* 0953798
* CAREER:  A Multi-Scale Computational Paradigm for Research and Education in Geomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,10/31/2010
* Jose Andrade, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 10/31/2010
* USD 74,915.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to establish a link between key macroscopic material properties and the
underlying micro-structure in granular soils via a multi-scale probing
framework, thereby bypassing phenomenological material evolution laws. We focus
on establishing a bridge between the well-established continuum mechanics
framework and discrete mechanics at the granular scale, while capturing the real
micro-structure (e.g., grain shape and kinematics) by combining advanced
experimental and X-ray techniques with contact mechanics based on parametric
surfaces. Ingrained to the research objective, the educational objective of this
project is to increase the accessibility of fundamental concepts in geomechanics
(e.g., permeability) to yield deeper learning. High school and undergraduate
students will work on the development of hands-on experiences that will lead
others to the observation and theoretical synthetization of important concepts
used in teaching and research. The experiences will then be used as part of
outreach initiatives and inductive teaching in the undergraduate curriculum. The
experiences will be made widely available via the Internet and will leverage
recent developments in instrumentation and visualization to make them accessible
and affordable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basic research connecting multiple scales
accurately in geomaterials will transform our understanding of these materials,
resulting in the development of predictive models and improved educational
methods in engineering and science. This multi-scale framework could be used to
formulate more durable greener concrete by manipulating the nano (micro)
structure, more reliable pore-scale models for granular rocks in deep oil
reservoirs, and physics-based models for soils during landslides, thus having a
potentially deep societal impact. Collaboration with industry and academia will
enhance the infrastructure for research and education. The inclusion of American
undergraduate and high school students will contribute to broader participation
of underrepresented groups. The work will allow significant steps towards
addressing societal challenges: recruitment and retention of a talented
workforce in science and engineering capable of addressing our pressing needs in
energy, infrastructure, and sustainability.