* 0953682
* CAREER: Next-Generation Peer-to-Peer Streaming: Theory and Design
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2017
* Yong Liu, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 01/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Peer-to-Peer (P2P) technology has enabled large-scale streaming services on the
Internet. The success of the next-generation P2P streaming systems largely
hinges on new designs delivering a higher level of efficiency, robustness and
incentives. At the same time, the increasing popularity and high-streaming rate
of P2P streaming systems have already generated significant traffic stress
inside ISPs' networks. The operations of future P2P streaming systems will have
significant impact on the stability and efficiency of the global network
infrastructure. The PI and his PhD students are developing new theory and design
for the next generation P2P streaming systems. They study the service
differentiation in P2P streaming to address peer heterogeneity and provide
incentives. They derive the minimum delay bounds for realtime P2P streaming and
propose streaming algorithms to approach the bounds. They apply the low-delay
streaming algorithms to live video streaming and 3D streaming. They develop ISP-
friendly P2P streaming design to largely reduce the traffic stress imposed on
ISP networks by P2P streaming applications. They also build prototypes for the
proposed new designs. The research of this project will lead to open protocols,
software and tools, allowing a multitude of developers, researchers, and
companies to expand, improve, and evolve the next-generation P2P streaming
systems. Important insights and key techniques developed in this project can
also be generalized to study data streaming in general distributed systems, such
as Content Delivery Networks and distributed data centers.