* 0953225
* CAREER: Pulsed electrically detected magnetic resonance - Advancing underrepresented groups in science through breakthroughs in materials spin spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Christoph Boehme, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2015
* USD 602,500.00

In this CAREER award, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Boehme of the University of Utah will
systematically explore the theoretical and experimental foundations of pulsed
electrically detected magnetic resonance (pEDMR) spectroscopy. PEDMR is many
orders of magnitude more sensitive than traditional magnetic resonance
spectroscopy and is thus well suited for the investigation of the role of spin
in microscopic electronic processes in very small and low dimensional
semiconductor samples and devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic resonance
spectroscopy has profoundly impacted physics, chemistry and materials research,
as well as medical diagnostics during the past decades. Nevertheless, the
traditional detection of magnetic resonance through induction is insensitive
when compared to other (e.g. optical) spectroscopies ? a limitation that has
impeded applications to electronically improved semiconductor materials. This
limitation will be overcome using a direct electrical detection scheme via
electric current. The aim of this project is to allow the observation of
microscopic processes which are responsible for efficiency limitations in
devices like solar cells, light emitting diodes or processes that could be
utilized for alternative information processing technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Boehme will integrate the development of student
recruitment tools with his research through high school student internships and
undergraduate research projects, with the goal of increasing minority
participation in STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;