* 0953876
* Workshop Proposal: Improving Domestic Student Participation in Electrical and Computer Engineering Graduate Programs. Held on October 19-20, 2009 in Knoxville Conference Center.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Itamar Arel, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 08/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of this two-day workshop will be to assemble department heads and
chairs from a broad range of ECE Ph.D. granting institutions across the nation,
to an open discussion on potential avenues of promoting the important common
goal of increasing domestic graduate student enrollment and retention. The
decision to invite department heads and chairs is driven by the desire to obtain
feedback, and target the discussions, directly toward policy makers. Embarking
with a focus on ECE is suggested as means of limiting the effort such that any
recommendations and conclusions can be disseminated to other science and
engineering disciplines. The expected outcome of the workshop is a report
detailing all discussions held as well as suggestions for future directions to
help sustain interest and momentum generated from the workshop. Moreover, the
report will include recommendations for further research and data collection
that would provide a research-based justification for graduate program
revisions.

Intellectual Merit

The workshop aims to chart out the future direction which the nation may follow
in order to increase domestic graduate student enrollment and retention in
electrical engineering, computer engineering and related disciplines. This is a
topic of national importance, particularly given the current worldwide economic
conditions, as it impacts the overall US job market and its viability in the
context of global competition. In order to directly target core contributors
that can potentially improve the current state of affairs, primary participants
will be department heads and chairs. The latter will be invited to present their
views on the issues of fundamental importance in the recruitment, support and
retention of domestic students to graduate programs. This discussion will also
provide the foundations for jointly funded initiatives between the NSF and DOE
on this topic.

Broader Impact

The workshop funded by this proposal is anticipated to generate critical insight
into improving enrollment and retention of domestic graduate students. This is a
topic of crucial importance to the economic viability of the nation. The
broadening of domestic research student body in science and engineering is a
vital building block in guaranteeing the US economy?s continuing leadership
position. As such, while the focus of the workshop is on disciplines closely-
related to electrical and computer engineering, the discussions directly reflect
on other science and engineering disciplines in which similar student
composition trends are being observed. The outcomes of this workshop will
identify new directions for improving the domestic graduate student landscape.