* 0953430
* CAREER: Dissecting Signal Recognition and Allostery in Ligand-Responsive Biological Functions
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Herschel Wade, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 03/31/2016
* USD 929,999.00

Intellectual Merit The goal of this CAREER project is to understand how
biological systems read and transform chemical signals into a diverse range of
biological outputs. Improved descriptions of ligand-responses have implications
from facilitating a general understanding of biological control to the design of
regulatory systems with pre-defined activities, both of which have wide-spread
uses in biomedical, engineering, environmental and biotechnological
applications. How do ligand-responsive functions recognize the correct ligand
structures, discriminate against incorrect ones and transform binding events
into controlled responses? To better understand the functional roles of ligand
interactions in regulatory systems, this project focuses on BmrR, a small
molecule-sensing gene regulator whose activity is stimulated by a number of
chemically diverse small-molecules. In the described work, biochemical,
biophysical and X-ray crystallographic approaches are employed to dissect and
examine ligand-directed effects at the binding, functional and structural
levels. The aim is to combine functional, thermodynamic and structural studies
into a more integrative analysis of ligand recognition and ligand-dependent
control of protein conformation.

Broader Impact The broader impacts involve better connecting underrepresented
minorities with the biological and physical science communities through
mechanisms that target students at the elementary, high school and undergraduate
levels. At the elementary and high school levels, these plans include continued
involvement in Baltimore-based programs in which students and teachers in the
area participate in science-based discussions, demonstrations and hands-on
activities. The integrated research and educational plans focus on increasing
the participation of underrepresented minorities in basic science research and
providing training opportunities for elementary, high school and graduate
students.