* 0953181
* CAREER: Socially Guided Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Andrea Thomaz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2015
* USD 551,063.00

There is currently a surge of interest in service robotics, a desire to have
robots leave the labs and factory floors to help solve issues facing society.
But if robots are to play a useful role in domains ranging from eldercare to
education, they will need the ability to interact with ordinary people and to
acquire new relevant skills after they are deployed; we cannot pre-program these
robots with every skill they might conceivably need. The PI's approach to
solving this critical issue is Socially Guided Machine Learning (SG-ML). In this
project she will explore ways in which machine learning agents can exploit
principles of human social learning. An important question for SG-ML is "What is
the right level of human involvement?" Previous efforts in machine learning
systems that use human input have tended to hold this level constant (e.g.,
guidance oriented approaches that are completely dependent on human instruction
in order to learn, and exploration oriented approaches with limited input from a
human partner). The PI, taking her inspiration from human learning and from her
prior work in robot learning, posits that a robot should be able to explore and
learn on its own, while also taking full advantage of a human partner's guidance
when available. The PI's goal in this work is to successfully incorporate self
and social learning within a single SG-ML framework, enabling a robot learner to
dynamically adjust to varying levels of human involvement in the learning
process. To this end, the PI will seek to make progress toward four main
objectives:

1) Motivations for learning: Typically machines learn because they are
programmed to do so, unlike children and animals who learn because they are
motivated to master their environment. A key component of this work is
computational motivations that drive a robot to good learning opportunities.

2) Multiple learning strategies: As mentioned above, an SG-ML framework should
have a repertoire of self and social learning mechanisms working together. A
central issue of this research is how the robot should best arbitrate and manage
the use of multiple strategies.

3) Transparency devices: Learning is a collaborative activity. The learner's
behavior has to be understandable, and has to express a certain level of
internal state to help the teacher guide the learning process. Transparency is a
fundamental issue of this work, developing robot behaviors that successfully
communicate the progress of the learning process.

4) Engagement mechanisms: In human social learning, teaching is a rewarding
process for both the learner and the teacher. This is a positive feedback loop
from which a machine learner could benefit. A primary component of this work is
to develop mechanisms that make the teaching process rewarding.

Broader Impacts: The long-term promise of this research is robots in society
able to adapt and learn from everyday people. The core principles developed in
this work will one day enable robots to adapt and learn about the changing needs
of people in their homes, or staff in a hospital. The lessons learned about
social learning with robots will be relevant both to computational devices and
to human-computer interaction in general. The PI will exploit the fact that
social robot projects like this one generate particular interest in the
community to conduct outreach programs in local area high schools, to raise
awareness about the work of women in science, and to stimulate the American
public's interest in science.