* 0953698
* CAREER: Exploring the Relationship Between Self-Efficacy and Project-Based Learning Among Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Debbie Chachra, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,084.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This engineering education
research CAREER award to Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering will determine
the impact of first year project-based learning courses on increasing self-
efficacy in all engineering students, regardless of background and preparation.
Low self-efficacy is often associated with student decisions to leave
engineering programs, and better understanding differential impacts on students
of implementations of project-based team-oriented learning components can
improve the quality of engineering education as well as retention and diversity.
This research will investigate whether the activities in these courses, as
currently implemented, increase self-efficacy for all students. Individual
students in a project team will spend time on different tasks and may select
tasks which do not provide mastery experiences. Self-efficacy of first year
students will be measured in relation to the amount of time spent on different
team project tasks. The project will include students from a small private
undergraduate engineering college, a medium sized private research university,
and a large public university, with significant participation of women and
underrepresented minority students. As a result of this research, interventions
will be developed to ensure that all students engage in activities which have
been identified as most likely to improve self-efficacy. This research may be
transformative in understanding gender based self-confidence differences in
engineering, and the results will be valuable for all students. Results of this
research will be widely disseminated and workshops will be held for engineering
faculty. This research will have profound impact on improving engineering
education and retention in all disciplines, and will enhance the number of
students who complete engineering degrees and are ready to fill engineering
jobs.&lt;br/&gt;