* 0953784
* CAREER: Imaging Electrical Transport in Carbon Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Brian LeRoy, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2016
* USD 556,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Award
supports an integrated research and education project to study the fundamental
electronic properties of carbon based nanostructures using scanning probe
microscopy. The research will focus on two carbon nanostructures: graphene,
which is a two-dimensional sheet of carbon atoms and carbon nanotubes, which are
one-dimensional, wire-like structures. These carbon nanostructures are
candidates to replace silicon in future semiconductor technologies. Beyond their
potential technological applications, these carbon materials exhibit many unique
electronic properties due to their one and two-dimensional nature. By using
scanning probe microscopy, this project will directly visualize, probe and
control their unique electronic properties with nanometer scale resolution. The
education portion of the project will bring the results of the research to local
students through collaboration with the Physics Factory, which is a local non-
profit organization. Undergraduate students will serve as mentors for high
school students in order to build demonstrations of the research as well as
other nanoscience topics. The demonstrations will be used by the Physics Factory
during trips to K-12 schools. This collaboration will allow high school students
through graduate students to be involved in the cutting-edge research. The
results of the research will also be used in a new course for undergraduates
focusing on experimental aspects of
nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;**** TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Award funds an integrated
research and education project to study the fundamental electronic properties of
carbon based nanostructures using scanning probe microscopy. The research will
focus on single-walled carbon nanotubes and graphene which both exhibit unique
electronic properties. In carbon nanotubes, the project will study aspects
related to their one-dimensional nature such as spin-charge separation, reduced
screening and inelastic scattering. In graphene, the project will look for ways
to enable new functionality through the use of strain and electric fields. By
combining scanning probe microscopy with electrical transport measurements,
these electronic properties can be studied on the nanometer length scale. The
research will be integrated with an outreach program to local K-12 schools. This
will be accomplished through collaboration with a local non-profit organization,
the Physics Factory. This project will enable the creation of a set of
demonstrations about the research as well as broader areas of nanoscience to be
used by the Physics Factory during visits to K-12 schools. The results of the
research will also be used in a new course for undergraduates focusing on
experimental aspects of nanoscience.