* 0953449
* CAREER:  Evaluating Capabilities of Neural Control in Human-Machine Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Zhi-Hong Mao, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to evaluate quantitatively the capabilities of human operators in human-
machine interaction (HMI). The research approach consists of two parts. In the
first part, the human operator is viewed as a hybrid neural controller. The
capabilities of the neural controller are evaluated based on physiological
constraints and modeled functions of the neural system. In the second part, the
human operator is viewed as an information processor and a communication
channel. The capacity of the neural system is quantified in terms of rate of
information exchanges between the human and the machine. These two parts offer
complementary views and synergistically combines control theory, information
theory, computational neuroscience, non-invasive human experiments, and computer
simulations in the study of human-in-the-loop control systems. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will provide quantitative
indications of the effectiveness of HMI and fundamental limitations of the human
controller. This will be instructive to discard impossible designs or
specifications, determine system controllability or task achievability, and
design HMI interfaces that may maximally utilize human control commands. This
research will also promote the understanding of neural organization and
mechanism for movement control, learning, and information processing. These
neural principles will inspire new concepts and techniques for intelligent and
advanced control. The educational component of this project will create more
opportunities for students and working engineers to appreciate the importance of
human factors and to learn techniques to handle these factors in engineering
system design. A new student chapter of IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society will be instituted to facilitate student involvement in research and
professional activities related to human-centered design in real engineering
world.