* 0953377
* CAREER: Mutual Benefit in Cognitive Radio Networks:  A Coalitional Game Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Zhu Han, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 02/28/2015
* USD 416,000.00

Cognitive radio (CR) is a revolutionary wireless communication paradigm in which
cognitive (secondary) users are able to observe, learn, optimize, and
intelligently adapt for spectrum utilization without interfering with
traditionally licensed (primary) users. Yet, the major technical challenges
remain: First, to avoid interfering with primary users, the cognitive users must
explore and sense the spectrum opportunities to determine whether there are
ongoing activities before data transmission. Second, a critical issue is dynamic
and opportunistic resource allocation over time-varying heterogeneous
interfering environments. Third, due to hardware limitation, each cognitive user
should distributively choose the candidate channels to either sense or access
(i.e., exploration and exploitation). To overcome these challenges, the novel
cooperative game theory methods are employed that emphasizes mutual benefit
management with simple distributed solutions. For different problems and
scenarios, this research project investigates three categories of cooperative
games: Canonical Coalition Game, Coalition Formation Game, and Coalition Graph
Game. The schemes and frameworks are implemented using the hardware/software
platform in the newly established Wireless Networking, Signal Processing, and
Security Lab at the University of Houston. The expected research results are
publicly available for other researchers worldwide through conference/journal
publications and via shared codes on the lab website. The education plan focuses
on an outreach program that integrates campus summer camps for high school-age
women/minority students. It also engages graduate and undergraduate students in
research. The goal of this project is to improve CR network performance through
the game theoretic point of view and to enhance women/minority participation in
engineering.