* 0953215
* CAREER:   The de novo discovery of transposable elements for the study of neutral substitution rate variation in plant genomes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2010,08/31/2016
* John Karro, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 588,345.00

Miami University (Ohio) is awarded a grant from the Faculty Early Career
Development program (CAREER) for the development of algorithms related to the
automatic annotation of transposable elements, as well as the analysis of the
results to expand our understanding of the roll of neutral substitution rates
and other processes in the evolutionary history of animal and plant genomes.
Transposable elements are pervasive across the genomes of higher order organisms
and are a fundamental force behind genomic evolution. They are also are one of
the key data sources for studying evolutionary processes at the genomic level.
But while effective algorithmic methods exist for the identification of
transposable elements that have retained sufficient sequence similarity to their
progenitor, the capability of these methods quickly diminishes when searching
for transposable elements that have experienced a higher level of sequence decay
due to age or presence in more evolutionary volatile genomic regions. The key
research results of this study will include 1) the mathematical formulation and
implementation of an algorithm underlying a comprehensive de novo generation of
transposable element libraries, 2) a fast, sensitive search tool for
transposable elements based on that library, 3) a model of transposable element
domain structure leading to the improvement of transposable element discovery,
4) an improved understanding of mammalian neutral substitution rates from a
transposable element based analysis, and 5) adaptation of the same methodology
of neutral substitution rate analysis to plant genomes and a comprehensive study
of rate variation in plants.

This grant will also provide an opportunity to develop aspects of a
comprehensive bioinformatics program using the proposed research as the
background for the introduction of new students into the field. In addition to
using the problem of transposable element annotation as the basis for an
introductory programming class targeted towards undergraduate biologists, an
online Bioinformatics course will be developed and implemented with the goal of
allowing the remote teaching of the subject at schools without the resources to
maintain their own program. To this end, we will specifically target Berea
College, an institution exclusively serving economically disadvantaged students,
developing a bioinformatics module to be incorporated into certain courses and
an annual workshop designed to expose their students to the field. For more
information see the project website at http://www.eas.muohio.edu/people/karroje.