* 0953192
* CAREER: Machine Learning Theory with Connections to Algorithmic Game Theory and Combinatorial Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2009,10/31/2014
* Maria-Florina Balcan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 10/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

Over the years, Machine Learning has become a very broad discipline with
important applications to many areas including computer vision, speech
recognition, robotics, and bio-surveillance, to name just a few. Moreover, many
of these application areas have faced a huge increase in the volume of available
data of various kinds. In order to be able to use all this data a number of new
learning approaches have been proposed. These approaches have been intensely
explored in the machine learning community, with many heuristics and specific
algorithms, as well as experimental results reported. Unfortunately, however,
the standard theoretical models do not capture the key issues involved in these
learning techniques, and it has become clear that for developing robust,
versatile, and general algorithms in these settings a more fundamental
understanding is necessary. This project will develop theoretical foundations
for such learning paradigms which are of significant practical importance but
are not explained by existing theoretical models. This project will also develop
fundamental new connections between Machine Learning, Game Theory, and
Combinatorial Optimization, that will aid in advancing and solving important
problems in all three areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key research directions of
this project are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Developing mathematical foundations
and algorithms for important machine learning paradigms that are not captured
well by standard models. This includes new analysis frameworks as well as new
practical and theoretically justified algorithms both for semi-supervised
learning and active learning, two important emerging approaches for
incorporating unlabeled data and interaction in the learning process. This
project will also explore a fundamentally new approach to analyzing clustering
-- a classic central task in the analysis and exploration of data, for which the
existing theory has been very brittle. This framework will enable practitioners
to describe in a formal way the properties they believe to be true about their
data, and then use these properties to choose or design the right algorithm for
their needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Developing novel fundamental connections
between Machine Learning and Algorithmic Game Theory in order to solve difficult
problems in multi-agent systems that have resisted previous approaches. In
particular, many multi-agent interactions have bad equilibria, and it is
important to develop methods for helping agents in such bad states to move to
better ones. This project will develop techniques for understanding and
influencing the behavior of natural dynamics in games of this type, by using
connections to important concepts in Machine Learning, such as learning from
untrusted experts' advice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Developing fundamental
connections between Machine Learning and Combinatorial Optimization in order to
advance both areas. These include new connections between approximation
algorithms and learning-based objectives for clustering, and new algorithms and
computational theory for learning submodular functions. Submodular functions,
which describe laws of diminishing returns, are ubiquitous in economic
optimization problems, and methods for learning them from observed data can aid
in designing improved decision procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Altogether, this
project will advance Machine Learning, Algorithmic Game Theory, and
Combinatorial Optimization, by developing and exploiting novel connections
between these areas. The theory developed by this work will enable the next
generation of powerful algorithms for machine learning and multi-agent systems.
It will additionally impact a wide range of application areas including computer
vision, robotics, bio-surveillance, and online auction design. More broadly, the
research results of this project will have impact across a number of scientific,
medical, and industrial fields. The PI's education plan further contributes to
the project's impact. In addition to advising a diverse set of students on
projects directly related to this project, the progress in this research will be
used to influence the curriculum via special courses presenting the theoretical
advances along with their applications. The PI will also contribute to
increasing the participation of women in computational sciences.