* 0953693
* CAREER: Mapping Energy Landscapes of Protein Conformational Switching
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Ekaterina Pletneva, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2016
* USD 675,000.00

This award in the Chemistry of Life Processes program of the Chemistry Division
is co-funded by the Biomolecular Systems Cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences. The award supports work by Professor Ekaterina
Pletneva at Dartmouth College to probe and then rationally modulate mechanisms
of conformational switching in signaling proteins. The studies will determine
how redox chemistry and ligand binding combine with the protein folding dynamics
to afford function. Kinetic measurements of gated electron transfer and
fluorescence resonance energy transfer will serve as analytical tools to
quantitatively characterize structural changes in proteins and thus
experimentally map energy landscapes of protein folding and function. Teaching
efforts will bring elements of modern research into upper-level and introductory
chemistry courses including opportunities for undergraduates to influence
science through critical writing. Professor Pletneva and her students work on
the Women in Science project at Dartmouth and reach out to local science
teachers and their students, establishing connections with a young generation of
prospective scientists. These studies advance understanding of many biological
systems where conformational changes govern function and provide valuable
insights for the design of protein-based switchable devices for use in
electronic nanocircuits and artificial photosynthesis. Rational manipulation of
protein folding and switchable behavior will be an important step toward these
engineering applications.