* 0953366
* CAREER: Robustness in Genetic Regulatory Network Modeling and Control
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2017
* Ranadip Pal, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2017
* USD 418,320.00

CAREER: Robustness in Genetic Regulatory Network Modeling and
Control&lt;br/&gt;Ranadip Pal&lt;br/&gt;Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Texas Tech University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current one-size-fits-
all methods of cancer treatment select drugs that target the whole population,
or some large segment of the population. The outlined research is based on the
vision that considering a patient?s individual genetic make-up will help in
selecting drugs that yields the best personalized prognosis. New generation of
cancer drugs designed to interfere with specific molecular targets have been
developed in the last decade. The success of these targeted drugs have been
limited since the selection of the drugs and the time and sequence of drug
administration are based on empirical principles without mathematical models to
design and estimate the efficiency of intervention strategies. The goal of this
proposal is to provide a theoretical and computational framework to estimate the
uncertainties in genetic regulatory network modeling and generate robust
therapeutic strategies for genetic diseases such as cancer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the objectives of genetic regulatory network
modeling is to design and analyze therapeutic intervention strategies aimed at
moving the network out of undesirable states, such as those associated with
disease, and into desirable ones. However, limited experimental data prevent
accurate inference of the mathematical model of the genetic regulatory network.
For the success of a mathematically designed intervention strategy for genetic
diseases, it is critical to (a) study the effect of modeling errors on the
predictive power of the inferred network model and on the intervention outcome
and (b) design control strategies that posses some degree of robustness to the
modeling uncertainties. The project is timely and appropriate as increasing the
effectiveness of cancer therapies in the clinical setting will require
intervention strategies that possess some degree of robustness to the
uncertainties in the modeling process. The proposed research is expected to
provide bounds on the performance of mathematically designed intervention
strategies. Algorithms to design robust control strategies with the objectives
of avoiding extremely undesirable results (minimax design) or improving the
expected chances of success (Bayesian approach) will be developed. The developed
strategies will be applied to the problem of intervention in human cancer cell
lines and targeted therapy in mice models, in collaboration with the PI?s
medical collaborators at Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGen) and
University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio
(UTHSCSA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary nature of this proposal
promises to foster cross-fertilization of ideas between electrical engineering
and systems biology through research and education. Some of the salient features
of the education and outreach plan are to (i) develop an interdisciplinary
graduate course on Genetic Regulatory Network Modeling and Control and an
undergraduate course on Engineering Applications in Biology, (ii) establish a
research laboratory at Texas Tech University to prepare students with skills in
Genomic Signal Processing (GSP) research, (iii) involve undergraduates in GSP
research through Project Laboratory Courses and the TTU Howard Hughes Medical
Institute Undergraduate Science Education Program, (iv) increase awareness of
GSP among K-12 students through the Clark Scholars program and presentations at
events involving high school students, and (v) further interactions with the
Medical Research Community. The research results will be disseminated to the
broad audience via peer reviewed publications, conference presentations and
seminars.