* 0953561
* CAREER:   Simultaneous 3D-Imaging of Multiple Molecular Interactions within Living Cells
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2015
* Adam Hoppe, South Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 03/31/2015
* USD 785,000.00

The dynamic assembly and disassembly of proteins into molecular complexes lies
at the heart of countless biological processes ranging from cell-to-cell
communication to the assembly of viral particles. However, almost everything
known about the process of protein assembly into macromolecular machines comes
from studying them in a test tube, isolated from the millions of other
biological molecules present in cells. This project will develop new optical
microscopy tools for studying the nanoscale organization of multiple dynamic
protein interactions within single living cells. This work will take advantage
of a process known as fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) to detect
the binding of two proteins. FRET allows observation of protein interactions
through exchange of fluorescence energy between two fluorescent tags on the
scale of five nanometers (~1/10,000,000th of an inch) and has become very
popular in recent years to detect protein interactions. One of the major
limitations of FRET, however, is that it has only been applied to study the
interactions between two proteins at a time, thereby limiting its utility for
studying complex molecular assemblies. This project will develop new methods and
instrumentation to allow simultaneous detection of the interactions of four or
more proteins in any combination. In addition, this instrument will be able to
image where they occur within the cell with superior resolution to conventional
light microscopes. This advance will be made by taking advantage of new methods
for interfering patterns of light with the sample and then using computer
reconstruction approaches to improve the subcellular resolution by about a
factor of 2.5 over conventional microscopes. By extending FRET microscopy to the
coincident detection of multiple molecular interactions while simultaneously
improving the resolution limit of the microscope, this project will provide a
highly versatile tool for studying molecular assemblies within living
cells.&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance the education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as provide summer research
opportunities for high school teachers as part of the institution's Masters in
Chemical Education program. The visiting teachers will develop new teaching and
laboratory materials for South Dakota high school students, a high fraction of
which are Native American.&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes from this work will be
accessible through a new website (http://www.fretmicroscopy.org/) and wiki
describing the instrumentation, methods and kinds of molecular information that
can be recovered from them. In addition, the software for performing the FRET
calculations and image reconstructions will be distributed through this website.