* 0953195
* CAREER:  Computational Models and Algorithms for Differential Network Analysis in Systems Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Mehmet Koyuturk, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2016
* USD 442,317.00

CAREER: Computational Models and Algorithms for Differential Network Analysis in
Systems Biology

PI: Mehmet Koyut√ºrk, Case Western Reserve University

An important challenge in life sciences, emerging from various successful genome
sequencing efforts, is the characterization of molecular mechanisms that
underlie phenotypic differences (variation in observable characteristics of
biological systems). These variations include developmental stages, disease, and
evolution. Molecular sequence and expression datasets have been used effectively
to identify frequently mutated genes and the relative abundance/lack of their
products in cells carrying the phenotype of interest. While the role of
contextual information, manifested in networks of biomolecular interactions is
widely acknowledged, lack of high-quality data has impeded the development and
use of network-based analyses. Recent high-throughput methods for network
inference hold tremendous potential for network-based phenotype analysis.
However, existing computational methods are in relative infancy. The primary
objective of this project is the development of computational models and
algorithms that enable integration of disparate datasets (gene sequences, gene
expression, protein expression, protein interactions) for phenotypic
characterization.

Network-based modeling of phenotypic differences gives rise to deep intellectual
questions relating to computational abstraction, algorithm design, and
biological validation. These challenges are exacerbated by the incomplete,
static, and noisy nature of available network data. The proposed research aims
to overcome these difficulties through innovative use of combinatorial,
probabilistic, and algebraic methods, including the following: (i) combinatorial
modeling of coordinate changes in the expression of multiple interacting genes,
(ii) probabilistic modeling of the crosstalk in biomolecular networks, for
statistically sound evaluation of functional association between multiple genes
and proteins, and (iii) algebraic modeling of information flow in the cell, to
make indirect inferences on the effects of multiple genetic perturbations. The
resulting computational tools will be integrated into frequently accessed
application frameworks, including Cytoscape, R, and Matlab, used extensively by
domain scientists at Case Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, for testing,
validation, and calibration, and subsequently disseminated to the broader
scientific community.

The proposed career plan also incorporates major educational and outreach
initiatives that build on the interdisciplinary nature of proposed research.
These initiatives include (i) novel instructional techniques based on active
learning, (ii) continued development of a Computer Science education platform,
TELESCOPE, for the purpose of illustrating basic algorithmic and problem solving
principles, (iii) incorporation of TELESCOPE into outreach efforts, targeting
K-12 schools, CWRUs TRIO programs for low income pre-college students, and CWRUs
Equinox summer program, (iv) programs for student involvement (particularly
minority and female) in outreach efforts, (v) development of new
interdisciplinary courses and degree programs at undergraduate and graduate
levels, and (vi) continued involvement of undergraduate students in research
projects.