* 0953502
* CAREER:  Fundamental Research on Rotary Ultrasonic Machining of Dental Ceramic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Zhichao Li, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2016
* USD 448,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to test the hypothesis that machined surface and subsurface quality of dental
ceramic materials can be significantly enhanced by rotary ultrasonic machining.
Approaches of finite element analysis and design of experiments combined with
theory of contact mechanics and fracture mechanics will be employed to carry out
the following research tasks: investigate mechanisms of material removal and
subsurface damages generation; solve the problem of complex surface machining;
quantify machining induced damages; measure ultrasonic vibration amplitude
within accuracy Â±0.1 micron; and discover the relationship between ultrasonic
vibration amplitude and subsurface damages. The educational objective of this
CAREER proposal is to enhance the education program in manufacturing at a
Historically Black College/University. The specific approaches involve
incorporating research results into existing manufacturing courses; developing a
research laboratory; recruiting African American graduate students; developing
multimedia courses to improve manufacturing education; and involving
undergraduate students and K-12 teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the research is expected to bring about a breakthrough innovation in dental
ceramic manufacturing, which will directly benefit the nation?s medical
consumers and society. An innovative and crack-free precision machining
technology will be provided for the US dental industry. The research results
will also benefit other medical industries where bioceramic materials are widely
used such as bone and joint replacements. The proposed education activities in
this CAREER plan will improve engineering education at North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University, contribute to increase the
percentage of engineering doctorates awarded to African Americans, and broaden
participation of underrepresented populations and non-traditional students in
engineering research.