* 0953967
* Diffusion of Merger: A Longitudinal Study
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Matthew Bauer, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 06/30/2014
* USD 155,567.00

Linguists have long observed that the sounds of a language change over time. One
such sound change involves a process in which two distinct sounds disappear in a
language--a process called "merger". For example, the "low back merger"
describes the loss of contrast between the vowels in "cot" and "caught" in
American English. Some speakers maintain a contrast in these two vowels, while
other speakers do not. A standard claim is that mergers can occur within an
individual over time. However, while numerous published studies have documented
the occurrence of specific mergers and theorized on the causes and course of
merger, there have been no published accounts testing this claim and clearly
documenting the course of a merger within an individual. This project is a
first-ever longitudinal study designed to determine whether "unmerged" speakers
show signs of merger over time. The project takes place in suburban
Minneapolis/St. Paul, Minnesota, and tests the claim about merger using recorded
speech and other data obtained from subjects exposed to two ongoing mergers in
that area, the "low back merger" (i.e. "cot" vs. "caught") and "pre-velar
raising", where the stressed vowel in a word like "haggle" sounds similar to the
one in "Hegel". Both mergers are changes in progress but are not completely
established in the Minneapolis/St. Paul metro area. Participants include 13- to
15-year old students at a suburban junior high school, a population beyond the
critical acquisition period but also of an age likely to be vulnerable to
change. This group has received little attention in the area of sound change.
The longitudinal study consists of collecting data at three times during the
project period. The data to be collected consists of speakers being recorded
saying a list of words, taking a listening task based on artificial vowel
stimuli, and being recorded in a 10- to 20-minute semi-structured conversation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current study is intended to establish a baseline for
understanding early adult speech patterns. It will shed light on the process of
sound change and advance our understanding of an important type of sound change
in a way that integrates sociolinguistics, historical linguistics, and
dialectology. The project is complemented by an outreach component in which
university students will construct audiovisual and electronic media displays to
introduce high school and junior high students to basic linguistic concepts.
Other graduate students will be trained in sociolinguistic research
methodologies. The project will add a large volume of publicly-available data to
the discussion about how sound change works.