* 0953499
* Video Analysis of Science Teaching: Developing a Shared ?Words-to-images? Analytical Tool
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Kathleen Roth, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 05/31/2012
* USD 158,455.00

Research on science teaching is limited by the lack of shared images of
excellent science teaching looks like. Despite wide consensus that science
education research should help teachers teach in ways consistent with reform
documents, researchers vary widely in their interpretation of what counts as
inquiry in the classroom. This lack of a shared "words-to-images" language makes
findings difficult to interpret because similar words are used but they are not
anchored to similar images. In addition, because each research project develops
its own analysis protocols and coding schemes, cross-project comparisons are
difficult. Finally, the lack of a shared language makes it difficult to
communicate research results to practitioners, policymakers, and the general
public. This study proposes a unique approach to addressing a critical problem
in research on science teaching to break down the "silo" approach to science
education research and demonstrate the feasibility of developing consensus
analytical tools and language that can be used in a wide variety of
investigations. Use of these common tools across studies will improve the
quality and impact of science education research and improve the communication
of research to practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Video technology, including online
accessibility, provides the opportunity to improve science education research
quality by developing a shared words-to-images language and analytical tool.
Videotapes of science teaching enable researchers to conduct more rigorous,
detailed, and revealing analyses of science teaching, and collaborative viewing
of lesson video challenges researchers to sharpen definitions and descriptions.
In addition, several large-scale studies of science teaching, including the
TIMSS video study, provide a strong foundation for the proposed consensus-
building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage diverse science
educators in developing a consensus image-based language for describing 5-10 key
aspects of science teaching. This language,accompanied by video images, will be
described in a Guide for Video Analysis of Science Teaching. The effectiveness
of the guide in helping diverse science educators to code video examples
reliably will be tested in pilot and field test studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
literature review of current methods and tools will start the collaborative
process. Across a 2-year period, the research team will work with an Expert
Panel of 10 leading science educators representing the full range of
perspectives in the science education community to:&lt;br/&gt;a) select key
features of science teaching, b) develop a consensus language for describing the
selected lesson features in lesson videos, and c) develop and revise a coding
manual to guide analysis of the selected features in lesson videos. The video
analysis manual and video examples will go through two rounds of testing and
revision using an online, password-protected website: 1) a pilot test involving
a diverse group of 25 leading science educators, and 2) a national field test
involving 50 participants who reflect the diversity of the science education
community. These tests will assess the effectiveness of the manual and video
examples in helping diverse members of the science education community develop a
shared words-to-images language.&lt;br/&gt;