* 0953839
* CAREER:A computational approach to template-based structure selection for protein-protein interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Xiaoqin Zou, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 734,016.00

The University of Missouri-Columbia is awarded a grant from the Faculty Early
Career Development program (CAREER) to support research on macromolecular
interactions, a central theme in functional genomics. The ability to predict
protein-protein interactions has far reaching impact on understanding the
molecular mechanisms of signal transduction and macromolecular assemblies, and
ultimately on rational design of protein functions. Significant progress has
been made on prediction of protein-protein interactions based on individual
protein structures (referred to as protein-protein docking). However, lack of a
reliable energy scoring functions to evaluate the binding tightness remains a
critical problem in the field. Furthermore, with the rapid progress of the
genome projects, it has become commonplace in plant, animal and human biology
that homology-modeled structures are available for the study of protein pairs of
interest, and the development of a systematic computational method for
homologous protein-protein docking will have broad practical applications. This
research will develop a new rigorously derived scoring function for protein-
protein interactions based on the physical principles, and understanding why the
new scoring function works will provide valuable insights into the development
of other scoring functions. A new paradigm will also be developed and validated
for predicting protein-protein interactions for cases in which only homology-
modeled structures are available. The software package and test sets generated
in this project will be available through the Zou lab website:
http://zoulab.dalton.missouri.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a part of her CAREER
award, Dr. Zou will develop a true and unique interdisciplinary environment in
her laboratory and in her class for excellence in research and education,
particularly for underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students. Examples
include developing a unique interdisciplinary curriculum and sponsoring
undergraduate and pre-doctoral research fellowships/internships particularly for
women and minority students. The PI also actively participates in scientific
educations to local community and to Missouri high school students.