* 0953071
* EAGER:   Usable Location Privacy in Geo-Social Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Goodrich, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This project is focused on a potentially transformational research study
involving the simultaneous investigation of usability and security/privacy
technologies for location-based geo-social applications, with the objective of
studying the usability, feasibility, and scalability of privacy-preserving and
secure location-aware geo-social networking platforms for mobile devices. The
approach is based on a belief that usability and security/privacy are addressed
properly and most effectively from the start. In particular, the project will
study the usability of privacy-agile secure location-based communication and
associated supporting protocols that scale to large numbers of users and
accommodate various privacy levels suitable for different application domains.
By studying the usability of location-aware protocols, the investigators propose
methods that provide seamless connectivity and functionality over different
networking technologies, without sacrificing the user experience. The
investigators also plan to address other security issues in privacy-preserving
operation, including authentication, access control and accountability. This
project envisions a wide range of future applications with three unifying
factors: (1) a geo-social undertone, i.e., applications that combine social
groups and locality, (2) lack of, or desire to avoid using, fixed infrastructure
facilities, and (3) need for both security and privacy. Although progress is
starting on technologies for supporting such applications, there has been
precious little work done on the study of usability factors with respect to the
privacy and security users expect with their small-device location-based
applications. The proposed project therefore has an ambitious goal: to study the
usability of privacy-preserving geo-social technologies, including the user
models, perceptions, interfaces, and feasible communication/computation
technologies for supporting futuristic geo-social applications on portable
mobile devices in the aforementioned setting. Methods employed may include
interviews, focus groups, and cognitive walkthroughs. One key feature of the
approach is to study methods that shield location from identity, thereby
allowing for location-based services and geo-social applications while also
protecting user privacy, and, most importantly, to do so in a way that is most
usable and effective from the user?s point of
view.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technologies using location and small devices are
growing at a rapid rate, while techniques considering security and location and
identity privacy are only now being addressed. Thus, usable systems that protect
location-sensitive privacy concerns could have a major impact on society. The
tools developed in this project will enable important and economically
beneficial technologies to be developed for location-aware geo-social networks
preserving privacy rights for the individuals using such services. In addition,
a vital part of this project involves graduate-student participation in
research. Thus, this project has the potential of bringing expanded research
opportunities for developing the next generation of information technology
researchers. Likewise, it also includes an important educational component.