* 0953106
* CAREER:   Opioid-dopamine interactions and pair bonding
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2017
* Brandon Aragona, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/28/2017
* USD 797,957.00

For many species, including our own, social bonding is essential for numerous
aspects of biological and psychological function. Therefore, it is critical to
understand the neuroscience underlying social bonding. This project will examine
the neurobiology of social bonding by utilizing behavioral, neuroanatomical, and
neurochemical assessments of pair bonding in the socially monogamous prairie
vole. The experiments will determine how the endogenous opioid systems interact
with dopamine signaling in brain circuitry important for reward and motivation
underlying pair bond formation and maintenance. Additionally, the project will
capitalize on state-of-the-art neurochemical measurement technology (fast-scan
cyclic voltammetry) in the prairie vole model to further assess the role of
opioid-dopamine interactions in pair bonding. On both intellectual and technical
levels, results from these studies are expected to have a tremendous impact on
several biological fields. This work focuses on the neuroscience of social
bonding, is poised to enhance our understanding of reproduction, ethologically
relevant learning and memory, as well as the evolutionary origins of neural
mechanisms that mediate social bonding. Importantly, the robust teaching plans
will translate into the classroom (at both the graduate and undergraduate
levels) and impact how this information will subsequently reach the public
domain. Finally, this project provides outstanding training opportunities for
both graduate and undergraduate students, revealing details on how students will
be trained in the laboratory and placing an emphasis on promoting diversity in
neuroscience by the recruitment and training of women and underrepresented
minorities into this laboratory.