* 0953339
* CAREER: Symbolic-Numeric Constraint-Based Solutions for Real-World Scientific Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2016
* Martine Ceberio, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 12/31/2016
* USD 598,650.00

CAREER: Symbolic-Numeric Constraint-Based Solutions for Real-World Scientific
Problems PI:Martine Ceberio, University of Texas at El Paso ABSTRACT Numerical
constraint solving (NCS) techniques have proven to be efficient to solve real
problems ranging from electronic circuit to aircraft design. Yet they are under-
utilized. The lack of user support of the solvers can partly explain this, but
most importantly NCS techniques have isolated themselves into a jargon
(constraints) and a schema (propagation/reduction) that disconnect them,
respectively, from real problems and real needs (e.g., scalability, flexibility,
and distributivity). The goal of this career plan is to make NCS better adapted
to real-world needs while making it more accessible. In order to achieve the
goal, this project will concentrate on theory and algorithms at the crux of the
efficiency, reliability, and distributivity aspects of problemsolving
techniques. In particular, the following research objectives will be pursued:
RO1 To open NCS to novel techniques, improving scalability and reliability. The
research will be oriented towards designing new algorithms that lie between
local consistency techniques and global constraints: symbolic-numeric approaches
will be studied from the theoretical point of view, and algorithms will be
developed and embedded in a new solving toolbox; RO2 To assist users facing
over-constrained problems. New methods based on the topology of the search
space, in terms of satisfaction of the constraints, will be designed to provide
users with alternative solutions; and RO3 To extend the distributed use of NCS
to reflect the emerging networked social structure. The structures of social
groups and their potential to support distributed systems will be studied,
resulting in new and more complete algorithms for distributing constraints. The
results of the research objectives will feed into the work carried out to pursue
our education objectives: EO1: to enhance the problem-solving skills and
interest in advanced studies for 8-16 students; and EO2: to enhance the
participation ofwomen and Hispanics in computing. Intellectual Merit. The
success of the Career project will contribute to the NCS and decisionmaking body
of knowledge. The proposed work will advance knowledge about: i. NCS algorithms:
Along with theoretical results about the quality of the solution, the proposed
work will address the noise in solution sets, as well as continuums of
solutions; ii. Soft constraints: By developing decision algorithms for over-
constrained problems, it will be possible to (semi-)autonomously determine the
most relevant soft constraints scheme to solve the original problem; iii.
Constraints distribution over different social groups structures: the expected
communication algorithms will combine theory from speculative constraints with
frameworks of social structures to improve the time to solution of given
constraints. Broader Impacts. The project will result in a new Matlab toolbox,
expected to enhance the way users approach problem solving and appeal to more
users, in particular the Matlab community. The progress and results of the
project will be disseminated through the PIs constraintsolving.com website,
widely accessed by various communities. Moreover, the PI holds a CoProD workshop
that annually brings together NCS researchers and practitioners. The project
will take place at UTEP, an institution with more than 75% Hispanic citizens and
a leader in the education and advancement of Hispanics. With UTEPs
infrastructure and the proposed educational activities, the project will train a
new generation of diverse computer scientists with strong problem-solving
skills. It will also result in new constraint-based courses, including material
that can contribute to a textbook on NCS that will have impact beyond UTEP.
Workshops and constraint-oriented hands-on activities will be offered at one
middle-school and three high-schools, one of which is a women-only high-school,
with potential to inspire students to engage in computing disciplines. It is
expected that over 450 students will be involved in outreach activities over the
course of the grant.