* 0953941
* CAREER: Automatic Analysis of Cyber Physical Systems: Bridging the Gap between Research and Industrial Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Sriram Sankaranarayanan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 459,648.00

The goal of this project is to develop sophisticated formal verification tools
for finding harmful defects in cyber-physical systems. Cyber-physical systems
are responsible for numerous control tasks in safety-critical systems such as
automobiles, avionics, medical devices, and power distribution systems.
Guaranteeing the correctness of these systems is of the utmost importance.
However, existing verification and validation techniques have fallen far short
of addressing this important challenge.

This project investigates verification techniques for analyzing large and
complex cyber-physical systems. First, the project is developing rich modeling
formalisms that are capable of capturing realistic system designs at the right
levels of abstraction. These formalisms form the basis for verification
techniques that can be used to pinpoint functional defects in cyber-physical
systems. Specifically, the project focuses on techniques for detecting harmful
numerical precision loss in control systems implemented using fixed and floating
point numbers. Finally, the project addresses the challenge of verifying complex
non-linear systems using interval analysis, convex optimization and symbolic
decision procedures. The results of this research are available to the community
in the form of open-source tools. These tools will directly support the
verification of complex systems.

The educational impact of the project lies in the integration of the research
with a course curriculum centered around the theme of rigorous software
engineering for cyber-physical systems. The resulting courses provide valuable
training to undergraduate as well as graduate students in the use of advanced
verification tools and techniques to ensure safe and reliable design of systems.