* 0953107
* CAREER: Brain-Tongue-Computer Interfacing
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2018
* Maysam Ghovanloo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2018
* USD 548,298.00

The PI's long-term research plans involve exploring new pathways to the human
central nervous system (CNS) in order to expand our knowledge about this highly
complex system and understand how it works, and developing innovative
technologies and research tools that will enable direct or indirect
communication with the CNS through such pathways. In particular, he is keen to
utilize and evaluate new interfacing technologies in devices that will help
individuals who suffer from chronic disabilities and neurological diseases, such
as blindness, deafness, and paralysis to improve and extend their quality of
life. With these general goals in mind, the PI will in this project focus on
exploring the use of voluntary tongue motion as a substitute for some of the
functions traditionally performed by the arms and hands in personal
environmental control. This has not been possible in the past absent access to
tongue motion without impeding the tongue's key roles in swallowing,
respiration, and speech. The PI has previously developed and successfully tested
a new wireless, unobtrusive, and wearable technology he calls the Tongue Drive
System (TDS), to indicate tongue position in real time within certain user-
defined locations in the oral space. Building upon the TDS prototype, he will
explore whether the inherent characteristics of the tongue and its rich motor
capabilities can be harnessed as an intermediary pathway to the human brain. In
other words, he will seek to create a Brain-Tongue-Computer Interface (BTCI) by
enhancing the functionality of the TDS hardware, signal processing algorithms,
and GUI software to support a large number of choices that will be
simultaneously available to users, in addition to the proportional control
capability that is currently employed to facilitate navigation and computer
access. The PI will conduct experiments to evaluate the performance, usability,
and acceptability of the BCTI platform, and will employ it to achieve a
fundamental understanding of human factors associated with voluntary tongue
motions. Finally, the PI will combine his real time 3-D tongue tracking
technology with multi-channel wireless neural recording to explore the
relationship between unconstrained tongue movements and whole muscle/single
motor unit activities in speech, respiration, and swallowing without any bodily
restraints.

Broader Impacts: Individuals who are severely disabled as a result of various
causes from spinal cord injuries to stroke, cerebral palsy, and ALS find it
extremely difficult to carry out everyday tasks without continuous help. This
research will ultimately transform the lives of many persons with severe
disabilities, by helping them live active, self-supportive, and productive
lives. Solutions such as the BTCI may also help reduce healthcare and assisted-
living costs by relieving the burden on family members and dedicated caregivers.
Utilization of the tongue's motion as an untapped human motor modality in
command, control, and navigation tasks involves costs and benefits which are at
present unknown; quantitative analysis of human performance in concurrently
conducted sensory, motor, and cognitive tasks, both in the presence and absence
of tongue motions, is likely to bring about new scientific discoveries in human
system integration. The PI's 3-D tongue tracking technology will also impact
speech/language therapy, as well as the treatment of communication and sleep
disorders that involve tongue motion. The PI will explore use of the BTCI
technology in educational settings for children with special needs through
programs such as Tools for Life, and will also conduct outreach efforts to
expose K-12 students to facts about the CNS, its associated impairments, and
different ways to address those problems with engineering solutions.