* 0953464
* Mechanistic Studies of Organic Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2015
* Jeehiun Lee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2015
* USD 349,750.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms Program supports Professor
Jeehiun K. Lee at Rutgers University New Brunswick whose research describes gas-
phase experimental and computational studies designed to gain an improved
understanding of the acidity, basicity and reactivity of organic species, such
as damaged nucleobases and heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs). The fundamental
properties of normal and damaged bases will be examined to gain an essential
understanding of how damaged bases, some of which are quite mutagenic, differ in
properties from normal bases. These fundamental studies will elucidate the
intrinsic properties of damaged bases, which have implications for ultimately
controlling their mutagenicity. N-Heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) are stabilized
carbenes that have a wide variety of applications including, as effective novel
ligands for transition-metal-catalyzed reactions; as catalysts in their own
right, for a range of organic transformations; and in protonated form, as
environmentally "clean" nonvolatile solvents for organic reactions (ionic
liquids). In this project, the gas phase proton affinity of such carbenes will
be explored, using mass spectrometric methods. The resulting knowledge may be
useful for improved design of NHCs as ligands, catalysts and ionic liquids since
the basicity of such species impacts their utility in these
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics, and Mechanisms Program in the Chemistry Division at the National
Science Foundation, Dr.Lee's research will utilize experimentation and theory
while involving mass spectrometry, organic synthesis and different levels of
calculations to provide excellent training and education for undergraduate and
graduate students. The proposed work will advance the understanding of the
thermochemical properties of a wide range of molecules, and has the potential to
impact a wide range of topics, including enzyme mechanism, mutagenicity of
unnatural nucleobases, and synthetic utility of carbenes. The PI is dedicated to
the recruitment and inclusion of women and underrepresented minorities into
science. She is involved with the Rutgers Office of Promotion of Women in
Science, Engineering and Math, which was recently awarded an NSF Advance Grant
to promote the participation and advancement of women in science, engineering
and math through recruitment, retention, networking, liaisons, communication,
visibility and family initiatives. On a smaller scale, the PI has three
Ph.D.-track female graduate students and through her new role as the Director of
Graduate Admissions in the Chemistry Department at Rutgers University. Dr. Lee
has been and will continue to be actively involved in recruiting a diverse
graduate population.