* 0953950
* CAREER: Novel Data Mining Technologies for Complex Network Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Ruoming Jin, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2015
* USD 536,359.00

The long-term research goal is to develop novel data
mining&lt;br/&gt;technologies to elucidate the structures and dynamics of
complex&lt;br/&gt;but ubiquitous networks. A complex network is a large
system&lt;br/&gt;of elements (vertices) that are joined by non-trivial
relationships&lt;br/&gt;(edges). Examples of such complex networks include the
WWW,&lt;br/&gt;metabolic and protein networks, social networks, and
economic&lt;br/&gt;and financial markets. The underlying principles and laws of
these&lt;br/&gt;network systems can help us construct more
effective&lt;br/&gt;communication mechanisms, find cures for fatal diseases,
and&lt;br/&gt;deal with economic crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spite of the
significant advances that have been made towards&lt;br/&gt;understanding the
fundamental laws that govern the structure and&lt;br/&gt;behavior of complex
networks, there is still a disconnect between&lt;br/&gt; current analytical
techniques and their applicability to real-world&lt;br/&gt;complex networks. A
principled approach is lacking to systematically&lt;br/&gt;analyze a single
large complex network and link system behaviors to&lt;br/&gt; network structure.
There is also immediate and crucial need for a&lt;br/&gt;theoretical framework
to understand the relationships between&lt;br/&gt;multiple networks, which is
the key for comparative network analysis. &lt;br/&gt;How to integrate and
leverage the rich system data, such as&lt;br/&gt;measurement time series,
associated with network topology to study&lt;br/&gt;complex systems is still an
open question. This project addresses&lt;br/&gt;these issues by: 1) developing
novel graph and information&lt;br/&gt;theoretical approaches to extracting
network backbones which both&lt;br/&gt;simplify and highlight network
structures; 2) developing information&lt;br/&gt;theoretical network distance
measures and clustering algorithms for&lt;br/&gt;comparative network analysis;
3) applying causality inference and&lt;br/&gt;network modularity to integrate
time series with network topology.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed mining methodologies
build upon an innovative blend&lt;br/&gt;of graph theoretical, information
theoretical, and statistical learning&lt;br/&gt;concepts and techniques, and can
greatly expand the reach of&lt;br/&gt;data mining. This project will also help
us better analyze the&lt;br/&gt;emerging complexity, heterogeneity, and large
scale of real-world&lt;br/&gt;complex network data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a
close collaboration with domain experts from social and
political&lt;br/&gt;sciences, software engineering, and bioinformatics, the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;techniques have the potential to help understand how human
society is&lt;br/&gt;organized at the individual level (social networks) and
organizational&lt;br/&gt;level (political science); illuminate how large scale
software systems&lt;br/&gt;form and evolve; reveal the organizational principles
of biocellular&lt;br/&gt;systems in a dynamic environment; and identify
therapeutic or drug&lt;br/&gt;targets. Using the popular online social networks,
such as MySpace&lt;br/&gt;and Facebook, as ``hooks'', this project will attract,
recruit, and&lt;br/&gt;prepare students from underrepresented groups including
women&lt;br/&gt;and minorities to computer science and involve
underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;students in the cutting-edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web page
at:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.kent.edu/~jin/NSFCAREER/