* 0953749
* CAREER:  Examining Users' Collective Privacy Management for Online Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Heng Xu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 09/30/2016
* USD 394,642.00

To better articulate privacy as a dynamic and dialectic phenomenon in a Web 2.0
world, this project proposes a set of basic empirical research activities to
investigate three aspects of privacy in online social networks:
conceptualization, intervention, and awareness. The goals of this CAREER award
are to: 1) improve the theoretical understanding of information privacy in the
context of online social networks in an interdisciplinary manner; 2) assess the
efficacy of various privacy intervention strategies developed or proposed by the
technologists and regulators; and 3) develop and enhance the persuasiveness of
privacy and security awareness and training programs. The main contribution of
this research is the generation of an interdisciplinary privacy research
framework, with extensive grounding in a range of multidisciplinary privacy
literatures in behavioral sciences, computer science, information systems,
communication, and social psychology. This research takes a holistic view of
privacy compared to the large amount of work focusing strictly on data privacy
aspects. Thus, it recognizes the critical importance of user perceptions and
behaviors when evaluating and developing privacy protection approaches. The
proposed three tasks are greatly needed to better connect the social analysis of
user privacy behaviors with the technical design of privacy enhancing
technologies. The work should contribute to basic science-the underpinnings of
user perceptions and actions around privacy management-as well as the findings
generated for informing the design of privacy enhancing techniques. The research
findings can enable technology-oriented researchers to develop more feasible
privacy enhancing techniques that are embedded into the design specifications of
systems, as well as aligned with organizational practices and user behaviors.
This project will adopt various empirical research methods (experiments, large-
scale survey, focus group and social network analysis) to test the behavioral
hypotheses underlying user privacy behaviors in the context of online social
networks. Well executed surveys and field experiments will contribute
substantially to our understanding of how the actual users of online social
networks behave and what interventions (in terms of technologies, regulations
and trainings) may change their privacy decisions and
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the three major research thrusts is to
develop a privacy awareness and training program for users of online social
networks. The findings could potentially have a large impact on promoting
privacy and security awareness in the user community. The project also has
impacts on guideline creation for industry regulators and government agencies.
The PI aims to transform the repository of knowledge on the dynamic and
dialectic nature of privacy assurance into a number of educational activities in
her academic home at Penn State. The educational plan describes the development
of new courses and course modules on privacy assurance at both undergraduate and
graduate levels, bringing research into classrooms, outreach to students in
underrepresented groups, and training of undergraduate and graduate student
researchers in interdisciplinary methods. The PI has transformed her science
into a privacy workshop for high-school girls and their parents to teach about
on-line privacy issues and practices. She proposes to continue such efforts to
promote privacy and security awareness among high-school girls, as well as to
attract more female students into the program of security and risk analysis at
Penn State. The PI will also work with a professional society, the Association
for Information Systems, to create a privacy research chapter and a privacy
pedagogy section to extend the Information Systems research agenda and
curriculum into this important area nationally.