* 0953595
* CAREER:Investigation of the Thermal and Transport Properties of a Dusty Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2016
* Jeremiah Williams, Wittenberg University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 409,663.00

A complex (dusty) plasma is a four-component plasma system consisting of ions,
electrons, neutral particles and charged microparticles. The microparticle
component interacts with the other plasma components, acquires a net charge and
self-consistently modifies the surrounding plasma medium. The resulting system
is notably more complex than the traditional plasma, supporting a wide range of
physical phenomena and having connections to nanoscience, fluid mechanics and
material science. As a result, this field has, over the past twenty years,
rapidly evolved into a scientifically interesting and technically challenging
subfield of plasma physics. The objective of this research is to make detailed
measurements of the distribution of thermal energy and the evolutions of the
thermal and transport properties of a dusty plasma to address a number of open
questions in the field of dusty plasmas. This will be accomplished through the
use of the next generation particle image velocimetry (PIV) diagnostic,
tomographic PIV, and high-speed imaging techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this project will provide new and fundamental insight into the
thermal and transport properties of the dusty plasma system at the kinetic
level. In particular, this project will provide detailed measurements of the
distribution of the dust thermal energy, how this energy is redistributed within
the dusty plasma system and will contribute to the development of an equation of
state for these systems. This project will provide new insight into the three-
dimensional morphological features of these systems, such as the structure of
the dust acoustic wave, and address open phenomenological questions involving
the strength of the neutral drag force. Further, this project will serve as a
springboard to involve undergraduates at small, liberal arts undergraduate
institution in cutting-edge plasma science research through direct involvement
in ongoing research efforts, through student attendance at regional and national
professional meetings and through the development of level-appropriate
curricular material at all levels of the undergraduate curriculum.