* 0953445
* CAREER: Capturing Content and Linguistic Quality in Automatic Extractive and Abstractive Summarization
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2017
* Ani Nenkova, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2017
* USD 549,933.00

This CAREER proposal deals with the development of novel systems for automatic
summarization which incorporate both linguistic and content quality
considerations in their operation. The main motivation for the work is that even
the best current systems do not take the characteristics of the input into
account during their operation, they cannot estimate how successful they perform
content selection, and completely ignore issues of linguistic quality of the
output.

Improvement of linguistic quality of summaries requires a combination and
relative assessment of a wide range of text quality factors: discourse
relations, topic/entity/word coherence, form of referring expressions,
vocabulary. Tools for automatic extraction of such models from the input text,
including automatic discourse analysis of explicit and implicit discourse
relations, are developed as part of the project. The resulting models of
linguistic quality will have broader impact on a whole range of text producing
applications including questions answering, machine translation, automatic essay
grading and computer-assisted writing tutoring.

Improvement of content quality requires taking into account characteristics of
the input. In particular, we develop measures of input difficulty, which enable
systems to automatically predict if they can produce a good quality summary for
a given input and permit for change of summarization strategy when necessary.
Specialized summarization strategies for input types where current system
performance is known to be suboptimal are also elaborated.

Text quality and summarization are research topics with cross-disciplinary
appeal. The PI will offer project-based courses at the undergraduate and
graduate level which have the potential to attract young people to the field of
computer science.