* 0953475
* CAREER: Strongly Correlated Photons in Microwave Cavities and Coupled Cavity Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2010,11/30/2016
* Andrew Houck, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 11/30/2016
* USD 550,000.00

*****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT*****&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Award
supports a project aiming to understand the matter-like properties of light that
emerge when photons begin to interact with one another. While scientists have
developed a good understanding of the physics of individual particles, problems
become vastly more complicated when these particles begin to interact. Particles
of light, called photons, provide a unique tool for studying how the behavior of
a system changes as interactions are turned on, as they do not naturally
interact with one another. Through this award, systems that can have strong
photon interactions will be constructed, and the novel behavior of these
interacting photons will be measured. It is believed that, when interactions are
turned on, photons will undergo phase transitions, acting more like matter than
light. The primary goal of this award is to demonstrate this effect
experimentally. This research program will be integrated into an educational
program that aims to improve technical education at all levels: graduate,
undergraduate, K-12, and general interest. Through graduate and undergraduate
research opportunities, this award will create specific expertise in condensed
matter physics and quantum optics, and train students in generally applicable
technical skills, including nano- and microfabrication and high precision data
acquisitions and analysis. K-12 education and general outreach will be
incorporated through the platform of the Princeton Center for Complex Materials.
This award receives support from the Divisions of Materials Research and
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT*****&lt;br/&gt;This
Faculty Early Career Award supports a project aiming to understand the effects
of strong interactions between photons in arrays of superconducting microwave
cavities. Strong correlations have remained at the forefront of condensed matter
physics for some time, with many problems still proving difficult to solve
theoretically. This project will provide experimental insight into the physics
of correlated states of photons in coupled cavity arrays, a field that has a
growing theoretical foundation but little experiment thus far. When photon-
photon interactions are large, matter-like properties of light such as quantum
phase transitions are expected to emerge. Although photons do not in general
interact, effective photon interactions will be achieved by implementing a
circuit quantum electrodynamics system, in which photons are strongly coupled to
a superconducting qubit. The primary research goal is to experimentally probe
these correlated photon effects. Specific research goals include (1) probing
photon blockade due to strong off-resonant interactions in a single cavity and
(2) demonstrating phase transitions of light in coupled cavity arrays. More
broadly, these experiments will lay the groundwork for studies of the exotic
correlated photon states that emerge from quantized photonic systems with strong
interactions. These research results will be integrated into an educational
program that aims to improve technical education at all levels: graduate,
undergraduate, K-12, and general interest, including graduate and undergraduate
research opportunities and outreach through the platform of the Princeton Center
for Complex Materials. This award receives support from the Divisions of
Materials Research and Physics.