* 0953730
* CAREER: Flexible Resource Allocation and Efficient Coding in Human Vision
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* George Alvarez, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* catherine arrington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 591,793.00

Imagine you are driving in the middle lane of a busy three-lane highway,
approaching your exit, with the radio on so you can hear the weather report, and
with your children in the backseat calling for you. How are you going to manage
this situation? Will you ignore all but one thing, and pay full attention to the
road signs to determine when to switch lanes, or to cars in the rearview mirror
as you change lanes, or to the radio, or to your children? Or will you somehow
divide your attention between all of these incoming streams of information? What
is the optimal thing to do under these circumstances, and can you do it? With
the support of an NSF CAREER award, Dr. George Alvarez at Harvard University
will examine whether people can optimize the way they divide their attention,
and how this affects their ability to see and accurately report information in
their field of view. We are limited in our ability to attend to multiple things
at once, and given the limits on our attention, there is an optimal strategy for
how to pay attention in any given situation. This optimal strategy could involve
flexibly distributing attention (e.g., paying 40% to the road signs, 40% to cars
in other lanes, and 20% to the children in the backseat), or using clever
strategies for combing information (e.g., you can get the gist of whether the
chatter in the backseat requires your immediate attention without paying
attention to each individual voice). The proposed research will examine whether,
and how, these different strategies are employed to optimize the use of our
limited attentional resources.

A basic level understanding of how people optimize the use of their limited
attentional resources opens the door to studying the extent to which attention
deficits in humans are due to sub-optimal use of available resources. Thus, the
results of the research will have implications for disorders such as Attention
Deficit Disorder, Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, Autism, Schizophrenia,
Dementia, or disorders due to stroke or brain damage, such as Visual Neglect or
Executive Dysfunction. In addition, Dr. Alvarez will use the research project as
an opportunity to mentor a cadre of undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups. Dr. Alvarez helps coordinate a summer research program that places
students in labs, providing them with hands on training in conducting behavioral
research. As a professor of Hispanic background, Dr. Alvarez is in a unique
position to increase minority representation and visibility in the brain and
cognitive sciences.