* 0953495
* CAREER: Evolutionary Computation and Bioinformatics
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Clare Congdon, University of Southern Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2016
* USD 496,000.00

The research focus of this project is to develop a novel evolutionary
computation-based approach for identifying candidate modules in non-coding DNA
that respond to environmental toxins (such as arsenic) and that alter gene
expression. These modules are composed of short pieces of DNA that are binding
sites for proteins; the cooperative and combinatorial interactions are believed
to contribute to the inducibility and specificity of environmentally responsive
genes. Since each gene has an enormous number of possible modules, searching for
them in the laboratory is untenable; even an exhaustive computational search for
candidate modules is impractical, given the large space. Thus, the development
of artificial intelligence techniques is called for.

This is an interdisciplinary proposal that makes contributions in both computer
science and biology. The computational contributions include designing an
effective search through the large and complex space of possible modules. While
a few existing tools have been designed to search the thousand base pair region
immediately upstream of the gene, the work here is designed to search
significantly longer sections, 1 million base pairs and longer in length. The
existing approaches cannot be expected to scale to the larger search, requiring
the development of a novel approach.

The PI has plans for introducing undergraduates to research, both through
coursework and in supervised research projects. This proposal will support and
encourage the creation of a new upper-level course in informatics as well as the
development of informatics-themed exercises to be incorporated at the
introductory level. The project will further directly support undergraduate
researchers who will contribute to the core research project. This project will
result in a well integrated program of research and teaching for the PI,
contribute to the available tools and our understanding of evolutionary
computation approaches for informatics work, and introduce scores of students to
this work.