* 0953238
* CAREER:  Operating System based Energy Virtualization for Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2017
* Charles Cao, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2017
* USD 443,229.00

In recent years, wireless sensor networks have emerged as one key technology
with the advantages of being low-cost, low-profile, and easy to deploy. These
attractive advantages, however, imply that resources available to individual
nodes are severely limited. In particular, it is highly likely that energy will
continue to be a system bottleneck, as more transistors indicate more power
consumption. On the other hand, there is a growing need for long-term,
sustainable deployments of sensors to reduce operational costs and ensure
service continuity. This research presents an operating system based approach
and its underlying foundations for this problem, by providing energy
virtualization in long-term unattended sensor network applications. The
foundation of this work is the LiteOS operating system: a Unix-like operating
system for wireless sensor networks. The centerpiece of this project is
operating system based energy virtualization, which represents a comprehensive
framework for accounting, reservation, and isolation of energy resource for
applications sharing the same platform. The deliveries of this project are (i)
an improved, highly reliable LiteOS operating system with built-in support for
energy virtualization, (ii) architecture principles, design methodologies,
programming APIs, and adaptive communication protocols for software development
based on energy virtualization, (iii) results from theoretical and algorithmic
investigations of energy virtualization, and (iv) educational testbeds,
curriculum and laboratory designs for undergraduate and graduate courses. Our
findings will have pervasive impact on applications that are in need of long-
term and remote sensing, such as infrastructure protection, assisted living,
smart buildings, factory monitoring, and numerous military applications.