* 0953714
* CAREER:   Structure-function studies of bacterial toxin-ribosome complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Christine Dunham, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,000,000.00

ABSTRACT Prokaryotes have evolved effective and efficient ways to rapidly
respond to and survive diverse environmental stresses through global regulatory
responses. This is achieved by adjusting rates of intracellular metabolic
processes that halt essential growth processes such as DNA replication, RNA
transcription and protein synthesis. Toxin-antitoxin (TA) modules facilitate
cell survival during such times. In addition, TA systems have also been
implicated in biofilm formation, bacterial persistence during antibiotic
treatment and bacterial pathogenesis. These diverse functions underpin the
importance of determining how recognition of cellular targets is achieved to
facilitate cell survival. During times of nutritional stress, bacteria turn to
TA systems to fine tune basic cellular processes. In distinct contrast to
classic bacterial toxins such as anthrax, cholera or diptheria, the toxin
component of a TA system is normally present in cells bound to an antitoxin that
specifically blocks its activity. Under stress conditions, the antitoxin is
degraded and the toxin released to exert its effect, most commonly ribonuclease
activity against messenger RNA. The research in the Dunham laboratory focuses on
a novel toxin protein that codon-specifically degrades mRNA, but only when bound
to a translating ribosome. This research entails the use of an integrated
structural biology and biochemical approach to answer key questions of RNA-
protein recognition and catalysis and to provide a deeper understanding of the
toxin mediated mRNA degradation. Broader Impacts: The Broader Impacts of this
research include the involvement of students in all aspects of this project from
learning to purify ribosomes, overexpression and purification of recombinant
proteins, in vitro transcription of RNA and in vitro translation assays. In
addition, students will gain experience at the forefront of structural biology,
learning about techniques that are required to solve large macromolecular
complexes. The PI will sponsor two summer undergraduate students through the
Emory summer undergraduate program and from an all women?s college to encourage
the pursuit of a scientific career. Lastly high school students and teachers
will get hands-on experience in a joint Emory-Georgia Tech summer program
designed to study extremophile ribosomes.