* 0953766
* CAREER:  How Temporal Fluctuations Alter Indirect Interactions in Duckweed-based Communities and its Integration with a Student Report Exchange
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2016
* Chad Brassil, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2016
* USD 531,141.00

Food webs reflect the interactions among species and the resources that they are
eating, typically other species. Direct interactions in food webs, those between
a consumer and its prey, play key roles in determining the dynamics of species
in a community. Indirect interactions, resulting from impacts through
intermediary species, may not be immediately apparent but may be as important as
direct interactions. Climate models predict that environmental variability may
increase in many areas due to, for example, a greater frequency of intense storm
events and droughts. The impact of increased environmental variability on the
importance of indirect interactions in food webs will be studied by developing
and testing food web models. Experimental tests of food web theory will be
conducted using a duckweed-based community. Duckweeds are small, floating,
aquatic plants, and community members include insects that eat duckweed and
predators of those insects. Environmental fluctuations will be created by
varying temperatures. Refining general theory through the use of the duckweed
communities will provide enhanced understanding of how environmental
fluctuations might alter other systems of interest which cannot be so easily
manipulated.

The broader impacts of this study will include a distributed experimental design
among diverse elementary school classrooms in which each classroom will be an
environmental replicate in a duckweed-based research project. In addition,
student-designed duckweed projects at the elementary level and at the college
level will be exchanged via an internet database to expand students'
participation in a peer-exchange, inquiry-based approach to learning the
science.