* 0953984
* CAREER:  Ab Initio Calculations for Design of High Temperature Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Raymundo Arroyave, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 02/29/2016
* USD 400,804.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to systematically investigate high-temperature metallic systems through
electronic structure calculations based on density functional theory. The
specific goals of the present research program are: (i) to develop practical
approaches to treating anharmonic effects on the thermodynamic and structural
properties of materials designed to operate at high temperatures; (ii) to assist
in the development, by a close collaborator of the PI, of high-temperature
Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy to measure high temperature elastic constants.
(iii) to systematically model the influence of configurational defects on the
properties of intermetallic compounds, with special emphasis on their effects on
structural stability, allowing the development of alloying guidelines to
optimize high temperature properties; (iv) to develop a framework for the
integration of multiple atomistic simulation tools for the automated prediction
of material properties as well as to generate material property databases in the
spirit of Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME) approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program addresses problems that are
essential for the further development of high temperature intermetallics and
alloys. Through this work, a fundamental understanding of the underlying
physical mechanisms that influence the high temperature thermo-mechanical
properties of metals will be achieved. The proposed curriculum innovations will
allow the scaling up of undergraduate research experiences. The PI will
collaborate with the NSF-RET program to provide research experiences for
secondary math and science teachers. Proposed undergraduate research activities
(linked to the minority-focused, NSF-funded LSAMP IV program) as well as
collaborations with Mexican institutions will broaden participation and enhance
international perspective of undergraduate/graduate students. This CAREER award
will also contribute to the formation of human resources by: training students
in computational materials science; fostering students' communication skills
through manuscript preparation and conference presentations; introducing the
students to the scientific community by encouraging participation in scientific
meetings.