* 0953976
* CAREER: Robust Trajectory Based Analysis for Stochastic Hybrid Systems Abstraction and Verification
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2017
* Anak Agung Julius, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2017
* USD 536,785.00

Hybrid systems (deterministic and stochastic) are widely used as the
mathematical framework to model many engineering systems and natural phenomena,
ranging from biomolecular processes to modern air traffic control systems. One
of the most important analysis problems in hybrid systems is reachability/safety
analysis, where the question of interest is whether the system can enter an
undesirable state during its execution. For stochastic hybrid systems, the same
question is asked with a probabilistic qualifier, i.e., what is the probability
of the occurrence of such an event. This question is crucial in analyzing the
performance or correctness of engineering systems, and the accuracy of the
mathematical models of natural phenomena, such as cellular biomolecular
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops formal analysis methods
for reachability/safety analysis based on the execution trajectories of
stochastic hybrid systems or their abstraction. The main tool used in this
research is the notion of trajectory robustness, which is established using
bisimulation functions. This technique offers a number of advantages over other
methods, including simplicity of implementation, better complexity, easiness of
parallel implementation, and possibility of partial verification. The project
also aims to extend the analysis from static reachability/safety properties to
dynamic ones that are specified by temporal logic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program includes the development of necessary theoretical results,
algorithms, and software tools for the application of the theory of trajectory
based analysis. The integration of the theoretical results in a software tool
will play an important role in disseminating the research output in the industry
and academia. There are also ongoing efforts in applying the results in cutting
edge engineering challenges, such as microscale actuation using bacteria and the
development of portable UV-based water sterilizer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
parallel with the research program, this project has an educational agenda
involving K-12, undergraduate and graduate level education. The broader impact
of the educational program is in educating new engineers and researchers that
are fluent in multidisciplinary research collaborations and are aware of the
tremendous potentials of such activities. The outreach component of the
educational program will also improve pre-college students' awareness of the
potential and attractiveness of engineering and research careers.