* 0953772
* CAREER: WE FEEL SCIENCE:   We Engage with the Flexible, Experimental Environment for Learning in SCIENCE
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2010,11/30/2011
* Chang Nam, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 11/30/2011
* USD 203,352.00

This five-year CAREER proposal aims at designing, evaluating, and implementing a
learning-by-collaborating system that provides haptic, visual, and auditory
feedback to students with and without visual impairments to work together in
hands-on science learning opportunities. The setting and sample of the proposed
study includes sighted and visually impaired students (N=120) from the Arkansas
School for the Blind, the Virginia School for the Deaf and Blind, the Kansas
State School for the Blind, and the Fayetteville (Arkansas) High School. The
hypothesis that a haptically enhanced learning-by-collaborating system may
increase the science learning of both sighted and visually impaired students
guides the study and its four research questions: (1) To what extent does
additional haptic feedback during collaborative hands-on practice influence
students' learning performance?; (2) To what extent does additional haptic
feedback during collaborative hands-on practice influence students' attitudes
towards science learning?; (3) How does additional haptic feedback during
collaborative hands-on practice influence students' motivation to learn?; and
(4) What are the relationships among learner motivation, learning attitudes, and
learning performance?

The study employs a research and development design consisting of three stages.
The first, Synthesis and Application, allows the PI to identify the set of
points of collaboration that need to be supported haptically, audibly, or both,
through two group sessions with three pairs of totally blind and partially blind
students per session. The second, Development and Formative Evaluation,
facilitates the development of two modules on the Nature of Light
(Electromagnetic Waves, and Vibrating Charges), as well as the modification of
the Molecular Properties, and Heat and Temperature modules, already designed for
visually impaired students only. A Design for Co-Touch software framework is
used for this purpose, and quality of the interaction techniques will be
assessed using internationally established standards for usability,
effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction. All materials that visually
impaired students use are provided in Braille.

The PI will investigate the cognitive and affective impacts of shared haptic
experiences on students' science learning through the third stage, Summative
Evaluation of Shared Haptic Experiences. A total of 30 pairs of visually
impaired and 30 pairs of sighted students participate during this stage. The
study employs a two-level-between-subjects condition to manipulate sensory
feedback: visual + auditory (students will receive visual and verbal
instructions on science concepts) vs. visual + auditory + haptic (students will
receive haptic feedback in addition to visual and verbal). This research stage
utilizes Campbell & Stanley's (1966) pretest-posttest control group design in
which participants are randomly assigned to one of the two groups.

Instruments to be used in the study will be developed or modified and pilot-
tested to determine their validity and reliability. To measure learning
performance, two tests will be developed: (a) a recall and recognition test
using Bloom's taxonomy, and (b) a transfer test to assess learners' ability to
integrate and apply knowledge. To measure learning attitudes, the Test of
Science-Related Attitudes (Fraser, 1981) will be used. To measure learning
motivation, Keller's (2007) Instructional Materials Motivation Survey will be
utilized. Statistical analysis (e.g., ANCOVA) will be used to control any
initial differences in pretest scores between the groups. Multiple regression
will be performed with the learning performance score (the sum of recall and
transfer tests) as the dependent variable. Independent variables are learners'
attitudes and learners' motivation.