* 0953900
* CAREER: Bringing Wireless Sensor Networks Underground
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Mehmet Vuran, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 05/31/2016
* USD 418,760.00

In this CAREER project, the development of wireless underground sensor networks,
which carries information through soil, is investigated. More specifically, the
application of underground networking in agriculture is considered, where
underground sensor networks promise significant reduction in water usage for
irrigation. The objectives of this project are to establish the foundations of
underground networking for the realization of underground sensor networks,
develop hands-on educational tools, and provide experiences to facilitate the
dissemination of these techniques to a larger audience including students and
farmers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Communication performance in underground settings
is significantly affected by the variations in soil conditions. Hence, the
research activities are focused on revisiting the concepts of connectivity and
interference under the influence of environmental factors such as soil
composition, soil moisture, and depth. Moreover, a theoretical framework is
developed to capture the spatial and temporal correlations in soil moisture for
underground sensor networks, enabling the development of environment-aware
communication protocols. The insights from these analyses are exploited to
develop event-based cross-layer communication platforms that adapt to the
environment in an energy efficient manner. Finally, an agricultural underground
sensor network testbed is developed to evaluate and highlight the outcomes of
this research. The educational components include bringing wireless sensor
networking to the class, developing an interactive cyber-physical networking
lab, and providing hands-on experiences for "little farmers".
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The realization of the underground networking techniques
has the potential to transform the agriculture industry, as well as a broad
range of applications including border patrol, perimeter surveillance, and toxic
material monitoring.