* 0953441
* CAREER:  Manipulating near-field optical interactions for nanoscale chemical imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Michael Gordon, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 01/31/2016
* USD 427,612.00

In this CAREER award, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Gordon from the University of California,
Santa Barbara, and his students will develop new scanning probe microscopy
instruments which use vibrational spectroscopy below the diffraction limit to
make chemical images of surfaces at spatial resolutions < 10nm. These new tools
will be used to spatially correlate the topography, electronic structure,
mechanical properties, and chemical functionality of surfaces in a variety of
experimental venues. The overarching theme of the work is to probe and better
understand how local effects (i.e., shape, structure, phase separation,
electronic interactions, and organization) influence chemical reactions and
opto-electronic processes at interfaces. Given such correlative information, it
will be possible to better engineer and exploit the unique physical and chemical
behavior of nano- and meso-scaled material systems. Application areas include
chemical imaging of nanoparticle catalysts, studying molecular transformations
on surfaces during reaction, and probing optical and charge transfer processes
in plastic solar cell materials.

Graduate and undergraduate students will play a crucial role in all aspects of
the project; they will conduct nanoscience research in a curiosity-driven,
interdisciplinary, and collaborative setting. Professor Gordon will continue his
efforts to involve undergraduates in research by offering internships during the
academic year and summer through the Research Internships in Science and
Engineering (RISE) program which provides research experiences to students from
underrepresented groups and universities. Scholarly activities include the
development of two "Spectroscopy of Materials" lecture/lab courses that
introduce quantum mechanics/solid-state physics to engineering students and
provide hands-on training with materials characterization equipment. Community-
level efforts focus on the development of a "Crime Scene Investigation" lab
where middle and high-school students use portable Raman spectrometers to
investigate the structure of different materials using spectroscopy-based
chemical analysis. Professor Gordon will also integrate research and education
with the scientific community at large by developing web-based tutorials on
various theoretical and experimental aspects of different spectroscopy methods.