* 0953197
* CAREER: Towards Scalable Datacenter Services with Strong Robustness Guarantees
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Michael Freedman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2017
* USD 529,306.00

Modern datacenters have reached hundreds of thousands of servers, and modern
distributed services can be spread over multiple or even dozens of datacenters
worldwide. For scalability, availability, and performance, these services have
increasingly embraced a weakened model of data consistency. This trade-off
proved highly successful for applications such as web crawling, search, and
content distribution. On the other hand, the recent trend to move ever-more
dynamic applications to the "cloud" portends a shift in service requirements---
in which losing data or applying operations out-of-order may not be acceptable
---as does far-flung demand for concurrent access to data and
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these changing needs, this research
project reconsiders the challenge of building storage and replicated systems
with strong robustness guarantees and at scale. Recognizing that large-scale,
complex systems are typically built-up from smaller groups---which either
provide different functionality or partition some larger state-space into
smaller, more manageable parts---it leverages a group compositional approach to
tackle the problem. First, the research develops novel protocols for smaller
groups of nodes that offer strong properties at minimal overhead. Second, it
proposes a coordination service and a suite of management algorithms that
adaptively organizes these groups and composes them together. These algorithms
explore problems of dynamic load balancing, topological control, and security.
The research includes substantial systems building, including the incorporation
of its core services into several other distributed systems (e.g., a scalable
virtual world and a istributed name resolution
service).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remarkably rich and varied Internet services
run out of datacenters form the core of people's online experiences today. The
algorithms and software systems developed by this research may lower the barrier
to developing datacenter services that are scalable, reliable, secure,
efficient, and easy to manage. And by reducing the technical difficulty of
building robust, large-scale applications---by providing them with a firm
foundation---this research may enable further innovation in Internet services.