* 0953236
* CAREER: Hierarchical Polymeric Hybrids - Lessons from Nature in Mechanical Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* LaShanda Korley, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2016
* USD 511,250.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

High performance materials found in nature, such as collagen and spider silk,
exhibit a hierarchical structural arrangement and contain reinforcing, ordered
domains, which lead to novel mechanical function. The overall aim of this CAREER
project is to utilize a bio-inspired approach, particularly the incorporation of
ordered regions, to generate functional, polymeric hybrids with tunable
mechanical properties. Multi-block copolymers, which mimic the microstructure of
numerous natural materials, are ideal systems with which to explore ?soft?
domain ordering via variations in secondary structure of polypeptide-based block
copolymers. The PI will develop peptide-containing polymeric hybrids with
controlled structural variations to elucidate the role of hierarchical ordering
(secondary structure; microphase segregation; supramolecular interactions;
crystallinity) and structural interplay on mechanical and morphological
behavior. The fundamental structure-function relationships obtained in this
examination of hierarchically-assembled hybrids will drive the development of
new polymeric material systems with tailored mechanical behavior for emerging
applications, such as scratch-resistant coatings, impact-resistant films/fibers
for composites, and multi-functional tissue engineering scaffolds.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The development of hybrid polymeric materials with a bio-inspired architecture
and tunable mechanical response will impact the design of next generation
materials for energy-absorption and high strength applications, such as impact-
resistant panels, scratch-resistant coatings, and durable fabrics. This multi-
disciplinary research, educational, and outreach CAREER plan provides a unique
training and mentoring platform for high school, graduate, and undergraduate
researchers. The PI will also incorporate concepts of nature-inspired design,
hierarchical assembly, and mechanical behavior into new and existing
undergraduate and graduate courses. Innovative and impactful outreach programs
have been proposed, including 1) a mentoring network, Sister 2 Sister, for
underrepresented women interested in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM); 2) a partnership with Citizens? Academy, an urban K-5
charter school in the University Circle area adjacent to the Case Western
Reserve University campus, to provide opportunities to explore the world of
polymers, support Science Club activities and curriculum development; and 3)
Many Faces of STEM, an exposure day for Cleveland-area middle school students
from primarily underrepresented groups, to spur an interest in STEM disciplines
and to promote interaction with STEM role models from similar backgrounds.

