* 0953563
* CAREER: Efficient and Accurate Computation for High Throughput Sequencing Related Problems in Population Genomics
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Yufeng Wu, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2017
* USD 512,406.00

High-throughput sequencing is transforming the field of population genomics. The
cost of obtaining an individual's genome via sequencing has dropped several
orders of magnitude during the past decade, and may reach the so-called $1,000
genome target within the next few years. Now much attention has shifted to
sequencing on a population scale. Large amount of population sequencing data has
already been generated. Therefore, there is an urgent need for the development
of new computational methods that work with noisy, high-throughput sequencing
data to provide efficient and accurate analysis for important population
genomics problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the work
include the development of accurate computational methods that are capable of
analyzing large-scale high-throughput sequencing data for several population
genomics problems. Problems of interest include inferring genotypes, correcting
sequencing errors and detecting meiotic recombination, as well as searching for
disease-causing rare gene variants and other emerging applications of high-
throughput sequencing. A key difference between the proposed research and many
existing methods is that the proposed approaches are explicitly designed for
processing large amount of high-throughput sequencing data. One particular focus
is on applying combinatorial optimization techniques such as integer linear
programming, which is not well-known to biologists. Probabilistic models will
also be used and integrated with optimization approaches to provide efficient
and accurate solutions. The expected project outcome includes efficient
algorithms for the above population genomics problems, related open-source
software tools, and rigorous methodologies for both theoretical and empirical
evaluation of the algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part of the contribution of
this work to computer science is that the study of algorithms for handling short
sequencing reads may contribute to the research of string matching algorithms, a
problem of general interests in computer science. Noisy sequencing data
motivates naturally approximate string matching and may lead to new string-based
problem formulations. Due to the need of efficiency, algorithmic string
processing techniques may play an important role in the proposed research. Other
aspects of the proposed work are related to phylogenetic problems, which have
been actively studied in computer science. Theoretical study on these
algorithmic problems will be conducted to obtain rigorous results that may be of
interest to computer science research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the project include interdisciplinary collaboration and
training, as well as educational impacts. The developed software tools will be
made available freely to the multi-disciplinary research community, and are
expected to enable novel biological applications of high-throughput sequencing.
The PI will develop an interdisciplinary undergraduate and graduate educational
curriculum at University of Connecticut. The proposed educational and outreach
activities include reaching out to students with various backgrounds, and
training of future researchers with unique interdisciplinary skills.