* 0953455
* Ethnic and Religious Influences on Forgiveness for Mass Atrocities
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2012
* Adam Cohen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 01/31/2012
* USD 40,018.00

This project represents an initial effort to study the cultural, emotional and
social factors that contribute to forgiveness for mass atrocities. Human history
is replete with examples of groups committing mass atrocities against each
other, such as the Holocaust, the Armenian genocide committed by the Turks, and
slavery in the US. Negative emotions and mistrust can be directed at the
perpetrator group by members of the victim group for generations long after the
actual perpetrators and victims have died. These negative emotions and mistrust
can potentially prevent positive intergroup relations and exacerbate or increase
the likelihood of conflict. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this
grant will study the forgiveness of Jews for the Holocaust and Armenians for the
Armenian genocide. Using experimental methods, the investigators will explore
whether and to what extent ethnic and religious identity are associated with
forgiveness, and expressed feelings towards the offender groups (Germans for
Jews, Turks for Armenians). In addition, the investigators will consider the
impact of the passage of time since the event. The proposed research will make
several important contributions by advancing theories about cultural influences
on forgiveness and intergroup relations, and enhancing understanding of a set of
processes that have direct implications for the lives of individuals and groups
across the globe.