* 0953733
* CAREER: Magnetocaloric Effect in Metallic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Casey Miller, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 02/28/2015
* USD 586,060.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This research will advance understanding of the
magnetocaloric effect through the fabrication and characterization of novel
nanoscale heterostructures composed of magnetic metals. Geometric confinement
and physical proximity will be used to perturb and understand the structure-
property relationships governing the entropy at relevant phase transitions.
Investigations will include composition gradients, finite size effects, tailored
interfaces, and magnetic anisotropies. Physical properties of the artificially
structured materials will be characterized by means ranging from standard
magnetometry and diffraction techniques to synchrotron and neutron probes
available through collaborations with US National Laboratories. These studies
will help enable the design of materials with enhanced entropic properties,
which will ultimately be relevant for highly efficient magnetic
refrigeration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: By fabricating
otherwise standard materials in exotic nanostructures that do not exist in
nature, it is possible to make new materials with properties superior to those
of the individual materials. This will be accomplished by bringing the materials
in contact at the nanoscale. Physical properties will be characterized using
synchrotron and neutron scattering techniques at US National Laboratories and/or
user facilities. Discoveries will be relevant to the emerging field of
magnetocalorics, which has the potential for developing extremely high
efficiency refrigeration using environmentally friendly refrigerants. The
teaching and training of undergraduate and graduate students will be integrated
into cutting edge interdisciplinary nanomagnetism research. Students will
develop a network of future mentors, colleagues, and employers by disseminating
work at conferences, participating in collaborations, and interacting with US
National Laboratories. A scientific literature learning module will be
formulated to increase undergraduates? scientific literacy, enable an easy and
early transition into active research labs, and increase the quality of the
undergraduate experience. USF's interdisciplinary Science, Technology, and
Mathematics Education research cluster will help extend this module to other
disciplines in order to reach a broad audience with interests ranging from the
hard sciences to the health sciences.&lt;br/&gt;