* 0953908
* CAREER:  Future of Search: User, Social Networks and Language
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Yi Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 536,692.00

How to retrieve relevant information for a specific user under a specific set of
circumstances is a challenging research problem. The goal of this research
project is to tackle this challenge and lay the foundation for the next
generation of search engines. Instead of simply matching a query to documents
that contain query words, the approach developed here is a unified user-centric
retrieval framework that consists of: (1) personalization: learning a user model
that takes into consideration the content, context and decision criteria of a
user; (2) language processing: learning better text representation for retrieval
from heterogeneous corpus and linguistic resources; and (3) social networks:
further improving the user model based on social norms and a user's social
networks. To evaluate the framework, a personalized social search engine will be
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result of this project will be a unified
retrieval framework with a set of novel techniques applicable across a wide
range of information retrieval (IR) tasks, including: search engines,
recommender systems and adaptive filtering systems. Through the PI's industry
collaboration, the results of this project are expected to be incorporated in
commercial systems, and thus benefit millions of users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;K-12 students, undergraduate, graduate students, and
engineers in Silicon Valley will be involved and benefit from the project. The
project will lead to research-based educational materials (lecture slides, video
lectures, book chapters and course projects). Project results, including
publications, open source software, annotated data sets, demos and course
materials, will be disseminated via the project website
(http://www.soe.ucsc.edu/~yiz/futureofsearch).