* 0953046
* CAREER: Supporting Middle School Students' Construction of Evidence-based Arguments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2017
* Brian Belland, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2017
* USD 590,333.00

Doing science requires that students learn to create evidence-based arguments
(EBAs), defined as claims connected to supporting evidence via premises. The
question chosen for study by a new researcher at Utah State University is: How
can argumentation ability be enhanced among middle school students? This study
involves 325 middle school students in 12 class sections from 3 school districts
in Utah and Idaho. First, students in middle school science classrooms will be
introduced to problem-based learning (PBL) units that allow them to investigate
ill-structured science problems. These activities provide students with
something about which to argue: something that they have explored personally and
with which they have grappled. Next, they will construct arguments using a
powerful computer technology, the Connection Log, developed by the PI. The
Connection Log provides a scaffold for building arguments, allowing each student
to write about his/her reasoning and compare it to arguments built by peers. The
study investigates how the Connection Log improves the quality of students'
arguments. It also explores whether students are able to transfer what they have
learned to new situations that call for argumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study is set in 6th and 7th grade science classrooms with students of diverse
SES, ethnicity, and achievement levels. The Connection Log software supports
middle school students with written prompts on a computer screen that take
students through the construction of an argument. The system allows students to
share their arguments with other members of their PBL group. The first
generation version of the Connection Log asks students to: &lt;br/&gt;1. define
the problem, or state the problem in their own words &lt;br/&gt;2. determine
needed information, or decide on evidence they need to find to solve the
problem&lt;br/&gt;3. find needed information and record it &lt;br/&gt;4.
organize information to make it useful for developing their claims &lt;br/&gt;5.
develop a claim, or make an assertion stating a possible problem solution
&lt;br/&gt;6. link evidence to claim, linking specific, relevant data to
assertions &lt;br/&gt;The model will be optimized through a process of design-
based research. The study uses a mixed methods research design employing
argument evaluation tests, video, interviews, database information, debate
ratings, and a mental models measure, to evaluate student progress.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is important because research has shown that
students do not automatically come to school prepared to create evidence-based
arguments. Middle school students face three major challenges in argumentation:
adequately representing the central problem of the unit; determining and
obtaining the most relevant evidence; and synthesizing gathered information to
construct a sound argument. Argumentation ability is crucial to STEM performance
and to access to STEM careers. Without the ability to formulate arguments based
upon evidence, middle school students are likely to be left out of the STEM
pipeline, avoid STEM careers, and have less ability to critically evaluate and
understand scientific findings as citizens. By testing and refining the
Connection Log, the project has the potential for scaling up for use in science
classrooms (and beyond) throughout the United States.