* 0953585
* CAREER: Real-Time Platform Virtualization in Multiprocessor Systems: Temporal Isolation and Allocation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Nathan Fisher, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2016
* USD 416,800.00

The standard platform architecture for real-time embedded systems has
increasingly shifted away from single processor platforms to multiprocessor
platforms. The recent shift towards multiprocessor platform architectures has
resulted in increased consolidation and integration of multiple subsystems upon
shared processing platforms, aided in part by virtualization execution
environment (VEE) technologies. The potential impact of the subsystem-
integration approach is a significant reduction in the size, weight, and power
(SWaP) requirements of integrated systems over non-integrated systems. However,
the tighter physical integration of subsystems upon a shared processing platform
introduces fundamental questions on how the processor's computational resources
should be effectively allocated among the contingent subsystems and how temporal
isolation between real-time subsystems should be achieved. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this NSF CAREER project is to obtain
solutions to the above questions via development of effective real-time
scheduling algorithms, formal analysis, and tools for supporting tunable
temporal isolation of subsystems upon a multicore VEE platform. The specific
research objectives of the project are: effective system and subsystem real-time
scheduling algorithms for VEE frameworks, protocols for resource sharing between
subsystems, schedulability analysis, and implementation of a VEE for controlling
a real-time robotic system. The educational goal of the project is to increase
overall awareness and understanding of the importance of building and verifying
temporally correct systems by: recruiting graduate and undergraduate students
from underrepresented populations into embedded systems research; developing
embedded systems curriculum and outreach training program; introducing K-12
students to general embedded systems concepts; and developing online real-time
systems repository for students, researchers, and faculty.