* 0953002
* CAREER: Analytical Rheology and the Dynamics of Polymer Melts
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Sachin Shanbhag, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2016
* USD 410,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research and education that seeks to develop novel algorithms
to infer the architecture of polymer melts from rheological data. Addition of
trace amounts of long-chain branching improves the processability of polymer
melts. Despite its industrial importance, and advances in synthesis, which
enable us to control the amount of branching, standard analytical methods such
as chromatography and spectroscopy cannot reliably diagnose these trace levels.
Rheology, on the other hand, is extremely sensitive to molecular architecture.
This motivates the PI to investigate inverting contemporary models, based on the
tube theory and hierarchical relaxation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
algorithms are based on the idea of Bayesian inference, which is used to
transform the inverse problem of inferring structure, into a sampling problem,
that is attacked using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. This approach has four
unique advantages: (i) It can be applied to systems with an unknown number of
species; (ii) It has a built-in Occam's razor, which prefera less complex
solutions, (iii) It can characterize multiple solutions, and (iv) It can
incorporate complementary analytical information in a systematic and robust
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contemporary rheological models, however, are less-
than-perfect, and effort is directed in this project, at addressing these
shortcomings by microscopic studies. In particular, we seek to study blends of
cyclic and linear polymers to understand the process of constraint release, and
to map physically different microscopic simulation models to understand the role
of assumptions in coarse-graining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
promote teaching, training and learning by continuing undergraduate and graduate
participation in the research effort. The PI's association with an HBCU will
provide a conduit for the participation of minority students in the research.
This together with various strategies will help broaden participation. The PI
will use computation to emphasize the connection between the microscopic
structure and motion and macroscopic properties and phenomena of materials.
Educational tools developed will be distributed through the PI's
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research and education that seeks to develop novel algorithms to
infer the structure of large molecules that have long branched chain-like
structures through rheology. Rheology involves measuring how these materials
respond to deformation. Addition of trace amounts of long-chain branching
improves the processability of these molecules known broadly as polymers.
Despite its industrial importance standard analytical experimental methods
cannot reliably diagnose these trace levels. Rheology, on the other hand, is
extremely sensitive to molecular architecture, and motivates the PI to consider
using contemporary models based on sophisticated microscopic theories in a
direction reversed from the usual way they are used. This process is called
analytical rheology, and is an ill-posed problem, which seriously impairs
current methods. The research will develop a method that addresses the most
serious shortcomings, which includes the inability to discriminate the number of
components and to address the multiplicity of possible structures. This project
also involves improving the contemporary models of polymers that would be used
in reverse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will promote teaching, training
and learning by continuing undergraduate and graduate participation in the
research effort. The PI's association with an HBCU will provide a conduit for
the participation of minority students in the research. This together with
various strategies will help broaden participation. The PI will use computation
to emphasize the connection between the microscopic structure and motion and
macroscopic properties and phenomena of materials. Educational tools developed
will be distributed through the PI's website.