* 0953994
* SHF: EAGER: Closing the gap in Controller Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Paulo Tabuada, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

Automatic controller synthesis algorithms hold the promise of producing correct-
by-construction systems, obviating the need for costly post facto verification.
However, there is currently a gap between theoretical foundations of controller
synthesis and their practical implementations on hardware and software
platforms. This project addresses challenges in closing the gap in control
synthesis. In particular, we consider two fundamental problems. First, we
consider the problem of implementation complexity of controllers. While
theoretical results have focused on the optimal memory requirements for
controllers, in practice, a controller implementation may have several other
optimality requirements such as the size of the implementing (combinational and
sequential) circuit, the complexity and frequency of computing the control
action, and the sensing and actuation bandwidth. Accordingly, we study
algorithms for the construction of optimal controllers under these metrics.
Second, we consider the problem of fault tolerance in controllers, in which we
consider effects of (possibly stochastic) errors in controller implementations.
While traditional fault tolerance techniques such as error-correcting codes and
redundancy can be applied directly, our thesis is that a closer interaction of
fault tolerance with controller synthesis algorithms can lead to fault tolerant
designs at costs lower than traditional techniques. For example, by
distinguishing the "importance" of signals to the control objective, the costs
associated with error-correction and redundancy can be decreased while having a
negligible effect on the control objective. The research performed in this
project is prerequisite for a more widespread adoption of correct-by-
construction techniques.

The tools and techniques developed in this project have the potential to
significantly enhance our ability to produce robust cyber-physical systems, thus
affecting several large-scale application areas beyond the computer science and
control engineering domains. Practically, the results of the research will lead
to better controller synthesis tools. Theoretically, the research will bring
together cross-cutting techniques, ranging from theoretical foundations in
logics and algorithms for control, to optimization techniques, real-time
systems, and hardware and software synthesis. In addition, by fostering
collaboration between software foundations, control foundations, and hardware
synthesis foundations, the project will train graduate and undergraduate
students in the emerging and important domain of formal techniques for cyber-
physical systems.