* 0953767
* CAREER: GoldMine:Automatic Assertion Generation in System Design Using Data Mining and Static Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Shobha Vasudevan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2015
* USD 430,000.00

CAREER: GoldMine:Automatic Assertion Generation in System Design Using Data
Mining and Static Analysis&lt;br/&gt;Shobha Vasudevan&lt;br/&gt;University of
Illinois at Urbana Champaign&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assertions are
summarized statements of design intent that have emerged as the most popular
checking artifacts in hardware and software development cycles. In hardware,
assertions are used in formal verification, dynamic verification, runtime
monitoring, emulation, post-Silicon debug and in-field diagnosis. The generation
of assertions today is an intensely manual task. During each system development
cycle, many man-months and resources are spent in assertion generation. This
work proposes an automatic assertion generation technique and tool, GoldMine,
for systems using data mining and static analysis in combination. Data mining
infers knowledge by statistical analysis of dynamic behavior of a system. Static
analysis reasons with the source code or model of the system without executing
it, and analyzes possible behavior. These two technologies can be used
synergisti-&lt;br/&gt;cally. Static analysis techniques can be used to infer
domain information and guide the data mining. GoldMine will provide simulation
data of the target design along with static analysis to a suite of data mining
algorithms that will infer ?likely invariants?. The likely invariants will be
passed through a formal verifier for filtering the true assertions. Feedback
from formal verification will be given to the mining algorithms, as will the
designer/user evaluation of the generated assertions. This iterative process
will produce high quality assertions automatically. Preliminary results have
been obtained on Rigel, a 1000+ processor RTL. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
marriage between statistical and static analyses proposed here for generating
knowledge about a system is a ?meta technique? that can be used in a multitude
of forms. A systematic methodology to extract and provide domain knowledge in
any structured system, along with statistics based learning techniques can
create a very powerful combination. The alliance of static domain analysis and
statistical data mining that has been introduced can be used for software
systems, embedded systems and other domains where knowledge needs to be
inferred.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to automate a manual, all-
pervasive system process. This aims at saving economic and human resources,
thereby increasing the productivity of the community. GoldMine will also be
widely disseminated (along with the source code) for research and education
purposes, contributing to practical learning of students. The merit in the
system design world is that we are proposing to study and systematize the human
cognition aspect of design.