* 0953284
* CAREER: Optimization Models and Approximation Algorithms for Network Vulnerability and Adaptability
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2010,07/31/2016
* My Thai, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Complex network systems are extremely vulnerable. This vulnerability may be
propagated, leading to a much more devastating consequence. Furthermore, several
network algorithms must be adaptable to changes in order to maintain their
functions. In the presence of uncertainty, network vulnerability and
adaptability are the two major aspects that must be deeply investigated.

This proposal is using optimization theory and approximation techniques to
address the following fundamental questions: How do we quantitatively measure
the vulnerability degree of the network? How is the vulnerability propagated?
What are the quantitative benefits of using adaptive solutions vs. re-computing
it from scratch? What techniques can we use for adaptive solutions in order to
theoretically bound their performance? The proposal provides several new
theoretical frameworks and approximation techniques to characterize the network
vulnerability and adaptability, which brings the understanding of network
vulnerability and adaptability to the next level.

This research can potentially impact nearly all applications that benefit from
networks such as the Internet, critical network infrastructures, and
transportation networks where vulnerability and adaptability are important
characteristics. In addition to its obvious impact on networks, the project
crosses several research areas such as graph theory, approximation algorithms,
combinatorial optimization, and computational complexity, thus it has a profound
impact on the theory of optimization and approximation, especially the adaptive
approximation techniques.