* 0953067
* CAREER:  Collaborative Communication and Storage for Sensor Networks in Challenging Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,10/31/2010
* WenZhan Song, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 10/31/2010
* USD 91,596.00

CAREER: Collaborative Communication and Storage for Sensor Networks in
Challenging Environments

NSF Proposal ID: 0953067 PI: WenZhan Song

This project concerns the sustainability and reliability of sensor networks in
challenging (e.g., extreme) environments. In a challenged sensor network, a
predictable and stable path may never exist, the network connectivity is
intermittent, and a node could suddenly appear or disappear. The rare upload
opportunity and unpredictable node disruptions often result in data loss. The
unpredictable network disruptions make the traditional communication protocols
inefficient and require a new design paradigm to combat network disruptions and
maintain reliable operations. The driven research idea of this project is
collaborative communication and storage - an integrated approach which
cooperatively configures resources to increase disruption resilience, data
persistence and network lifetime, and capture the fluctuating connectivity for
data delivery. The expected outcomes of this project are (1) the innovative
architecture principles, algorithms and protocols, design and evaluation
methodologies for sensor networks in challenging environments, (2) the design
and implementation of an integrated collaborative communication and storage
middleware, and the running prototype sensor network systems in relevant
environments, and (3) the curriculum and test bed enhancement for undergraduate
and graduate research and courses, and educational outreach activities to K-12
students, minority groups and local communities. This project will greatly
promote the confident use of sensor networks in challenging environments and
enable new applications and economics. The outcomes of this project will be
broadly disseminated to academic and industrial communities through
international conferences, journals, media and intra-disciplinary and inter-
disciplinary collaborations.