* 0953061
* CAREER: Atomistic Simulations of Enzymatic Modulation of Long-Timescale Biomolecular Switches
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Donald Hamelberg, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 01/31/2016
* USD 877,319.00

Sub-cellular signaling processes generally involve recognition and transient
interactions between biomolecules and switching of conformations. These
signaling processes, at times, occur over very long timescales (seconds to
minutes). For the on-off signaling to take place at biologically relevant
timescales (milliseconds), nature has provided enzymes to catalyze and increase
the rates of these processes. One of the major challenges in computational
biophysics is describing, at the atomistic detail, biomolecular events that are
beyond the microsecond timescale. This project takes advantage of an accelerated
molecular dynamics simulation method developed by the principle investigator
(PI) to access long timescale events and fully model the enzymatic mechanism of
peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerases (PPIases). PPIases are a class of
ubiquitous enzymes that catalyze the notoriously slow cis-trans switching of the
prolyl peptide bond of their protein substrates in many important signaling
pathways. The goal of this CAREER project is to investigate the conformational
transitions of cis-trans biomolecular switches, including the phosphorylation
dependent cis-trans switches, and the associated mechanistic role of PPIases.
Experiments have provided wealth of structural insights and kinetic information
on PPIases, but they have not been able to provide a complete picture of the
mechanism at the atomistic level. Direct observations at this level are hard to
achieve with current experimental techniques. As a result, the mechanism of
action of PPIases that is required for better understanding of certain sub-
cellular processes has been elusive and controversial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER project will have broad impacts in fundamental research as well as
scientific training. By unraveling the atomistic details of biomolecular
switching mechanisms and the accompanying protein dynamics, a better
understanding of the inner workings of molecular machines at the physicochemical
level will be achieved. And at a higher level, this will undoubtedly illuminate
how cellular signaling takes place under normal and aberrant conditions. Also,
the knowledge gained from this project will allow the PI to make testable
hypotheses and to ask specific questions that can then be addressed
experimentally. More importantly, this project provides an excellent opportunity
to attract and train the next generation of scientists. Computational chemistry
cuts across many disciplines, including chemistry, biology, physics,
mathematics, and computer science, and therefore, provides an excellent tool for
attracting students into the sciences. An advantage of computational chemistry
in teaching is the fact that dynamic atomistic and molecular descriptions of
concepts that would otherwise seem abstract can be made understandable. In
addition to training undergraduate and graduate students, this project will
allow the PI to expose high school students to scientific research in a safe
environment and reach out to high school and middle school students through a
well-established Bio-Bus outreach program at Georgia State University. This
outreach program will help to raise scientific literacy amongst school-aged
children and provide access to a larger audience, especially those in school
districts with underrepresented minorities in science and engineering.