* 0953112
* CAREER: Tailoring Photo-Switchable Interfaces using Functional Polymer Brushes
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2010,12/31/2016
* Jason Locklin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 12/31/2016
* USD 490,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This proposal outlines a 5 year plan centered on understanding how light-induced
conformation changes in surface-bound polymer brushes influence surface,
interfacial, and macroscopic properties in photochromic thin films. The three
dimensional arrangement of photochromic moieties in extended polymer chains
result in an increased density of functional groups at the surface that can be
used to amplify the stimuli responsive nature of functional coatings. This
proposal is aimed at synthesizing photochromic polymer brushes using surface
initiated polymerization techniques that can be used to complete the following
three research objectives: (1) Using light to control the colorimetric response
of photochromic polymers through metal ion complexation. The reversible binding
mechanism of photo-induced complexation that occurs when spiropyran containing
polymers are irradiated in the presence of different metal ions will be
elucidated and exploited to generate reversible ion sensors. (2) Investigating
reversible, photo-switchable adhesion. The design of surfaces that undergo
photo-induced phase separation will allow for surfaces that switch from adhesive
to non-adhesive states. (3) Investigating photo-induced mechanical motion on the
single molecule level. Light will be used to induce conformation changes between
random coils and extended chains on surface of different free energy, leading to
photo-induced mechanical motion.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The creation of functional surfaces with controlled interfacial properties using
light as an external stimulus will have a major impact on a wide variety of
scientific developments, such as sensors, microfluidic devices, controllable
drug delivery, optical data storage, self-cleaning, antifogging and antifouling
surfaces. Light as a stimulus can provide the ability to control sensor response
remotely, with high speed and spatial precision. Measuring and quantifying the
interfacial forces involved in photoresponsive polymer surfaces will help to
elucidate the origins of adhesion in responsive materials. The understanding of
polymers, especially in two-dimensional space, will be improved with the
investigation of photo-induced motion at the molecular level. The technical
nature of this project provides an interdisciplinary training experience to
graduate and undergraduate students in polymer synthesis and thin film
characterization. This training will provide students with the skill set
necessary in addressing the future needs of polymer scientists. A significant
outreach component of this proposal includes a ?summer camp? for ten high school
teachers to be held at the University of Georgia is aimed at providing teachers
with simple experiments involving polymer science to perform in their
classrooms. The ultimate goal of this outreach project is to provide a large
social and economic impact by influencing young students to pursue careers in
science and engineering.