* 0953902
* CAREER: Invasive Micro-optics for In Vivo Multiphoton Microscopy of Deep Brain Structures
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Michael Levene, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 02/28/2015
* USD 819,177.00

Major questions in experimental Neuroscience, ranging from how neuronal
computation works at the level of micro-circuitry to the effects of thousands of
different genes on basic anatomy, are best studied optically. Yet, current
optics devices can only reach ~5% of the intact mouse brain. The devices
developed in this project will open up the remaining 95% of the intact mouse
brain to optical microscopy through novel invasive micro-optics. The devices
will be capable of penetrating the brain to gain access to deep brain regions,
while evaluating and minimizing tissue damage to ensure the validity of
experiments. The micro-optics will take the form of needle-like lenses that can
access deep, sub-cortical brain structures and micro-prisms that can image
entire cortical columns, the fundamental processing unit in cortex. These
systems will also be combined to form micro-periscopes, for side-on viewing of
deep structures. Taken together, these devices will fundamentally change the
limits of experimental Neuroscience in living animals. In addition, they will
also find application in a wide range of non-Neuroscience fields, including, for
example, the monitoring of tumor growth and the investigation of the stem cell
niche, or even in plant systems. The anticipated low-price of the micro-optics
will facilitate rapid dissemination of this technology to the research
community. The dissemination will be aided by classes on how to assemble and use
micro-optics, offered as part of the free Yale Microscopy Workshop and
Symposium. This symposium occurs every summer and is open to the broader
research community outside of Yale. In addition, each summer, two or more high
school students will be funded to join the Yale Engineering and Science Summer
Internship (YESSI), run by the primary investigator. This program runs a
competition amongst interested graduate students to mentor high school students,
who also compete to enter the program. The graduate students receive valuable
experience as mentors, while the high school students get exposed to cutting
edge research.More information may be found at
http://www.eng.yale.edu/levenelab/