* 0953005
* CAREER: An Integrated Scheduling Framework for Multicore Based Real-Time Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Dakai Zhu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2016
* USD 412,000.00

The goal of this CAREER project is to design and develop an integrated
scheduling framework for networked multicore-based control systems in smart
vehicles. The advanced functionalities (such as stability control and collision
avoidance) in modern vehicles impose high computational demand on their
electronic control systems, which can be powered by multicore processors to
mitigate their increasing complexity. However, the existing scheduling theory
and techniques have fallen short of supporting such networked multicore-based
control systems, especially considering the human-related factors and dynamic
environments of smart vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project undertakes a
comprehensive study of resource management techniques and scheduling algorithms
to efficiently schedule various real-time applications and effectively utilize
the computation power in networked multicore-based smart vehicle control
systems. First, a hierarchical control architecture with a simplified high-level
master controller is being investigated to achieve accurate situational
awareness and ensure prompt response. Second, to address the uncertainty in
dynamic environment, distributed and multicore-aware elastic real-time
scheduling algorithms are being developed that can adaptively adjust the
invocation interval of various control tasks for schedulability and stability.
Moreover, criticality-aware scheduling algorithms are being developed that
consider the variable importance of control tasks under different situations.
Finally, energy-efficient multicore scheduling algorithms and battery management
schemes for hybrid/electric smart vehicles are being
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design and development of the proposed
scheduling framework has a direct economic and societal impact, which can reduce
car accidents and thus save lives. Moreover, with the development of new
curricula on cyber-physical systems, this project also provides abundant topics
and learning opportunities for under-represented students.