* 0953274
* CAREER: Combinatorial Online Learning and its Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2017
* Arindam Banerjee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 03/31/2017
* USD 495,804.00

Several important problems in machine learning, such as
maximum&lt;br/&gt;aposteriori (MAP) inference in graphical models, are
inherently combinatorial. While extensive research has been devoted to designing
approximation algorithms for such problems, existing algorithms do not scale
well to large problems. This project focuses on leveraging ideas from online
learning with expert advice to develop a novel family of online learning
algorithms for combinatorial optimization problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithms for combinatorial online learning are efficient
and simple to analyze in order to establish guarantees. Unlike existing
literature on approximation algorithms for combinatorial problems which rely on
suitable real relaxations of the original problem, combinatorial online learning
algorithms never use relaxations; they work directly with binary/integer
solutions and have global approximation guarantees. The project investigates
generalizations of the framework to solve online and batch binary quadratic
programming problems, yielding approximation algorithms for a variety of
combinatorial problems, including NP-complete problems, and MAP inference in
directed and undirected graphical models. The project considers three important
real life applications: portfolio selection for effectively investing in the
stock market, automating surgical pathology by expediting disease detection in
tissue images, and climate change detection for discovering abrupt climate
changes from spatiotemporal climate data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
expected to be transformative, especially in the context of surgical pathology
and climate change detection, yielding significant long term societal benefits.
The research results will be disseminated to the community through research
papers, tutorials, open source software, and outreach activities using games
based on mock stock markets.