* 0953323
* CAREER: Library Based Design of Linked Equilibria to Control Protein Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* James Horn, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/29/2016
* USD 631,282.00

Intellectual Merit: Antibodies play an important role in the immune response by
recognizing foreign molecules with high affinity and specificity. It is these
same properties that make them excellent affinity reagents in fields ranging
from basic research to diagnostics and nanotechnology. While efforts to obtain
high affinity antibodies against almost any molecule of interest are now
relatively straight-forward, methods to control and regulate antibody binding
have not been well explored. Regulation of protein interactions is quite common
in biology and frequently involves additional equilibria that are linked to
protein binding. The research objective of this CAREER project is to study
single domain antibody fragments as a vehicle for understanding and applying
linked equilibria in biomolecular systems. By combining recent advances in
protein engineering techniques with biophysical and structural analysis, this
research will explore several methods to engineer reversible control of antibody
interactions through the introduction of linked equilibria. Several approaches
will be explored to either reduce or enhance antibody binding under defined
conditions. The resulting knowledge, methods, and reagents will help stimulate
new directions in research and biotechnology by providing unique routes to
control protein interactions. These results will also be of fundamental interest
to researchers interested in protein design, structure/function relationships,
and computational chemistry. Furthermore, these results will help improve the
general understanding and teaching of molecular regulation in biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The educational component complements the
research aims and serves to enhance training at Northern Illinois University
(NIU) and the regional community. To enhance the undergraduate curriculum at
NIU, an upper-level undergraduate biochemistry lab will be re-designed to
incorporate inquiry-based learning approaches. These training tools will be
further developed through the initiation of a web-based wiki project to serve as
a training resource for the larger community of biochemical instructors and
students. To help attract and retain student interest in the sciences at NIU, a
new course will be developed that is aimed at exposing undergraduate students to
cutting edge research at the interface of biology and chemistry. In
collaboration with NIU STEM Outreach, this course will also be adapted to summer
workshops for pre-college students and secondary school instructors to help
increase scientific literacy. This CAREER project also includes partnerships
with NIU's STEM Outreach and Latino Resource Center to provide opportunities for
high school students and underrepresented undergraduate students, respectively,
to perform research in the PI's laboratory.