* 0953716
* CAREER:  A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF EXTRINSIC AND INTRINSIC ISOLATION IN KILLIFISH - USING STUDIES OF SPECIATION TO DEVELOP RESOURCES FOR TEACHING SPECIATION
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2010,09/30/2017
* Rebecca Fuller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2017
* USD 880,288.00

Because closely related species often differ in habitat, ecological differences
could be important in speciation. The two possible mechanisms of ecological
speciation are called extrinsic and intrinsic isolation. Extrinsic isolation
occurs when hybrids that are intermediate in form cannot find appropriate
habitat. Intrinsic isolation occurs when hybrids have reduced fitness regardless
of habitat, that is, the problem has to do with internal factors such as hybrid
physiology. The challenge is to determine which kind of isolation arose first
and their relative contributions to allowing populations to continue towards
being distinct species. For most animals, speciation takes too long to observe
directly, but some can be caught in the process of speciation. Such species are
ideal for making inferences about the order and magnitude of extrinsic and
intrinsic isolation because populations can be studied at various stages of
divergence, from recently diverged to completely unable to hybridize. This
project focuses on ecological speciation among populations of killifish, which
are ideal for studying ecological speciation because populations have diverged
across a gradient from freshwater to saltwater multiple times. The PI will
measure extrinsic and intrinsic isolation between freshwater and saltwater
populations and compare the results with those from populations that are found
in similar salinities.

Teachers and biology education majors are incorporated into nearly all the
proposed activities; they will conduct research and develop curriculum
materials. The goal of the PI is to provide a thorough understanding of
speciation through participation in research. A yearly seminar event will be
held on teaching evolution to create an ongoing discussion between educators and
scientists. Finally, a summer workshop will be held to educate local teachers
about evolution and disseminate the curriculum materials developed through this
project.