* 0953756
* CAREER:  New Directions in Computing Game-Theoretic Solutions:  Commitment and Related Topics
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Vincent Conitzer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 02/28/2015
* USD 500,002.00

Game Theory occupies an important place in the foundations of multi-agent
systems in artificial intelligence. Research under this award focuses on
settings where one agent can commit to her (possibly randomized) strategy before
the other agent moves. We consider how to compute optimal strategies to commit
to in games with a combinatorial structure, extensive-form games, and
repeated/stochastic games. Among other topics are connections to learning in
games and mechanism/environment design, and the implications of commitment for
the efficiency of computing game-theoretic solutions more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the research is to make
scientific contributions to artificial intelligence, multi-agent systems, and
computational game theory, but to also advance real-world applications. For
example, other researchers have expanded on the PI's prior theoretical research
(with his PhD advisor) to apply the commitment framework to security
applications, such as the placement of checkpoints and canine units at Los
Angeles International Airport and the scheduling of Federal Air Marshals. The
research performed under this award aims to provide a solid scientific
foundation for improving and expanding this and related applications. The award
also helps to build connections between computer science and economics, the
traditional home of Game Theory. This interdisciplinary link can help diversify
the computer science community, intellectually and demographically. Research is
tightly integrated with the PI's educational efforts, which include the
development of courses in Computational Microeconomics and Game Theory and an
approved Computational Economics minor.