* 0953184
* CAREER:   Computational modeling and analysis of gene expression patterns from microscopy image data
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Uwe Ohler, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2015
* USD 647,869.00

Duke University is awarded a grant from the Faculty Early Career Development
program (CAREER) to develop an integrated framework for the analysis and
interpretation of biological image data. Images have been long used in molecular
and developmental biology as a means to document the outcome of experiments, but
are increasingly seen as quantitative data and not just qualitative
descriptions. With recent advances in microscopy technology, as well as means to
visualize biological molecules, the growing amount of available data has turned
images into a new data type for computational biology with new and exciting
challenges and possibilities. In particular, microscopy allows for measuring
gene expression patterns at high resolution and in living organisms. Algorithms
to extract, represent, and compare spatial and temporal expression patterns from
images are still in early stages, and are often tailored to a particular
scenario. The key contribution of this project lies in a principled
probabilistic framework which utilizes top-down generative strategies to extract
samples from images, model gene expression patterns from microscopy data, and
integrate image expression data with other genomic data to understand gene
regulation. Close collaborations with biologists working on animal and plant
model systems will ensure that the developed methods are widely applicable, and
will allow for the targeted validation of specific model predictions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdiscplinary nature of this proposal reaches
across both research and education. In concert with the research program, a
graduate course in computational biology will be expanded to include case study
modules combining methodological background with hands-on examples to analyze
primary research data. Topics will include genome annotation, gene regulation,
and image analysis. To increase the impact of this effort, the PI will closely
collaborate with the ongoing NSF iPlant initiative and teach at workshops for
educators at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate level. The PI will
also continue to participate in development and teaching of systems biology
curricula for undergraduates and graduates spearheaded by the Duke Center for
Systems Biology. Ongoing international efforts by the Center include the
development of a platform to allow for an open sharing of teaching resources.