* 0953267
* CAREER: The molecular mechanisms governing fate decisions of human embryonic stem cells
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Fei Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2015
* USD 550,000.00

This CAREER proposal aims to integrate the PI's research in human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) with the creation a new undergraduate course, training of next
generation of scientists, community outreach and sharing knowledge and current
information of hESCs with the research community and the general public.
Intellectual Merit: hESCs have been well recognized as a source for derivation
of differentiated human cells for therapeutic purposes, but their enormous
potential for understanding human development and many fundamental biological
questions have been severely under-appreciated and under-explored. The goal of
the proposed research is to explore the potential of hESCs as a developmental
system and define the molecular programs that govern fate decisions in hESCs.
Based on the findings from genomic and chemical screens, the PI proposes to
apply a combined multidisciplinary approach including cell biology, genomics,
proteomics and chemical genetics to decipher the signaling networks underlying
the control of pluripotency and differentiation. The proposed research, if
successful, will significantly improve our knowledge of the molecular basis of
early human development. In addition, the results from this proposed research
will contribute to the overall knowledge of cell growth, differentiation and
plasticity. Broader Impacts: Research on hESCs has generated much interest and
public debate. As science and technology continue to advance, so do ethical
viewpoints surrounding these developments. The lack of overall and technological
understanding of hESCs has severely hindered hESC studies. The PI plans to play
an active role in advocating, educating and exploring the issues, both
scientifically and ethically. The investment of some time in educational and
outreach efforts will help to transform people's understanding of hESCs,
alleviate their concerns, and stimulate their interest. This in turn will impact
very positively on the advancement of this nascent and promising research field.