* 0953635
* CAREER:  Wireless Optical Sensors for High Resolution Imaging of Biological Structures
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2010,09/30/2017
* Valencia Koomson, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2017
* USD 563,450.00

Near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy is emerging as a promising non-invasive imaging
tool for fundamental studies of biological processes and structures, offering
greater biochemical specificity, high temporal resolution, potential for
concurrent intracellular and intravascular event measurement, and portability.
Time-resolved NIR techniques allow explicit separation of optical absorption and
scattering parameters related to biological structures, such as tissue, and (in
theory) provide functional and metabolic information based on spectral and
spatial imaging information. However, the visibility of superficial and deep
structures remains fairly poor due to the lack of imaging sensor technology
combining high-resolution spatial mapping, fast pixel response time, and broad
spectral response. The goal of this CAREER program is to develop a new class of
highly integrated wireless imaging sensors, combining photonic devices,
broadband analog/RF circuits, and free-space optical communication to improve
the spatial resolution of time-resolved NIR images; and establish an
interdisciplinary educational environment for engineers. The long-term goal is
to further expand the field of biological imaging by developing true mixed-mode
integrated systems combining microwave, acoustic, photonic, and nanoscale
electronic circuits for concurrent measurement of multiple imaging modalities to
increase the visibility of sub-millimeter structures.&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
program reaches beyond current state-of-the-art to develop imaging sensors
incorporating arrayed pixels for phase-sensitive optical detection at high
frequencies. Motivated by the need to detect low level optical signals at high-
speed, dielectrically-isolated avalanche photodiode structures implemented in
digital CMOS technology and integrated at pixel-level with RF analog signal
processing circuits will be explored. New approaches to low-noise front-end
amplifier design will be explored to enable detection of RF-modulated optical
signals at incident power levels below 1nW using chopper stabilization
techniques and resonant circuit topologies. Process-variant tolerant (PVT)
circuit topologies will be employed to ensure amplitude and phase accuracy
within 0.1%. A two-dimensional sensor readout architecture incorporating
pixel/column-level data converters and high-speed serial data readout will be
developed. As a result of detailed environmental noise (substrate, power/ground
supply) modeling and test structure measurement, a design methodology for
arrayed high-frequency imaging sensors will be provided to design engineers.
Pixel-level/column-level ADC architectures will be explored for optimal
performance in terms of pixel form factor, power, and resolution. For the first
time, wireless access based on optical transmission will be explored to enable
remote data transfer from a wearable NIR imaging device.&lt;br/&gt;This
synergistic research and education program will have significant broader impacts
on in vivo characterization of macroscopic optical properties of multiply
scattering tissues and enable development of new theories relating to
biophysical mechanisms and correlations between signals generated by
complementary imaging modalities (e.g. MRI). The portability of NIR imaging
instrumentation is a key merit of the technology, and therefore, this research
develops a wearable imaging system with integrated wireless capabilities
enabling signal acquisition during movement. Interactive workshops with
scientists and students will be organized to guide sensor development. The
education program is tightly coupled to the research activities, including new
undergraduate and graduate courses that vertically integrate topics from
optical/electronic devices to circuits/systems and applications. A cross-campus
undergraduate course on technical writing and communication will be developed in
collaboration with Howard University to teach strategies in formulating and
communicating technical ideas and engage students from under-represented groups
in the CAREER program. The PI is committed to broadening opportunities to all
engineers, including under-represented students. Workshops on graduate school
admission, funding, and academic career opportunities will be organized during
visits to minority serving institutions across the country. A complete wireless
sensor module will be made available to researchers for experimental testing.
Project outcomes and results, including educational materials, will be available
to the public through a website (www.ece.tufts.edu/~vjoyner).