* 0953413
* CAREER: Coping with the Data Deluge - Algorithms, Human Aspects and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Andreas Krause, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 04/30/2013
* USD 331,511.00

Massive volumes of data are now generated in social, scientific, business and
military applications. However, access to the data is limited, due to
computational, bandwidth, power limitations, as well as human constraints such
as attention and privacy. A fundamental problem is thus to obtain most useful
information at minimum cost. Most existing techniques are heuristics without
guarantees, do not scale or cannot cope with dynamic, distributed phenomena that
change over time. In addition, existing algorithms typically disregard human
aspects of the information gathering task. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
(1) develops principled algorithms for optimized information gathering in
distributed, uncertain, dynamic domains, (2) studies human aspects of optimized
information gathering, considering attention, perception and privacy as
fundamental constraints and (3) pursues novel, real-world applications.
&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these goals, fundamentally new techniques in
combinatorial optimization, probabilistic reasoning and decision theory are
developed. The approaches are unified in the mathematical framework of
submodular function optimization. In addition to developing theoretically well-
founded, rigorous approaches, an important part of the research is evaluation on
interdisciplinary, real world applications in social computing, scientific data
analysis and stochastic optimization in sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;These applications of optimized information gathering have the
potential to enable new classes of systems and services for science and society.
Impact is achieved through collaboration with partners from industry (Microsoft
Corporation) and governmental facilities (USGS and JPL), as well as by broad
dissemination of the results through an integrated education plan, tutorials,
shared data and open-source software, and interdisciplinary collaborations.