* 0953102
* CAREER: Understanding the Role of Nickel-Sulfur Complexes in Catalytic ROS Detoxification: Insight From Ni-SOD Synthetic Analogues
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Todd Harrop, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2015
* USD 626,775.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports Professor Todd C. Harrop at the
University of Georgia for a research project that will advance our understanding
of the chemistry of biologically relevant metal-sulfur coordination units in
their catalytic role as scavengers of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in
metalloenzymes. Current knowledge in this area stipulates that such coordination
units should be prone to ligand-based oxidation instead of primarily metal-
centered redox. Thus, to understand the fundamental chemical properties of these
systems, Professor Harrop will initiate a synthetic bioinorganic-modeling
approach towards the newest and most unusual superoxide-detoxifying enzyme
namely, nickel superoxide dismutase (Ni-SOD). To address the role of biological
coordination, the PI will synthesize and characterize a range of Ni-N/S
complexes that are direct electronic and structural mimics of Ni-SOD. The
fundamental reaction chemistry of Ni with ROS, in particular Ni-S and Ni(III)
complexes, is poorly defined and relatively unexplored. Thus, the reactions of
these complexes with ROS like superoxide, H2O2, and NO will be performed. These
reactivity studies will be monitored by a variety of spectroscopic and
computational methods that will define discreetly for the first time these
biologically important interactions. Collectively, the contribution of these
studies will allow the understanding of new concepts in the unique coordination
and reaction chemistry of Ni-SOD and result in the intelligent design of
molecules with SOD activity for use in catalysis and pharmaceuticals, thus
contributing to a significant stream of research.

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation, Dr. Harrop will provide biochemists and
theoreticians with spectroscopic, structural, and reactive benchmarks of
potential species that are important to understanding the Ni-SOD catalytic
pathway. This work will also have a broader impact on science education through
a variety of synergistic activities. The principal goal of these integrated
educational activities is to increase awareness, participation, and retention of
underrepresented minority groups in the STEM disciplines, specifically African-
Americans in chemistry. These efforts involve a new research-partnership
initiative that the PI will establish with Fort Valley State University (FVSU),
a public HBCU in the state of Georgia. A summer research internship will be
awarded annually throughout the grant period to an undergraduate chemistry major
from FVSU to be conducted in the PI's lab on Ni-SOD analogues. The award will
establish a new link with an HBCU in the state and will lead to a strong and
continual pipeline of FVSU students pursuing advance degrees in chemistry and
hopefully at UGA. This award will support salary for the undergraduate summer
researcher and for their travel to conferences, better preparing these young
scientists for careers in chemical research.