* 0953219
* CAREER: Using Machine Learning to Understand and Enhance Human Learning Capacity
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2017
* Xiaojin Zhu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 05/31/2017
* USD 465,586.00

Understanding and enhancing human learning are important challenges in the 21st
century. Existing human category learning models cannot quantify important
capacities such as people's (in)ability to generalize from training to test, to
learn from imperfect data, or to learn by actively asking questions.

This research project studies human learning using machine learning. It first
develops machine learning theory and algorithms to quantify these human learning
capacities: It establishes learning-theoretic error bounds on human
generalization performance; It models human learning from an imperfect teacher
with non-parametric Bayesian methods; It models human's ability to ask
informative questions with active learning theory. The project then studies
computational approaches to enhance human learning: It develops "machine
teaching" algorithms when the computer knows the target concept, and selects the
optimal training examples to teach a human learner; It develops "human machine
co-learning" algorithms when the computer does not know the target concept, but
instead learns alongside the human and suggests better learning strategies to
her. Each topic is verified by human experiments.

The project advances machine learning with new learning theory and algorithms on
tasks where humans excel. It advances cognitive psychology with new models of
human learning. It has broader impacts in understanding human intelligence, and
in benefiting students with new educational tools. This research project is
integrated with an educational plan that incorporates undergraduate and graduate
teaching and mentoring, developing a new course and a book on machine and human
learning, organizing seminars, tutorials and workshops, and sharing all results
on a website.