* 0953832
* CAREER: Social and Economic Consequences of Information Diffusion in Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Sinan Aral, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 06/30/2014
* USD 475,566.00

This project is a three-pronged program of research and education focused on
information in networks - its distribution, diffusion, value, and consequences
for social and economic outcomes. First, this project will map the flow of
information in real organizations over time and will combine economic theories
of production with social network theory to estimate the effects of information
diffusion on the productivity of individuals and teams. This work will advance
economic theory concerning information worker production and productivity;
sociological theory concerning the movement of information in social networks;
technical methods for analyzing information content in digital networks while
preserving privacy; and statistical methods to identify causal relationships
between network structure and productivity. Second, the research will utilize
data on online social networks to identify estimates of peer influence in
product adoption and demand, and it will develop and apply new statistical
techniques to separate influence from selection, homophily and confounding
factors to optimize targeted peer-to-peer information diffusion. Third, the
research will develop a general class of network-based models of the diffusion
of behavior change in social networks, and parameterize and validate these
models using empirical data on social relationships and health related behaviors
from five massive networked datasets.

The central goals of the project are: 1) to estimate and enhance the
productivity of information workers, 2) to model, measure and improve peer-to-
peer viral marketing and demand estimation, and 3) to improve health-related
prevention and intervention strategies. The proposed activities are designed to
have broader impact for science, education and society. Our understanding of
information worker productivity is a cornerstone of our future economic growth
and thus our prosperity and welfare. The project also aims to improve
intervention and prevention strategies for behaviors and outcomes such as
disease prevention, obesity, and drug use. Developing reliable, scalable
statistical methods for establishing causality in the diffusion of disease,
obesity, smoking and delinquency can change social policy to ensure health
interventions are appropriately targeted. Development of technical
infrastructures to deal with large dynamic networked datasets, privacy
preserving text analysis, and statistical methods for estimating the impacts of
information diffusion in networks have implications for telecommunications,
epidemiology, medicine, social policy and any industry or social sphere
characterized by network externalities and local network effects. Educationally,
the project will utilize the research program in classes to highlight the
importance of networks and information for business strategy, society and
health. Workshops will develop a new collaborative research community across
academia and industry around topics related to information diffusion in
networks.