* 0953694
* CAREER:   Advancing Macroecology Using Informatics and Entropy Maximization
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Ethan White, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/29/2016
* USD 657,499.00

Climate change, invasive species and other important factors impacting
ecological systems operate at continental to global scales. At these scales,
conducting experiments can be difficult, if not impossible. Therefore,
ecologists increasingly rely on analyses of large scale observational data to
predict how these systems will respond to increasing changes in climate and
habitat. Progress in this area of research has been slowed by the large number
of patterns used to characterize ecological structure, and by the fact that most
research focuses on a single group of species thus limiting the generality of
the results. This project will increase the speed at which knowledge of
ecological systems is acquired by characterizing the relationships among
ecological patterns and focusing research on the small number of key patterns
that need to be studied to understand the behavior of ecological systems. This
will be accomplished using advanced methods from physics that characterize the
most likely form of an ecological pattern given a small number of constraints on
the system. This research will test the performance of this approach using data
on wide variety of species. This method will then be combined with established
ecological models to predict a suite of major ecological patterns using only a
small number of environmental variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
improve how ecologists test and establish the generality of theories by
educating ecologists in advanced computational methods through online and
university courses, by providing web-based resources on the collections of data
that are available and how to utilize them, and by automating complicated
database tasks using computer programs that download, configure, and install
optimized versions of ecological databases, thus allowing the rapid
incorporation of available data into research projects. This combined research
and education program has the potential to substantially improve the rate at
which the field of ecology advances by focusing the research effort on a smaller
number of patterns and processes, and by allowing ecologists to rapidly
determine if a given pattern or hypothesis is general and if not how it varies
among ecological systems.