* 0953121
* CAREER: Frequency Domain Plasmon Fluctuation Spectroscopy For Single Biopolymer Mechanical Sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Bjoern Reinhard, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

0953121&lt;br/&gt;Reinhard&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal describes a
research plan for the development of a novel plasmon fluctuation spectroscopy
and for the application of this sensor to characterize the mechanical properties
of individual biopolymers without limitation in observation time. Plasmon
coupling spectroscopy utilizes the distance-dependent near-field coupling
between individual noble metal nanoparticles to quantify structural fluctuations
in individual biopolymers in the frequency domain. The proposal also contains a
strong educational component describing plans for training graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as attracting high-school students to the
natural sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. To date, plasmon
coupling between individual pairs of noble metal nanoparticles, so called
plasmon rulers, has been exclusively used for distance measurements in the time
domain. In this application the method is further enhanced to exploit the
distance dependence near-field interactions between individual noble metal
nanoparticles to characterize structural fluctuations in the biopolymer tether
in the frequency domain. To achieve the transition from a time to a frequency
domain analysis, the proposed project will develop a new generation of plasmon
rulers, detection approaches, and analysis schemes. The distance dependent
plasmon coupling in this new generation of plasmon rulers will be systematically
mapped, providing new insights into the underlying electromagnetic interactions
between noble metal nanoparticles on length scales between 0.5 - 30 nm. The
resulting technology will be able to analyze structural fluctuations in short
(0.5 nm - 30 nm) DNAs and RNAs without the need to apply an external force. The
targeted dynamic distance range is difficult to address with other sensors but
is biologically highly relevant. Plasmon fluctuation spectroscopy's ability to
monitor structural fluctuations in this range with high temporal resolution
without limitation in total observation time will enable improved insights into
the mechanical properties of DNAs and RNAs on the single molecule level and how
these properties change as consequence of nucleoprotein complex
formation.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Plasmon fluctuation spectroscopy enables
the analysis of structural dynamics in individual biopolymers with higher
temporal resolution and longer observation time than with fluorescence-based
approaches. The technique will be applied to probe the mechanical properties of
the nucleoprotein complex of the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) to reveal the
virus' fundamental regulation transcription and replication principles. RSV is
the most common cause of bronchiolitis among infants and molecular understanding
of its transcription and translation can pave the way to improved therapeutics
and diagnostics. In addition to scientific impact, this CAREER plan will also
have clear educational and outreach benefits. The project will offer high-
school, undergraduate and graduate students the opportunity to participate in a
collaborative research and education program. The interdisciplinary subject area
of the proposed effort is of great interest to the general public.
Synergistically with the laboratory research, the plan will enable a substantial
outreach through the Principal Investigator's annual "NanoCamp" for students
from local inner city high schools (whose students come primarily from
underrepresented groups). The aim of the hands-on, week-long "camp" is to enable
students to experience the excitement of nanotechnology in particular and of
science in general. The Principal Investigator will sponsor undergraduate
students and interested high school students who have completed NanoCamp to
obtain hands-on research experience in the proposed interdisciplinary research
effort.