* 0953521
* CAREER: Early Number-Concept Development in Low-Income English-Language Learners: Observation and Intervention
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Barbara Sarnecka, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,207,516.00

The project, conducted by investigators from the University of California at
Irvine, is an observation and intervention study of number-concept development
in 3- to 4-year-old children, controlling for income and language status.
Several lines of research have shown that children's number estimation acuity at
the age of 3 years and their understanding of cardinal numbers when they enter
kindergarten both predict performance on standardized mathematics tests many
years thereafter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observation component will assess 260
children at ages 3 and 4 years and will be the first comprehensive, baseline
description of the number knowledge of low-income English Language Learner (ELL)
preschoolers. By assessing children in both Spanish and English, this study will
separately describe (a) the children's knowledge of number concepts, and (b) the
degree to which this knowledge can be expressed in English. Three comparison
groups will also be tested: low-income English monolinguals, middle-income
English monolinguals, and middle income Spanish/English simultaneous bilinguals.
The children will be tested in 2 sessions, 6 months apart, on 10 measures that
include such variables as receptive vocabulary in English and the home language,
approximate number system (ANS) acuity, knowledge of the linguistic number
systems of English and the home language, family demographic information, and
attentional control. The intervention component will focus on 160 children from
low-income households where Spanish is spoken. Three-year-olds will be randomly
assigned to either a treatment or control group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intervention has previously been shown to improve English monolingual children's
knowledge of the linguistic number system and may also help children map
preverbal approximate number representations to number words. It is hoped that
the observation and intervention studies can lead to similar gains in this
vulnerable and understudied ELL population.