* 0953399
* CAREER:  Understanding Mechanisms that Generate Defects in the Fabrication of Functional Materials for Energy Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Tequila Harris, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2016
* USD 416,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding to develop
a relationship between the fabrication of functional materials and their
performance/durability in an operational system. Using a comprehensive approach
(i.e., theory through realization), processing conditions will be correlated to
defects generated in polymer electrolyte membranes (PEMs), which will lead to a
direct correlation of fabrication to system performance (e.g., a PEM fuel cell).
Theoretical and numerical modeling will be conducted to predict the behavior of
the material as it exits the fabrication tool and to study the interfacial
phenomena between the material and the substrate. Using a custom designed and
built Roll-Feed Imaging System, defects will be analyzed and qualified based on
the processing conditions. The effects of mechanical properties, such as stress,
shrinkage, relaxation, on the durability of the membranes will be studied using
numerical and experimental methods. Finally, the resulting film (with and
without) defects will be tested in a PEM fuel cell to obtain comparative overall
life expectancy data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, advancements in
research to understand mechanical failure of polymer electrolyte membranes used
in energy systems will be made. the proposed framework will enable analysis for
correlating defects from the fluid and solid phases to system failure; this work
will lead for the first time to a detailed correlation between the manufacturing
issues of complex materials and their performance. Furthermore, the proposed
investigation will make it possible to correlate materials processing to system
life cycle, which has not yet been realized in the field. To integrate the
research and education plans and to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups, the PI will further develop a program focused on energy
technology, coined ELECTRoDE: Educators Leading Energy Conservation and Training
Researchers of Diverse Ethnicities, which integrates students and faculty at
underrepresented institutions into year round research.