* 0953091
* CAREER: The Role of RNAi in the Nematode and Mammalian Antiviral Response
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Christopher Sullivan, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 01/31/2016
* USD 905,950.00

This project focuses on understanding the natural role of RNA interference
(RNAi) in divergent organisms. RNAi has generated much excitement as a mechanism
of gene regulation and as a laboratory tool for experimental gene silencing.
This project will develop an integrated program of research and teaching to
understand the natural functions of RNAi during viral infection. In plants and
insects, RNAi is a primary antiviral defense response, recognizing and
preventing gene expression from harmful nucleic acids. It is likely that RNAi
also plays an antiviral role in nematodes. However, because no viruses that are
fully infectious in the nematode have been isolated, this speculation has yet to
be fully verified. In mammals, there are conflicting views as to whether RNAi
functions as an antiviral defense, and this remains a hotly debated topic.
Unpublished data from the Sullivan lab shows that viral infection of mammalian
cells triggers an innate immune response that inhibits RNAi activity. These data
suggest that in contrast to insects and plants, RNAi in mammalian cells is not
playing an antiviral role during the early times post-infection. This project
will test the model that viral infection of mammalian cells triggers some
component of the innate immune response that modifies the RNAi effector
machinery (Aim 1); thus, repressing RNAi activity to allow for more robust
expression of the protein-based immune response that is unique to higher order
vertebrates (Aim 2). In addition, members of the lab will isolate wild nematodes
in an effort to identify natural viruses that are fully infectious in the
powerful laboratory model nematode C. elegans. These viruses will then be used
to fully test the notion that RNAi is an antiviral defense in nematodes (Aim 3).
This research will significantly contribute to our understanding of the
regulation of the RNAi and cellular host antiviral responses across multiple
phyla. The insights gained from this project will be of value to both the basic
virology and RNAi fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The apparently
opposite roles RNAi plays in mammalian cells compared to other organisms such as
insects (and likely nematodes) represents a marvelous teaching tool for better
understanding broad biological concepts such as evolution. The CAREER research
activities are integrated within a wider plan for education activities that
incorporate cutting edge research opportunities for students in the laboratory,
classroom and field: (1) In the laboratory, these goals will be achieved through
mentoring graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in hypothesis-driven
research projects that span the disciplines of molecular biology,
bioinformatics, virology, and RNAi. (2) In the classroom, education and research
will be integrated through two very different classes. A completely re-vamped
advanced virology undergraduate class has been developed at UT. It focuses on
active learning and incorporates the latest molecular techniques and issues of
importance to the student demographic (including evolution as a driving force in
the "cat and mouse" game of viral interactions with the host). The second course
is a component of a 4-week outreach program for 9th graders that participate in
the UT Austin University Jumpstart program, and is unique in that these young
students participate in a real world science project, with the goal being to
isolate the first nematode virus. Studies of wild and laboratory nematodes allow
for a cost-effective way to introduce numerous science neophytes to field work,
laboratory work, and hypothesis-driven experimentation. The ultimate goal of
this course is to discover, culture, and sequence numerous nematode viruses (AKA
the "worm virome"), while in the process exposing high school students from
underprivileged backgrounds to state-of-the-art laboratory techniques and
providing the opportunity to tackle a real world problem in science. It is
anticipated that exposing these young students to personal interactions with a
university professor will provide inspiration and resources to help foster a
future involving college studies in the natural sciences.