* 0953021
* CAREER:  Trend-Mining Design - Foundations for Modeling the Mutual Influence between Pre-Life Design and End-of-Life Recovery of a Sustainable Product Portfolio
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Harrison Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2016
* USD 412,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to provide foundations for modeling the mutual influence between pre-life
design and end-of-life recovery of complex, sustainable product portfolios. This
objective will be achieved by: 1) establishing the mutual link between pre-life
design and end-of-life recovery for a portfolio of products; 2) characterizing
the evolving, massive-scale preference/usage/recovery data that can capture
dynamic trend in the design and recovery process; and 3) optimal platforming
(i.e., component sharing decision making) for pre-life portfolio design and end-
of-life recovery in a simultaneous manner.

If successful, the results will ensure that sustainable product portfolio design
will be realized at a much faster pace with economic justification, as well as
environmental stewardship with regulatory compliance. The outcome will also
provide a new business model (green and sustainable) whereby a company is
compelled to close the loop of product design and recovery. This will be
achieved by making recovery a part of the business model, due to its potential
profitability, rather than outsourcing or ignoring it. Industrial impact will be
realized with partners in product design/manufacturing, systems modeling and
applications, and software and computing. Educational impact will be realized in
problem-based learning of engineering design, educating graduate students, and
mentoring minority students. Outreach effort will be realized at the local and
national levels via a new, Cool Design after school program, in partnership with
a local elementary school.