* 0953590
* Career: Multiscale Stochastic Simulation for Complex Biochemical Systems with Visualization Tools
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Yang Cao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2016
* USD 585,290.00

Career: Multiscale Stochastic Simulation for Complex Biochemical Systems with
Visualization Tools&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop efficient
simulation techniques for stochastic biochemical models, particularly the cell
cycle model. Cell cycle is the sequence of events whereby a living cell
replicates its components and divides them between two daughter cells, so that
each daughter has the information and machinery necessary to repeat the process.
Cell cycle is related to many diseases such as cardiovascular diseases and
cancer. Understanding the molecular mechanisms regulating cell cycle is a major
challenge of contemporary cell biology. Biologists have developed complex
mathematical models of cell-cycle control in budding yeast, fission yeast, and
mammalian cells. These systems are so complex that its simulation and analysis
present great challenges to computational science. The career goal of the PI is
to address these challenges by developing innovative computational methods and
rigorous mathematical theories to integrate the full gamut of continuous,
discrete, deterministic, and stochastic models, and support dynamic, seamless
and automatic switching between different models and algorithms as dictated by
the scales of underlying problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
three specific aims in this project. The primary aim is to develop innovative
computational algorithms and mathematical theories about a critical multiscale
challenge: stiffness. This project will develop the theory of the stiffness in
discrete stochastic simulation of chemically reacting systems and an automatic
stiffness detection algorithm through a running-time profile analysis. The
second aim is to develop hybrid algorithms to simulate biological systems with
multistate species, a special challenge in biological systems with multiple
binding sites. This project will develop hybrid methods to combine particle-
based methods, designed for multistate species, and population-based methods,
designed for general chemical reactions. The third aim of this project is to
develop algorithm and model visualization tools to introduce the algorithms and
model development in computational biology to graduate and undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms developed in this project will
enable biologists to efficiently model and simulate multiscale systems and will
directly benefit the whole research discipline of systems biology. Moreover, the
techniques about the stiffness are also applicable to multiscale simulation of
complex systems in other areas. This research project also provides learning
opportunities and training for students across the disciplines of computer
science, mathematics, and biology. The biological models and simulation methods
will be introduced in graduate courses on computational cell biology. The
algorithm visualization tool will help students understand the important
computational concept of stiffness. The model visualization tool and results
related to the cell cycle model will be used in undergraduate research and
education in Virginia Tech and Radford University, through collaboration with a
professor in the Mathematics department at Radford University. This
collaboration will help to attract more women and minority students into
computational science areas.