* 0953259
* CAREER:  New Catalytic Reactions for Organic Synthesis:  Novel Strategies for Cyclopropane Synthesis and Oxidative Carbonylation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Tristan Lambert, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2015
* USD 550,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis program is supporting the
research of Professor Tristan Lambert of the Department of Chemistry at Columbia
University. Professor Lambert will be developing several new catalytic methods
for cyclopropanation and for achieving novel oxidative carbonylations. The first
cyclopropanation strategy concerns Lewis acid catalyzed methylene transfer from
epoxides or related functionality, and the second concerns direct oxidative
cyclopropanation of 1,3-dienes with activated methylene compounds. For
carbonylations, novel oxidative carbonylation methods will be developed which
provide access to reactive carbonyl functionalities, including acid chlorides
and aldehydes. Professor Lambert's research could lead to efficient methods for
the preparation of complex organic molecules. These molecules are highly sought
after in the development of new pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals. In addition,
these compounds are important in any area of activities in which organic
chemicals are involved, such as the study of molecular biology.

Professor Lambert will also be developing new laboratory experiments aimed at
the high school level and designed to increase exposure to and excitement for
organic chemistry. These simple yet visually dramatic laboratory experiments
will be focused generally on the accessible and fascinating phenomenon of
aromaticity and will be accompanied by explanatory literature prepared by
Professor Lambert.