* 0953786
* CAREER:   Molecular Mechanisms of Virus-vector Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2017
* Anna Whitfield, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2017
* USD 1,006,490.00

Many of the viruses that infect humans, animals, and plants are transmitted from
one host to another by insects and other arthropods. Arthropods can serve as
vectors and hosts for the viruses that they transmit, and in some cases, viruses
induce behavioral and physiological changes in hosts that facilitate
transmission. The central aim of the project is to identify vector molecules
that recognize and respond to virus infection and characterize the direct effect
of virus infection on arthropod vectors. The central hypothesis is that the
insect immune system is activated by viruses resulting in successful
transmission to animal and plant hosts with little to no virulence to the
vector. The project will address this hypothesis by developing a fundamental
understanding of the vector response to virus infection, identifying vector
proteins that interact directly with the virus during the infection cycle, and
exploring the possible links between vector physiology and behaviors to virus
infection status. The project results are expected to contribute to our
understanding of how some organisms can tolerate or fight off viral pathogens.
These findings may lead to the development of novel strategies to prevent
transmission of viruses and/or the identification of unique molecules to combat
virus diseases.

The broader impacts of the proposal are the contribution to education of the
general public on basic scientific principals which will enable them to make
informed decisions regarding scientific technologies that directly impact them.
The investigator will develop an interactive exhibit entitled "Arthropods as
Vectors" for the Kansas State University Insect Zoo that will be displayed for
the duration of the CAREER award. New teaching tools incorporating virology and
virus-vector interactions in middle school science curricula will be prepared
and made publicly available on the World Wide Web. The award will enable the
training of the next generation of scientists and enhance diversity by mentoring
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups as they conduct research
projects on the physiological outcomes of virus infection of arthropod vectors.
Additionally, a scientist-science fair participant "pen pal" program targeted to
students in rural locations will be developed.