* 0953960
* CAREER: Towards a Constructive Theory of Networked Interactions
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Constantinos Daskalakis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

As Computer Science struggles to understand the Internet and its capabilities,
computer scientists are incorporating concepts and methodologies from Economics
and Game Theory into their discipline. In the past decade, there has been a
tremendous growth in research, centering around the following questions: what
game-theoretic tools are applicable to computer systems? How far is the
performance of a system from optimality due to the conflict of interests of its
users and administrators? And, how can we design a system whose performance is
robust with respect to the potential conflict of interests inside the system?
The proposed research aims to tackle some of the fundamental problems at the
interface of Computer Science and Game Theory, with a focus on networked
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools that game theorists have
traditionally used to model behavior in systems of interacting individuals, such
as the Nash and the market equilibria, have been recently shown to be
computationally intractable. The intractability of these concepts limits their
applicability to policy making since their predictions, although mathematically
well-defined, are hard to compute. Moreover, this intractability result raises
suspicion as to whether these predictions arise in actuality: if the behavior
predicted by some equilibrium concept cannot be found efficiently, how is it
that rational individuals find it and adopt it?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to develop a theory of networked interactions that does not run
into the computational complexity barrier, answering such questions as: In what
settings is it possible to use existing tools, such as the Nash equilibrium, to
predict selfish behavior computationally efficiently? How does the structure of
the interaction graph affect the tractability of equilibria? When computing Nash
equilibria is intractable, is it possible to make approximate predictions
efficiently? And if this is infeasible, are there other concepts of equilibrium
that are both plausible and tractable? Also, in the context of trading: What
kind of market equilibrium comes about in a trading network? Is it always
identical to the market equilibrium assuming full information? If so, how does
it come to arise in the presence of the communication constraints imposed by the
network structure? If not, how different is it? And for what kinds of networks
is it similar to the full-information one?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development
of a successful theory of networked interactions will necessitate answering deep
questions within the theory of computation. Equilibrium concepts typically
correspond to fixed points of continuous maps, which have proven to be a
challenging computational object for present techniques. In recent years,
algorithmic progress on computing equilibria has brought new techniques to the
theoretical computer science community. Likewise, characterizing the complexity
of game-theoretic concepts has broadened the computational complexity landscape
beyond traditional complexity classes. Several questions, such as the
approximation complexity of Nash equilibria, the complexity of simple stochastic
games as well as other fixed points at the intersection of the complexity
classes known as PLS and PPAD, and the complexity of market equilibria for
constant elasticity of substitution (CES) utility functions, are evading
existing techniques. Furthering our understanding of rational behavior in large
systems will necessarily involve developing novel algorithmic and complexity-
theoretic tools to meet the challenges posed by these problems.