* 0953721
* CAREER: Mechanistic Investigations of Enzymatic Methyl Transfer in Microbial Biosynthetic Pathways
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Susan Wang, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

Enzymes isolated from microbes play significant roles in daily life, ranging
from photosynthesis and oxygen production by algae to yogurt formation by
Lactobacilli and Lactococci bacteria. The proposed research will investigate a
unique, poorly-understood mechanism for the methylation of unreactive carbon and
phosphorus atoms used by enzymes in Streptomyces, a large genus of beneficial
bacteria that naturally produce many antibiotic, anticancer, and herbicidal
chemicals used commercially. To date, all enzymatic methyl transfer reactions
have been characterized as nucleophilic substitution reactions. However, the
substrates for these Streptomyces methyltransferases are not amenable to
nucleophilic activation, suggesting the need for and use of another catalytic
mechanism. Biochemical, spectroscopic, and synthetic organic techniques will be
used to determine whether these enzymes catalyze methyl transfer using a four-
iron, four-sulfur cluster to generate organic radicals from S-adenosyl-L-
methionine (SAM) and methylcobalamin, a derivative of vitamin B12. Understanding
the mechanism of these reactions will provide a framework for engineering these
and related enzymes to produce novel carbon-carbon and/or carbon-phosphorus-
carbon bonds. The enzymes, cofactors, and microbes studied in this research will
be linked to an educational outreach program targeting K-5th grade children of
the rural, agricultural Palouse region, which is 300 miles from the nearest
metropolitan area. In partnership with the Palouse Discovery Science Center,
interactive presentations focusing on beneficial microbes and enzyme chemistry
will be presented to families and classes throughout the area. Giveaways will be
combined with assessments to improve retention and obtain feedback for
improvements. Similar presentations incorporating experimental results will also
be made available in an accessible online format to reach a larger audience. The
ultimate goals of this proposal are to improve overall understanding of
microbial enzyme chemistry and encourage children to pursue future careers in
microbiology and/or biochemistry.