* 0953513
* CAREER: Towards Rich Multimedia Experience in Emerging Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Shiwen Mao, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 07/31/2016
* USD 452,000.00

A cognitive radio (CR) is a frequency-agile wireless communication device with
intelligent control and a monitoring interface that enables dynamic spectrum
access. The CR concept represents a paradigm change in spectrum regulation and
utilization. As basic understandings gained, there is a compelling need to fully
capitalize CR's high potential for supporting new applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project investigates the problem of enabling
rich multimedia services in emerging CR networks. Although highly rewarding, the
new dimension of dynamics on channel availability, sensing, and access brings
about a whole level of technical challenges. To address these challenges, a
novel cross-layer optimization and control approach is employed, complemented
with distributed algorithm design and development of an open source CR video
testbed. The manifold design trade-offs, multifarious dynamics, scarce resources
and, on the other hand, video's tight QoS constraints make the optimization and
control approach highly suited for "squeezing" the most out of CR video
networks. The three research thrusts include: cross-layer optimization of CR
video networks, classical and modern control theory based analysis and design of
CR video networks, and experimental research with a CR video testbed and field
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will serve a critical need by
enabling video communications in emerging CR networks for commercial and
mission-critical applications. Open source software, a CR video testbed, and
experimental data will be distributed in the wireless community. The research
outcomes will be integrated with course development, textbook writing, involving
graduate and undergraduate students in cutting-edge research, promoting
diversity, and outreach to K-12 students.