* 0953384
* CAREER: Investigating the Causes and Consequences of Conceptual Change
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Andrew Shtulman, Occidental College
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2016
* USD 470,752.00

This study attempts to resolve competing ideas in the literature about whether
complex scientific phenomenon, such as evolution by natural selection, cannot be
taught until high school, while others believe these topics can be taught at
earlier grades. The PI hypothesizes that since younger children may have fewer
beliefs and experiences that might interfere with their learning, it should be
easier to bring about a change in knowledge and skills about a particular
science concept. The objectives of the research is to determine how: (1)
individual differences in prior knowledge and metaconceptual awareness affect
the trajectory of conceptual change; (2) conceptual change alters domain-
specific attitudes, intuitions, and behaviors; and (3) conceptual change shapes,
and is shaped by, different forms of interpersonal communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will include 75 seven through twelve year-
olds, 20 school teachers, 250 undergraduate students recruited from the study
pool of the university (and taking introductory biology), and 15 research
fellows. Participants will be drawn from Occidental College, local childcare
centers and elementary schools. The study will focus on geology, genetics,
mechanics, thermodynamics, and evolution. This study builds on the premise that
there are three major tensions in the literature. These tensions include: (a)
intuitive theories vs. knowledge-in-pieces; (b) knowledge replacement vs.
knowledge suppression; and (c) role of experience vs. the role of testimony.
Twelve different studies (four for each tension) will be conducted to expand the
focus of conceptual change from patterns of learning and reasoning to the
broader cognitive context. Cross-sectional, correlational, comparison, and
microgenetic analyses will be used for pre and post tests. Procedures and coding
schemes used by the PI in prior studies will be used to analyze structured
interviews, dyads, and focus groups sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sample
outcomes from the 12 studies will uncover if children will exhibit less
extensive and coherent beliefs than adults, exhibit greater pre-post gains in
conceptual understanding, and a model to test where students likely made earlier
and later changes in life. Outcomes might also include how conservational
partners establish reference in situations where they hold conceptually
incommensurate views of a particular topic and its properties.