* 0953638
* CAREER: Human-Behavior Driven Malware Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Danfeng Yao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2016
* USD 561,998.00

Millions of computers worldwide are estimated to be infected by malware
(malicious software) and have become ? unknown to their owners ? part of an army
of dangerous ?bots?, which are software applications that run automated tasks
over the Internet controlled by cyber criminals. These infected computers are
coordinated and used by attackers to launch illegal and destructive network
activities including identity theft, sending spam (estimated 100 billion spam
messages every day), launching distributed denial of service attacks, and
committing click fraud. They are also capable of launching information warfare
to destroy critical network infrastructure of a nation. Existing malware-
detection approaches are limited in their ability to identify and discern
malicious bots from legitimate and benign ones. This proliferation and
sophistication requires constant vigilance and upgrading. The proposed project
introduces a new and paradigm-shifting approach for malware detection, referred
to as human-behavior driven malware detection. With this approach, the project
will be able to accurately differentiate network behaviors of a legitimate user
and malware by identifying and enforcing unique properties of human computer
usage on a host.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus on human-user characteristics,
versus those of malware, allows computer security to be realized without the
need for continually monitoring ever-changing malware patterns. This approach
will complement conventional malware-detecting techniques based on code
analysis, data mining, or network trace filtering. The design of a unique and
tamper-resistant traffic-enforcement framework will cryptographically verify the
provenance information of both system and application-level data utilizing on-
chip cryptographic hardware support. This project will implement novel and fine-
grained input-traffic correlation analysis that has not been previously applied
across a host?s network stack, kernel modules, and input devices. The proposed
work will create new knowledge on design principles of reliable operating
systems and applications, as well as gain insights to provide seamless
integration of network-security techniques into a kernel. These studies will
significantly advance the understanding of human-behavior based security and
improve the system integrity of all networked computers. The research will build
a base of important fundamental knowledge about user-centric security and will
provide a compelling and more permanent solution to the increasing need of
malware detection. The proposed work will focus on identifying characteristic
human-user behaviors (namely application-level user inputs via keyboard and
mouse), developing protocols for fine-grained traffic-input analysis, and
preventing forgeries and attacks by malware. The PI will design and apply a
combination of cryptographic techniques, correlation analysis, and Trusted
Platform Module based integrity measures to carry out these
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an integrated component of the project, the PI
will conduct outreach and educational activities that aim to increase the
general awareness of cyber-security issues in the K-14 community and broaden the
interdisciplinary participation of undergraduate and underrepresented groups in
computer security research. In addition, the PI will develop a novel interactive
software system Sec Ed for teaching computer security and advancing efforts in
curriculum development, mentoring, diversity building, and workshop
organization.