* 0953038
* CAREER: Learning to Learn from Mathematics Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Rossella Santagata, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2016
* USD 621,685.00

The main goal of this project is to determine through a redesigned pre-service
mathematics methods course how prospective elementary teachers become serious
learners about teaching of mathematics and student learning of mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;Research Questions - Phase I (Teacher education program)&lt;br/&gt;
1) Are treatment and control interventions implemented as intended during both
years of the experiment?&lt;br/&gt; 2) Do treatment-group pre-service teachers'
beliefs about mathematics and mathematics learning change to a larger extent
than control-group pre-service teachers' beliefs?&lt;br/&gt; 3) Are treatment-
group pre-service teachers better able to analyze a lesson taught by
others?&lt;br/&gt; 4) Are treatment-group pre-service teachers better able to
plan, teach, and reflect on their mathematics teaching than pre-service teachers
in the control group?&lt;br/&gt; 5) Do treatment-group pre-service teachers feel
better prepared to teach mathematics than control group pre-service
teachers?&lt;br/&gt; 6) To what extent do various characteristics of fieldwork
and student-teaching experiences impact pre-service teachers' learning from
treatment and control instruction?&lt;br/&gt;Research Questions - Phase II
(Longitudinal study)&lt;br/&gt; 1) Is retention during the first three years of
teaching higher for treatment than for control-group teachers? If participants
decide to leave the profession, what are the reasons behind that
decision?&lt;br/&gt; 2) Do treatment-group pre-service teachers feel better
prepared to teach mathematics during their first three years of teaching than
pre-service teachers in the control group?&lt;br/&gt; 3) Do treatment-group pre-
service teachers exhibit better quality of mathematics instruction than pre-
service teachers in the control group?&lt;br/&gt; 4) Do treatment-group pre-
service teachers more frequently seek opportunities to engage in professional
practices that focus on improving mathematics teaching, compared to control-
group pre-service teachers? Do they more often assume (whether formally or
informally) leadership roles that promote practice-based approaches to
professional development?&lt;br/&gt; 5) What external factors (e.g., school
leadership, available professional development opportunities) during the first
three years of teaching support or hinder teachers' adoption of professional
practices focusing on improving instruction?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will
be done at the teacher education program at University of California-Irvine and
surrounding school districts. The participants in the study will be pre-service
teachers in the 5th year program. These teachers will be followed through their
third year of teaching. The main STEM field is mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A randomized controlled experiment with a replication
group will be conducted over four years that will compare what happens in their
first three years of teaching by teachers who have used the Learning to Learn
from Mathematics Teaching (LLMT) curriculum. Multiple measures will be used
including fidelity of implementation (observations of mathematics methods
course); beliefs survey; video-based analysis of a lesson; content and
pedagogical content knowledge survey; survey on fieldwork and student teaching
experience; retention-in-teaching rates over three years following 5th year
program, teacher sense of efficacy scale; and classroom observations (for a sub-
sample of participants). Two years of students who are in the 5th year teacher
education program will participate in the study. In the first year 90 students
will be randomly assigned to the regular methods course or the course with the
LLMT incorporated. A second group of 90 students will be included in the study
the next year. With the two cohorts of students there will be a pooled sample of
90 in the treatment group and 90 in the control group. In addition, each year,
four participants, two from the treatment and two from the control group will be
chosen to represent variation in contexts of fieldwork and student teaching
experiences. These participants will be followed through the first three years
of their teaching career. Case studies will include school and classroom
observations and semi-structured interviews. The evaluation will be done by the
advisory board. The assessment findings will provide evidence of the
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main outcomes and impacts will be the
evidence on a specific approach to have elementary teachers to become more
effective in attending to student learning when teaching mathematics. The
project has the potential to have the greatest impact on the 90 pre-service
teachers who will receive instruction using the LLMT. Their students will be the
beneficiaries. More impactful will be the dissemination of LLMT to be used in
other teacher education programs and the knowledge gained from the study that
can be used to shape other teacher education programs. Graduate students who
work on the program will also benefit from engaging in the research study
including data gathering and analysis.