* 0953738
* CAREER:   New Technologies for Genome-Scale Comparative NcRNA Identification
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Yanni Sun, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 512,476.00

CAREER: New Technologies for Genome-Scale Comparative NcRNA Identification

Michigan State University is awarded a grant from the Faculty Early Career
Development program (CAREER) to develop new technologies for genome-scale
comparative noncoding RNA (ncRNA) identification. ncRNAs, which are not
translated into protein but function directly as RNA, play diverse and important
roles in many biochemical processes. Annotating ncRNAs in different organisms is
thus highly important to modern biology. Among numerous efforts made for ncRNA
detection, a few programs can be practically applied to whole genomes or large-
scale databases. However, these genome-scale tools rely on conventional
comparative sequence analysis, which cannot not effectively account for
structural conservation in homologous ncRNAs and thus jeopardizes the
sensitivity and accuracy of structured ncRNA search. In order to address the
need of sensitive and fast large-scale ncRNA search, this project focuses on the
development of novel and improved ncRNA detection algorithms that combine the
efficiency of conventional sequence comparison tools and the structural features
of ncRNAs. The specific objectives are: (1) fast known ncRNA identification
algorithms and tools that can efficiently classify a large number of putative
ncRNAs into corresponding ncRNA families, (2) highly efficient genome-scale
sequence comparison algorithms for ncRNA homology search, and (3) a novel ncRNA
structure modeling and comparison method.

The research goals of this project and the training needs of computational
biology are integrated with the following educational objectives and plans. 1)
Improve the awareness of computational biology as an important research area
among students in biology and engineering. A new computational biology course
for both senior undergraduates and graduates has been designed and is offered
every fall. 2) Improve cross-disciplinary research training experiences for
graduate and undergraduate students through MSU's Quantitative Biology
Initiative (QBI) dual-major degree program. 3) Encourage retention and
recruitment of underrepresented groups in computational biology related majors.
The PI will continue to attend the K-12 women students outreach through Women in
Engineering Summer Program every year, and help undergraduate women students
through Women In Computing organization at MSU.