* 0953940
* Integrating Trait and Cultural Psychology Perspectives on Personality Processes Across Cultures
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2014
* A. Timothy Church, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 01/31/2014
* USD 500,719.00

This research integrates the theoretical perspectives of personality trait
psychologists and cultural psychologists to achieve a more comprehensive
understanding of the relationship between culture and personality, as well as
the impact of personality on behavior and mental health in different cultures.
Cross-cultural research on personality processes can identify cultural
universals and differences, and clarify the role of socio-cultural factors in
personality, behavior, and psychological well-being. In six studies, across nine
countries including the United States, Australia, Norway, Mexico, Venezuela,
Philippines, Malaysia, China, and Japan, the investigators will address
fundamental questions regarding personality and mental health across cultures,
including the following: Do personality traits predict important behaviors and
mental health equally well in different cultures? Do people in different
cultures vary in the consistency or stability of their personality
characteristics across different situational contexts? Is such consistency more
important for mental health in some cultures than others? Are there universal
psychological needs that account for personality consistency and well-being in
all cultures?

While the significance of the research for scientific theory derives in part,
from the importance of integrating the personality trait and cultural psychology
perspectives, the broader impacts of this work are notable. Indeed, the
involvement of collaborators from countries that are underrepresented in the
scientific literature will contribute to a broadening of the data base of
scientific psychology, and this will ultimately have important implications for
mental health interventions and treatment outcomes in each of the societies.