* 0953482
* NSF Support for 9th International Seminar on Experimental Techniques and Design in Composite Materials
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2010
* Daniel Inman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2010
* USD 5,000.00

NSF funds are requested in support of the 9th International Seminar on
EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES AND DESIGN IN COMPOSITE MATERIALS. This seminar will
focus on composite materials, both with polymeric and metallic matrix. The main
topics are:&lt;br/&gt;- Experimental techniques&lt;br/&gt;- Damage mechanics and
characterization&lt;br/&gt;- Fatigue and fracture&lt;br/&gt;- Impact and
crashworthiness&lt;br/&gt;- Mathematical and numerical modelling&lt;br/&gt;-
Nanocomposites&lt;br/&gt;- Processing and properties&lt;br/&gt;- Structural
design and optimisation&lt;br/&gt;Although the general aspects of composites
will be discussed, particular emphasis will be given to the integration among
testing, design and manufacturing for the definition of reliable design
procedures. The area of nanocomposites will receive a special attention.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seminar, covering the topics mentioned above, aims to
represent a forum for researchers, scientist, engineers and designers, both of
academic and industrial field, for exchanging ideas, proposing new solutions or
even to put on the table questions still open about the development of reliable
tools for an effective and safe design of composite components. Moreover the
development of design procedures, the integration between testing, design and
process are among the subjects expected to be discussed during the
seminar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity is
that it will represent a forum for researchers, scientist, engineers and
designers, both of academic and industrial field, for exchanging ideas,
proposing new solutions or even to put on the table questions still open about
the development of reliable tools for an effective and safe design of composite
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity will include the development of design procedures, the integration
between testing, design and process are among the subjects expected to be
discussed during the seminar.&lt;br/&gt;