* 0953583
* CAREER: Molecular Imaging Training Program
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Andrew Tsourkas, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

0953583 Tsourkas

The overall objective of this proposal is to establish a synergistic,
multidisciplinary research and educational program for undergraduate and
graduate students that will provide direct links between classroom education,
independent research, and teaching. The underlying theme for this program will
be "Molecular Imaging" and it will integrate both lecture- and laboratory-based
learning. The lecture-based component will center on a core curriculum that is
designed to introduce students enrolled in the training program to the
fundamentals of molecular imaging. This will be complemented with monthly
seminars on "Molecular Imaging and Targeted Therapeutics" and a weekly journal
club on the same topic. The undergraduate and graduate research plan will focus
on developing two complementary bioluminescent probes that will allow for the
non-invasive, real-time imaging of programmed cell death (PCD) and cell
proliferation, respectively. The sensitivity, specificity, and dynamic range of
these bioluminescent sensors will be evaluated in culture and in murine tumor
models. The proposed research plan has been specifically designed to possess
well-defined objectives for both undergraduate and graduate students.
Undergraduate projects are independent but complementary to those performed by
graduate students and are meant to establish a setting for problem-based
learning and increased responsibility, while simultaneously fostering a
collaborative atmosphere.

With regards to Intellectual Merit; It has been found that nearly all diseases
have been associated with the deregulation of homeostasis. The bioluminescent
probes for PCD and cell proliferation can be used to advance knowledge and
understanding in a wide range of biological disciplines. Applications might
include monitoring stem cell fate and function in tissue engineered implants or
in cell-based therapies, performing high-throughput screening of therapeutic
compounds on live cells or zebra fish, evaluating the toxic or stimulating
effects of environmental, mechanical, and/or chemical cues in realtime, or
determining the efficacy of therapeutic compounds in culture or in murine models
of disease.