* 0953010
* A Chemical Model for the Prebiotic Origins of Tetrapyrrole Macrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Jonathan Lindsey, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2013
* USD 510,000.00

The question of how life originated on Earth is one of the most challenging and
perplexing problems in science. This project supported by the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program will examine simple, plausibly prebiotic chemical reactions
that lead from early-Earth available substances to tetrapyrrole macrocycles. All
present-day living organisms use a single, universal pathway for the
construction of tetrapyrrole molecules. While mimicry of the modern biosynthetic
pathway is attractive, this proposal casts a broad net to examine diverse
reactions that plausibly can lead to the formation of tetrapyrrole macrocycles,
including those of present-day biochemistry as well as analogues with similar
properties that could have played a central role in prebiotic chemistry. A
thesis here is that there may have been diverse pathways to the critical class
of tetrapyrrole macrocycles, including the now modern pathway, which were
operative in the prebiotic era. Simple chemical reactions that subsequently
transform tetrapyrrole macrocycles and alter their properties, as occurs in the
biosynthetic pathways leading to heme and chlorophylls, also will be examined.
The broader impacts of this project include deepening our understanding of
biogenesis and the role of energy metabolism in the origin of a self-replicating
system. Elucidation of critical milestones for the emergence of energy-utilizing
systems including photosynthesis, for which tetrapyrrole macrocycles would seem
essential, may not only be central to life's origins but may also augment our
understanding of the earliest steps in the transformation of the Earth. Perhaps
most important is the education and training of students who work on this
project, and a related course to be taught by the PI entitled "The Molecular
Origins of Life", both of which are expected to spark young scientists'
curiosity and deepen their passion for science.