* 0953516
* CAREER: Foundataions of Markets as Information Aggregation Mechanisms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Yiling Chen, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2016
* USD 461,794.00

CAREER: Foundations of Markets as Information Aggregation Mechanisms

Prediction markets are markets designed for information aggregation. To achieve
its goal, a prediction market offers a contract whose future payoff is tied to
outcomes of an event of interest. Participants of the market express their
information about the event through trading the contract. The market price hence
potentially incorporates the information of all participants and approximately
represents a consensus forecast for the event. Prediction markets have shown
great potential as highly effective information aggregation tools in practice.
However, they may be subject to manipulation. Participants have incentives to
lie about their information in order to seize more profit in the market or be
rewarded outside the market. With manipulation, information aggregation may fail
and the credibility of market prices is put into question. Another challenge is
the computational problem of operating combinatorial prediction markets. When
the mechanism becomes more expressive and participants can reveal their
information on combinations of outcomes, the process of operating a market may
become computationally intractable, which makes such combinatorial prediction
markets impractical to use. The goal of this project is to perform a
foundational study on issues that arise in prediction market design because of
the self-interest of participants and the need of expressiveness. Using computer
science theory and game theory as the main research approaches, Dr. Chen will
establish the strategic and computational foundations for prediction markets so
as to design market mechanisms that are not only theoretically sound but also
practically applicable for information aggregation in complex real-world
settings.

This project is centered around two themes: manipulation-resistant prediction
markets and computationally efficient combinatorial prediction markets. The
research on manipulation-resistant prediction markets investigates when
manipulation arises, how manipulation affects information aggregation, and how
to design prediction market mechanisms to explicitly control the impact of
manipulation. It will provide answers to the most fundamental question of
whether people can trust the information conveyed by prediction markets and
design robust market mechanisms for information aggregation. The research on
computationally efficient combinatorial prediction markets examines the tradeoff
between expressiveness and computational complexity of combinatorial prediction
markets, designs tractable combinatorial prediction markets, and develops
efficient approximation algorithms for intractable combinatorial prediction
markets. It will help to transfer combinatorial prediction markets from
theoretical artifacts to practical devices for aggregating richer information.
This project does not depend on any specific application domain. Hence,
mechanisms designed in this project can be applied to aggregate information in
many settings, including business, government, and society. Results of this
project will also help to inform policy making on the possible regulation of
prediction markets.