* 0953764
* CAREER:  Understanding the Non-proteolytic Function of Ubiquitin in Eukaryotic Translesion DNA Synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Zhihao Zhuang, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/29/2016
* USD 783,042.00

Ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like proteins have diverse functions in many
fundamentally important cellular processes. Besides the well-known role of
ubiquitin in the 26S proteasome-mediated protein degradation pathway, the non-
proteolytic roles of ubiquitin are being uncovered at a fast pace. In
particular, researchers in the area of DNA damage response have witnessed rapid
progress within the past decade. This was largely stimulated by the seminal
findings that ubiquitylation and SUMOylation of a key DNA replication/repair
protein, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), controls precisely how cells
respond to different types of DNA damage, and how the different DNA damage
repair or tolerance pathways are chosen to cope with the DNA damage. The
objective of this CAREER project is twofold: developing chemical approaches for
efficient ubiquitylation of PCNA, and using the ubiquitylated PCNA to
investigate the molecular mechanism of translesion DNA synthesis in the model
organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This information will also help researchers
in other fields to decipher the non-proteolytic function of ubiquitin in
essential cellular processes. Moreover, the newly developed chemical approaches
for ubiquitylation can be generalized for investigation of other processes that
involve post-translational modification by ubiquitin or ubiquitin-like proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project seeks to
spark the scientific curiosity and career aspirations of high school students
and underrepresented minorities in chemistry and biology. The interdisciplinary
nature of the research and educational activities will equip the undergraduate
and graduate students with novel ideas and the most up-to-date experimental
skills in the burgeoning field of chemical biology. The outreach activities will
also enhance the institutional infrastructure (the virtual reality visualization
or CAVE system at the Delaware Biotechnology Institute) that will benefit not
only the research community but also the general public. A long-term partnership
will be established with the Institute of Genetics, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences to facilitate a collaborative effort in attacking this very challenging
problem in the DNA damage response. The ultimate goal of this project is to
establish research and educational programs that not only advance the field of
chemical biology by enhancing the scientific understanding of DNA damage
tolerance, but also inspire and educate the next generation of chemical
biologists.