* 0953870
* CAREER:  Rational Language Processing with Uncertain and Noisy Input
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2016
* Roger Levy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 03/31/2016
* USD 501,529.00

This CAREER award investigates how humans integrate a wide variety of
&lt;br/&gt;information sources to achieve rapid, accurate natural language
&lt;br/&gt;comprehension subject to the physical and cognitive constraints under
&lt;br/&gt;which it takes place. The project's primary empirical focus is on
&lt;br/&gt;reading, a mode of information exchange of unexceeded importance in
&lt;br/&gt;literate societies. Reading involves a rapid sequence of targeted eye
&lt;br/&gt;movements throughout a text -- recordable through modern eye-tracking
&lt;br/&gt;technology -- from which noisy sensory input are obtained and
&lt;br/&gt;integrated with prior knowledge to resolve perceptual and linguistic
&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty. The central goal of this project is thus to develop,
&lt;br/&gt;implement, and test a computational model of language comprehension
&lt;br/&gt;and eye movement control in reading built on principles of
&lt;br/&gt;probabilistic inference and rational action, using the tools of
&lt;br/&gt;natural language processing (NLP) technology, reinforcement learning,
&lt;br/&gt;and behavioral psycholinguistic
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this project is likely to
have major impact in the &lt;br/&gt;field of human sentence processing, bringing
a new level of nuance and &lt;br/&gt;detail to both theory and data analysis,
and will bear on broad &lt;br/&gt;current debates in cognitive science regarding
rationality in &lt;br/&gt;cognition. Additionally, the results of this basic
research project &lt;br/&gt;have a wide range of potential applications ranging
from intelligent &lt;br/&gt;tutoring technology to language-impairment diagnosis
to cognitive &lt;br/&gt;ergonomics. Together with this research program, the
project involves &lt;br/&gt;an educational program including a new textbook on
probabilistic &lt;br/&gt;models in the study of language, new undergraduate and
graduate &lt;br/&gt;courses, and tutorials and courses on computational
psycholinguistics &lt;br/&gt;at major conferences and summer
institutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is co-funded by two
directorates:: CISE/IIS and SBE/BCS.