* 0953515
* CAREER: Theoretical Foundations for Wireless Network Algorithm Design: Satisfying Short-Term and Long-Term Application Requirements
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2015
* Atilla Eryilmaz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2015
* USD 462,716.00

Multi-hop wireless networks that are envisioned to form the backbone of many
future communication systems are: typically subject to restrictive and
unpredictably changing resource constraints; required to operate using low
complexity and scalable operations; envisioned to serve essential applications
with a range of long-term (e.g. throughput-greedy, long-duration applications)
to short-term (e.g. delay-sensitive, short-duration applications) requirements.
Yet, there is a huge gap in our understanding of how to design wireless network
controllers operating under such harsh conditions that can efficiently serve
diverse applications, especially those that have various degrees of delay
sensitivities.&lt;br/&gt;This research fills this gap by developing a rigorous
theoretical foundation for the methodical design of communication strategies for
effectively supporting diverse applications in general multi-hop wireless
networks. To that end, it first reveals the significant impact of several
unexplored design choices, including the service discipline, traffic shaping
strategy, and delay-aware decision making, on the achieved application
performances. Then, it systematically exploits these new design dimensions for
optimally serving both delay-related short-term and throughput-related long-term
application requirements by developing new approaches and mathematical tools
within non-convex optimization, stochastic network control, and
randomized/approximate algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;The insights and mathematical
tools developed within this project are expected to play an instrumental role in
the design of efficient communication protocols for tomorrow's networks serving
vital services with a range of delay sensitivities and throughput requirements
(in health-care, rescue operations, security, automated control, etc.). The
society will also benefit from the educational aspects of the project in the
training of future engineers and researchers.