* 0953652
* CAREER: An Integrated Systems Approach to Understanding Complex Muscle Disorders
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Siddhartha Sikdar, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 04/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to investigate complex dynamic interactions
between the musculoskeletal, circulatory and nervous systems involved in common,
yet poorly understood, muscle disorders. The approach is to develop novel
dynamic ultrasound imaging modes for quantifying anisotropic muscle kinematics,
viscoelastic tissue properties and blood flow, and integrate these novel
measures with conventional measures of tissue oxygenation, electrical
activation, strength, and range of motion to characterize the underlying
physiological systems.

Intellectual Merit: Real-time ultrasound imaging is uniquely suited for dynamic
muscle function studies because it is cost-effective, portable and can be
integrated with other measurements. However, lack of quantitative dynamic
measures and challenges due to anisotropy of muscle have been barriers to
widespread use of ultrasound. The proposed research is designed to overcome
these barriers. The technical contributions are the theoretical and experimental
investigation of novel ultrasound beam configurations, imaging modes and signal
and image processing algorithms for quantitative imaging of anisotropic tissue
motion and viscoelastic tissue properties.

Broader Impacts: This research will provide enabling tools for understanding
functional limitations in musculoskeletal disorders and measuring treatment
efficacy, potentially leading to more effective therapies for this significant
public health problem. Research and educational objectives are integrated to
engage graduate, undergraduate and high school students as part of a new
bioengineering curriculum. Outreach efforts include summer research programs for
high school students, a bioengineering demonstration kit encouraging students to
pursue careers in science and engineering, and engaging the local K-12 community
by presenting state-of-the-art research on muscle disorders affecting school-age
children.