* 0953548
* CAREER:  Entropic Elasticity of Fluctuating Filaments and Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Prashant Purohit, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to combine the finite element method with path integral techniques from
statistical mechanics to solve problems in which configurational entropy due to
thermal fluctuations plays a significant role. The advance of mechanics towards
the frontiers of biology and soft matter necessitates an understanding of
entropic forces which manifest themselves as thermal fluctuations at length
scales of a micrometer and below. The modeling technique will be used to
investigate two specific mechanics problems motivated from biology and backed
with a wealth of experimental results: (a) energetics of protein mediated loops
in DNA, and (b) mechanical behavior of networks of filaments, such as, actin and
fibrin. The proposed methods to analyze DNA loop formation are relevant to (i)
the action of DNA binding proteins implicated in gene regulation, and (ii)
mapping the human genome. An understanding of the mechanical behavior of
filamentous networks will have implications on manipulating adhesion, locomotion
and differentiation of cells since these are controlled by mechanical
interactions between a cell and its surroundings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
activity will lead to a better understanding of how mechanical properties of
cells and tissues are implicated in diseases. It will also enable design of new
biomaterials and possible therapeutic interventions for curing diseases.
Furthermore, there will be collaboration with a local start-up company on
projects related to mapping the human genome. The project will also open up
opportunities for educating graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in
the interdisciplinary areas of nanotechnology and biophysics.