* 0953677
* CAREER:   Evolution in the Eastern Mediterranean Campanulaceae - Integrating Information Management and Scientific Workflows in Daily Research and Teaching
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Nico Cellinese, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2016
* USD 865,251.00

CAREER: Evolution in the Eastern Mediterranean Campanulaceae - Integrating
Information Management and Scientific Workflows in Daily Research and
Teaching&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore biological diversity and
biogeography of Campanulaceae (bell flower family) in the Mediterranean Basin in
order to understand plant population dynamics in continental islands that are
under extraordinary pressure from humans and animals. The intricate geological
history and the significant human pressure on the environment have dramatically
shaped the biodiversity of this region. Many endemic species are confined to
restricted localities, and are threatened and highly dependent on habitat
conservation. Moreover, an ever-increasing need to extend phylogenetic analyses
to additional markers and taxa underlines a grand challenge for informatics and
computational sciences. Therefore, this research will integrate science and
technology by developing a novel research environment where the data generated
will be automatically processed into relevant analytical workflows. This
approach to scientific analyses is more efficient, but hard to achieve without
the technical skills and appropriate infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research will have an impact on conservation planning by better informing
researchers, educators, policy and decision makers about species dynamics in
ecosystems like the Mediterranean (e.g., in California). A fundamental strength
is the integration of science and technology research with training and
curriculum development for K-12 and higher education. Outreach to the public
will be through a museum exhibit developed at the Florida Museum of Natural
History. This project will increase technology capacity and will serve not just
as a test-bed but also importantly, as a foundational library that biological
scientists, educators, and others can use. &lt;br/&gt;