* 0953759
* CAREER: Building Immunity to Memory Management Bugs during Production Runs
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Feng Qin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/29/2016
* USD 420,000.00

The widespread use of software in our society has created unprecedented demand
on software availability. Unfortunately, memory management bugs, a major
category of common software defects, severely affect system availability.
Previous studies have shown that memory management bugs account for 43% of the
reported software failures. According to the Vulnerability Notes Database
maintained by the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team, memory bugs are
dominant in recent vulnerability reports. Memory bugs remain prevalent and
challenging to handle during production runs mainly because of three reasons.
First, memory bugs are deterministic, failing traditional fault tolerance
methods. Second, memory bugs manifested during production runs are hard to
reproduce off-site, making them difficult for diagnosis. Third, modern computing
trends such as cloud computing and multi-core enable larger and more complicated
software, causing memory bugs to slip into the field more easily.

This project addresses the above challenges. The investigator employs a
systematic approach for providing immunity to memory bugs during production
runs. The main idea is to perform online diagnosis once a memory bug or failure
is detected, then generate and apply runtime immune patches to the running
program for surviving and preventing memory bug occurrences or failures caused
by memory bugs. The research hinges on the following synergistic thrusts: (1)
runtime support of diversified program execution environments for safely and
efficiently surviving and preventing memory bug occurrences or failures, which
addresses the determinism issue of memory bugs; (2) new algorithms for low-
overhead bug diagnosis, which are applied on-site for easy reproduction of
memory bugs and best exploitation of on-site bug/failure information; (3)
operating system support for lightweight checkpointing and re-execution
mechanisms for multi-threaded programs on modern multi-core systems.