* 0953297
* CAREER:  Ontogenetic changes in tracheal system structure and function in larval insects
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2017
* Kendra Greenlee, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2017
* USD 812,000.00

Insects are the most numerous and diverse animals on the planet and, as they
grow from a hatchling to an adult, body mass may increase 200 to 10,000 fold.
Although increasing mass must be supported by more oxygen, the insect
respiratory system (the tracheal system) increases in size only when the insect
molts. The overall goal of this research project is determine how growing
insects match oxygen supply to increasing oxygen demand. Several mechanisms are
possible. For example, larger insects may have more or larger tracheae or they
may breathe faster. In addition, larger insects may change cellular or gene
expression patterns that alter oxygen supply or demand. To characterize changes
in respiratory structure and function, the studies will employ tools from
molecular biology and whole animal physiology. The results of these studies may
help to develop non-pesticide methods of insect control, as manipulation of
atmospheric gases is increasingly important for controlling insects in grain
storage, greenhouses, and museum collections. In addition, understanding the
relationship between oxygen supply and demand will help to explain the
appearance of gigantic insects in the Paleozoic era, as increased oxygen supply
is hypothesized to have driven this phenomenon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contributing to this research, undergraduate researchers
from North Dakota State University and Mississippi Valley State University, a
Historically Black University, will participate in a summer research program.
Students will assist in data collection at NDSU and accompany the principal
investigator to Argonne National Laboratory to image the insect tracheal systems
using synchrotron x-rays at the Advanced Photon Source. This educational
component will increase participation of underrepresented students in research
and will help recruit students to science careers. An online mentoring group
will provide support to students and provide a means for assessing the efficacy
of this program. Together the scientific components and educational components
of this research program serve to advance discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching, training and learning.