* 0953117
* CAREER: Breaking the Barriers in Wireless Network Information Theory: A Deterministic Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Amir Avestimehr, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2013
* USD 441,876.00

Shannon's masterpiece, A Mathematical Theory of Communication (1948), is one of
the most influential works in the history of communications. In this seminal
work, Shannon characterized the fundamental limit for reliable communication
over point-to-point channels and provided the architectural system design for
achieving it. Extending this theory to network setting has been one of the
greatest challenges in information theory over the past few decades. Progress in
this area is expected to produce significant breakthrough in the design of
distributed wireless networks of the future, such as ad-hoc networks. So far,
most research efforts have approached this problem using the same generality and
accuracy used by Shannon for point-to-point channels. However, meeting such a
standard has proven to be extremely difficult, to the extent that the capacity
of most basic networks is still unknown.

This research overcomes the limitations of prior work by presenting a new
approach, which is based on changing the focus to seek approximate solutions
accompanied by guarantees on the gap to optimality. At the heart of this
approach is the development of simple, deterministic channel models that capture
the main features of the wireless medium, and are utilized to approximate more
complex models. Building on recent results of the PI, the work develops a
unified framework to utilize this powerful approach to 1) approximate the
capacity of wireless networks; 2) study the impact of incomplete network
knowledge on the capacity; 3) design protocols that are robust against
adversaries; and 4) utilize recent physical layer coding techniques for cross-
layer protocol design. The project also includes significant outreach program to
women and under-represented minorities in the form of presenting tutorials and
organizing workshops.