* 0953644
* CAREER: Towards Seamless Mobility in Cognitive Radio Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2015
* Jiang (Linda) Xie, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The cognitive radio technology is a promising technology to overcome the
imbalance between the increase in the spectrum access demand and the
inefficiency in the spectrum usage by allowing dynamic spectrum access. Seamless
mobility is considered as a critical component to ensure the success of
cognitive radio network (CRN) deployment, but unfortunately, is under-explored
in the literature.

The research objective of this project is to develop new policies and algorithms
for providing seamless mobility support in cognitive radio wireless networks
(CRNs). The approach involves identifying the new issues in the mobility support
caused by the changing spectrum environment in CRNs, exploiting the varying
spectrum opportunities in time and space domains, proactively utilizing the
spectrum opportunities for mobility preparations, and optimizing the performance
via spectrum-adaptive mobility management schemes.

This project will provide innovative mobility support techniques to numerous
applications of the CRN technology. It will also have significant impacts on
research in emerging technologies with high mobility scenarios, such as
vehicular networks, and opportunistic interconnections of heterogeneous wireless
networks. This project provides an excellent opportunity for graduate and
undergraduate research students to gain valuable educational training and
research experiences. The research results will be presented at IEEE journals
and international conferences. In addition, the PI plans to organize a workshop
and a journal special issue to enhance the understanding and promote research
discussions on seamless mobility in wireless networks.