* 0953633
* CAREER: Mechanistic Toxicity Assessment of Emerging Pollutants via Prokaryotic Real-Time Gene Expression Profiling for Water Quality Monitoring
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2016
* April Gu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2016
* USD 448,670.00

0953633&lt;br/&gt;Gu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The health risk and harmful
environmental impacts associated with the plethora of emerging contaminants in
our water necessitate a breakthrough in toxicity-assessment technology because
the available methods are neither feasible nor sufficient to provide the timely
information needed for regulatory decision making to eliminate these threats.
The objectives of this CAREER project are (1) to apply an innovative
interdisciplinary approach of prokaryotic real-time gene-expression profiling as
a means of evaluating toxic effects and identify toxicity mechanisms of emerging
contaminants; (2) to develop a more sophisticated and informative, yet cost-
effective and feasible genomic assessment system for monitoring and quantifying
toxicity effects from contaminants in water samples; and (3) to establish a
creative and integrated education program to attract and educate personnel from
various disciplines and backgrounds, especially women and underrepresented
groups, to become contributors in the field of environmental engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal is to build a unique interdisciplinary
and translational research and education program that specializes in applying
genomic and molecular biotechnology for water-quality improvement and
monitoring. The lack of sufficient and feasible methods of toxicity evaluation
and quantification greatly hampers the development and implementation of
effective regulations, strategies, and technologies for controlling and
eliminating the harmful effects from the emerging contaminants of concern. This
project will, for the first time, apply a prokaryotic whole-cell array
consisting of a large number (~2000) of bioluminescent GFP-transformed E. coli
strains to obtain real-time gene-expression profiling in response to
contaminants. The high-resolution and high-throughput measurements of the global
molecular status of an organism in exposure to a toxin will allow for
simultaneous evaluation of toxic effects, understanding of toxicity mechanisms,
and obtaining of pollutant-specific molecular fingerprints (biomarkers) for
compound classification and identification. This approach will lead to more
timely and more informative toxicity-evaluation results than conventional
methods. It will greatly improve the feasibility and cost effectiveness of gene-
expression profiling for toxicity assessment as a result of its much simpler,
faster, and more reliable assay procedure, higher reusability, and desirable
flexibility for customization of the cell-array library. Furthermore, the
proposed method has higher sensitivity and specificity than the existing
microarray-based genomic profiling approach because it adds a temporal dimension
to the profiling data and therefore allows for more comprehensive and accurate
toxicity evaluation of pollutants. Obtaining a wealth of new data on the
toxicity effects and toxic mechanisms for various categories of emerging
environmental pollutants will help to fill a great void in our understanding of
the risk of emerging contaminants. Incorporation of this information into the
standard tiered ecological-risk-assessment framework can greatly advance the
efficiency of regulatory ecotoxicology by reducing the uncertainty in risk
assessment and optimizing the resource utilization on chemicals with the
greatest potential risk. This cross-disciplinary project will incorporate its
research products into an education plan built upon an interdisciplinary,
experiential, and multi-channel education and outreach paradigm that will target
personnel from various levels and backgrounds, including students from K-12 to
graduate level, water professionals and practitioners, local agencies and
regulators, and high school and community college teachers. This study will
demonstrate the ability and advantages of genomic toxicity-assessment
methodology as an alternative to conventional tests of toxicity evaluation and
identification and/or as a complementary tool to conventional
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will have a significant
impact on ensuring water quality for public health protection and quality-of-
life improvement. This project integrates the diverse disciplines of
biotechnology, toxicology, and environmental engineering and opens new ground
for research in genomic toxicity assessment for water-quality monitoring. The
creative and integrated teaching and education paradigm will increase the
diversity of participation in the environmental engineering workforce and equip
students with adequate knowledge and skills to tackle today's challenging
environmental issues. The BEST (Biotechnology for the Environment-Showcase and
Training) program that was pioneered by the PI will continue to expand through
connections with various NU education programs (STEM, FURI, RET, and YSP) and
local organizations and communities to increase the diversity of participants in
the field of environmental engineering, especially with regard to women,
minorities, and people with disabilities. Enhanced technology transfer and
information dissemination will be achieved through ITRI (Industrial
Translational Research Initiative, initiated by the PI), multi-level
collaborations, and the NU co-op program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support for
the PIs career development will help her mature into a successful scholar and
educator who benefits society by contributing to the technological and
educational advancement of water-quality improvement and public health
protection.