* 0953985
* CAREER: Next-generation Interactive Simulation
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Adrien Treuille, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2016
* USD 549,155.00

Data-driven model reduction has enabled astonishing speedups in physical
simulation. We can now experience interactive simulations of three-dimensional
fluids and other complex phenomena that were impossible with traditional
techniques. However, this approach's central limitation is inflexibility. Even
small changes to the simulation domain require complete recomputation of the
model. Moreover, the approach has been limited to a small class of dynamical
systems. In this project, the PI seeks to radically generalize model reduction
so that it is reconfigurable at runtime, handles a far greater range of
phenomena, and supports heterogeneous coupling between reduced systems. The core
goal of this research is to enable interactive simulations with the speed of
model reduction, but without its inflexibility. The tension between these goals
brings to light fundamental questions. What kinds of flexibility and runtime
reconfigurability are possible? What kinds of reduced models maximize runtime
flexibility? How can dynamical systems be projected onto these models? What is
the broadest possible class of phenomena to which we can apply model reduction?
How can we couple the model reduced dynamics across heterogeneous systems? The
answers to questions such as these will provide a deeper understand of the
conditions under which low-dimensional representations can successfully
represent complex dynamical systems. The PI's approach will be to subdivide his
research goals into three challenge areas: modular and deformable bases;
particle systems and non-polynomial dynamics; and model coupling. Success within
these areas will greatly increase the flexibility and extensibility of model
reduction techniques, bringing us closer to interactive simulation of rich,
heterogeneous virtual environments. The PI will also explore several advanced
technologies enabled by these theoretical advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Solving these challenges will be a transformative development directly
applicable to a wide range of challenging fields including medical research,
engineering, industrial design, architecture, training, and education. The
interactive simulation of complex dynamics will allow people to rapidly explore
physical design spaces, improve controllers for airplanes and other nonlinear
systems, provide training for dangerous or remote environments, provide time-
critical simulation for disaster scenarios, and will be a valuable tool for
education. Interactive simulation will also allow students to play with remote
phenomena, from wiggling proteins to curling smoke; interactively manipulating
these structures will reveal concepts such as why a protein's helices are more
rigid than its loops. Students could even modify the laws of physics; replace
the famous force equals mass times acceleration with force equals mass times
velocity and you find yourself in a strange molasses-like world where a rolling
ball comes to rest as soon as it's no longer being pushed. In such impossible
worlds, abstract equations suddenly resonate with truth.