* 0953311
* CAREER:  Sensing, Imaging and Energy Applications of Metamaterial Cloaks
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Andrea Alu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 05/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Objective: This project focuses on the fundamental theoretical and experimental
study of metamaterial covers, operating as cloaks to suppress the otherwise
inevitable disturbance that near-field sensors, imagers and absorbers produce on
their surroundings. These findings will be aimed at advancing near-field
measurements and imaging techniques, and increasing the efficiency of green-
energy devices. Furthermore, these research concepts will be combined with a
number of outreach and educational activities, aimed at integrating metamaterial
research and education, with special emphasis on diversity and
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project applies the unique
property of plasmonic metamaterial shells to tunnel, capture and extract energy,
combined with minimized scattering. In near-field probing applications, this may
realize sensors that measure and image without perturbing their own measurement,
drastically improving their overall performance. Moreover, this technology holds
the potential to match, tune and maximize the efficiency of energy-harvesting
devices by eliminating scattering, reflections and&lt;br/&gt;unwanted coupling.
Finally, this project will establish thin-film conformal metamaterial technology
also suited for a variety of other applications, from radio to optical
frequencies.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: These results may substantially improve
biomedical measurements and the efficiency of absorbing semiconductor devices.
Moreover, the educational plan broadens the project?s impact through various
activities, including the creation of a website, combining teaching resources on
metamaterials with cutting-edge research updates, and the organization of a
student symposium on metamaterials. These efforts will fill the gap between the
considerable research activity on metamaterials and its currently limited
educational extent, broadening the impact of these exciting topics to all
society.