* 0953468
* CAREER:  A Hardware-Software Approach to Enabling In-Situ Visibility and Control in Wireless Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Vijay Raghunathan, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 413,266.00

Reliable operation of wireless embedded systems is a crucial requirement due to
their increasing use in a variety of mission-critical application domains. One
of the biggest impediments to ensuring reliable operation is the fact that, post
deployment, designers have very little visibility and control over (and hence
understanding of) the behavior and operational state of remotely deployed
embedded systems. This project addresses the above challenge and is based on the
premise that, especially for remotely deployed embedded systems, visibility and
control cannot be treated as mere afterthoughts, but should be treated as prime
considerations throughout the hardware and software design process.

In terms of intellectual merit, the project is pursuing two complementary
research thrusts: (i) The project is investigating the design of new embedded
hardware platforms that feature explicit hardware hooks to provide enhanced
visibility and control over the functioning of the platform, and (ii) The
project is exploring new embedded software architectures that provide fine-
grained remote visibility and control over the execution of embedded software in
a lightweight, easy to use, and non-intrusive manner, without disrupting normal
software execution on the system.

In terms of broader impact, the project has the potential to positively impact
the adoption and acceptance of wireless embedded systems in a variety of
consumer and mission-critical applications. In addition to enhancing graduate
and undergraduate courses on embedded systems at Purdue, results from the
project are impacting the broader community through unique programs at Purdue
such as the Engineering Projects In Community Service.