* 0953517
* CAREER: A Computational Framework for Mapping Ligand Migration Channel Networks and Predicting Molecular Control Mechanisms
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Guang Song, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/29/2016
* USD 500,000.00

CAREER: A computational framework for mapping ligand migration channel networks
and predicting molecular control mechanisms - Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Proteins
are fundamental elements of living organisms. They are marvelous microscopic
bio-machines that function in a steady, predictable manner. Together with other
elements such as DNA, they make up the basics that underlie the complexity of
life. The quest to know how these bio-machines work has inspired intense
scientific curiosity and imagination. Since most functions are carried out
dynamically and are difficult to observe directly from experiments,
computational methods have an important, irreplaceable role to
play.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to map out the
ligand migration channel networks inside proteins and determine the molecular
control mechanisms by which these channels are regulated dynamically. To
overcome the limitations that existing methods face, the project will develop
and employ a novel, efficient computational framework that draws one of its
inspirations from path planning in robotics, as a ligand?s migration in a
dynamic protein resembles closely a mobile robot?s navigation in a dynamic
environment. The proposed approach will overcome the computational barrier by
integrating efficient geometric mappings with the dynamic exploration of a
protein?s structure flexibility. By taking as input the structure ensemble of a
given protein, which may be composed of existing experimental structures and/or
conformations generated from molecular dynamics simulations, the proposed method
carries out a spatial mapping of the protein?s inner space at each conformation
in the ensemble. The spatial mapping reveals the partial connectivity of the
cavities and channels inside the protein. All partial maps are then merged to
form a super-graph that represents the complete migration channel network that
is accessible to the ligand, spatially and dynamically. The method will be
applied to map out the ligand migration channel networks in a family of proteins
and to study the similarities and differences in the ligand channel networks
across the family, which is novel. Moreover, since the channel network is mapped
for each individual conformation in the ensemble, direct correlation data
between conformation changes and variations in channel sizes will be collected
and analyzed to identify the key conformation changes that regulate these
channels. Key residues that are responsible for the key conformation changes
will then be identified. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As a university professor, the
PI has observed the prevalent lack of motivation and inspiration in
undergraduate classrooms and the need for more inspired training in creative
thinking among graduate students. To address these pressing needs, the education
objectives of this proposal are: i) to infuse scientific curiosity and
motivation into the undergraduate classrooms, ii) to train motivated
undergraduate and graduate students to become creative thinkers, and iii) to
spread the excitement of learning and discovery to the community, to junior high
and high school students. The PI believes that the inter-disciplinary nature of
his research should provide invaluable resources to engender scientific
curiosity and to inspire cross-disciplinary creative thinking among the
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: the project will develop a
novel computational framework for mapping ligand migration channel networks.
Upon completion of this project, it is expected that a clear understanding of
the control mechanism by which ligand migration channel networks are regulated
will have been developed. Key control residues, or molecular switches, will be
identified. The precise roles of protein motions and dynamics will be
delineated. Such an understanding of functional mechanisms can be used to
interpret the existing experimental results or make new predictions that can
guide future experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: the proposed
research activities will be closely integrated with education activities. The
PI?s interdisciplinary research will be used to cultivate scientific curiosity
and cross-disciplinary creative thinking among students, especially for women,
underserved minorities and the disabled. The project will create ample
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to participate in research
and to be trained to become creative thinkers. The research results will be
broadly disseminated through journal publications and conference presentations.
The computational framework developed in this project will provide the
scientific community with an invaluable tool that can be adapted to study the
molecular control mechanisms of many other bio-molecules.