* 0953744
* Landscape legacies in rivers: retrospective analyses of changes in ecosystem function across two centuries
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2012
* James Thorp, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 80,000.00

Natural variations in physical processes alter ecosystem structure and function,
with the greatest impacts caused by natural and human disturbances that alter
the control mechanisms defining how an ecosystem operates. The primary ecosystem
driver in rivers relates to the timing, volume of water, and duration of high-
and low-water periods as part of the natural flow regime. Ecological responses
to altered control mechanisms can be linear or nonlinear, with the latter
including somewhat unpredictable threshold responses where a community shifts
abruptly to an alternative state of ecosystem function. Research on alternative
states may determine whether some shifts to undesired alternative states are
both predictable and reversible. Unfortunately, most studies of alternative
stable states have been theoretical and very limited in time due to funding
constraints. Our project circumvents these problems by using stable isotope
analysis of museum specimens to determine how changes in the natural flow regime
over a period of 100-150 years have altered food web complexity in medium to
large rivers. Our initial project will focus on differences in food web
complexity in the main channel, side channels, and backwaters of three
geomorphically diverse areas of the Upper Mississippi River in response to
altered flow regimes. Food webs will be constructed from real-time and museum
samples of fish in multiple feeding groups.

This project will also help alleviate the general dearth of knowledge about the
functioning of rivers and will thus focus on ecosystems that have experienced
relative declines in biodiversity far greater than those in the most affected
terrestrial ecosystems of North America. This historical knowledge of effects of
changing ecosystem drivers on functioning of river ecosystems is vital because
we need to predict effects of future disturbances if, as expected, global
climate changes and the need for more so-called green energy increases
socioeconomic pressures to build more dams. The initial project takes the form
of a proof-of-concept study and is thus limited in personnel and opportunities
for the extensive broader impacts proposed for our full study. However, the
project will include undergraduate assistants from two universities who will
learn both field and lab techniques as well as gain a broader appreciation of
the ecology of complex ecosystems.