* 0953783
* CAREER:  Computational Modeling of Protein Evolvability
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Brian Dominy, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 02/29/2016
* USD 587,711.00

While it is recognized that the molecular evolution of proteins is integral to
the evolution of species, the physical mechanisms underlying protein evolution
and the physical properties of proteins that facilitate evolution are not well
understood. The objective of this CAREER project is to address these questions
through the development and application of new theoretical models that rapidly
and accurately capture the essential physics and chemistry relevant to the
evolution of enzyme function. The approach will specifically involve modeling
the effects of mutations on the stability of a native protein fold as well as
the effects of mutation on catalytic efficiency. The application of these and
other theoretical tools to informative model systems will form the basis for
discovering physical-chemical features associated with molecular evolution.
Examples of these features include the physical mechanisms underlying
compensatory mutations as well as the role of protein stability and dynamics in
facilitating transitions to new enzymatic activities.

This CAREER project represents an integrated and multidisciplinary educational
and research approach, focused on using the laws of chemistry and physics to
explain and predict fundamental evolutionary processes in biology. The new
methods and new physical understanding of molecular evolution resulting from
this project will have direct implications for a variety of fields including
protein engineering and design, directed evolution, and nanotechnology. In
addition to the impact of the research, the educational goals will impact future
scientists by training undergraduate and graduate students to approach
biological questions from a quantitative perspective. This objective will be
partially realized through the development of a new undergraduate course in
chemical biology and a new graduate level course in biophysical chemistry. In
addition, this project will involve the development of a new interactive
software package that will further establish, for students, the value of
applying quantitative thinking to biological questions. The software will do
this by allowing students to explore the connection between the physical
properties of proteins and the biological function of proteins. The developed
educational software will have a broad impact as it will be distributed freely
to the public and will therefore be available to universities nationally and
internationally.