* 0953881
* CAREER:  Computational Tools for Fundamental Characterization and Inference of Genetic Interaction Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2017
* Chad Myers, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 05/31/2017
* USD 571,952.00

The University of Minnesota-Twin Cities is awarded a grant by the NSF Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) Program to support the development of
computational approaches for understanding large-scale genetic interaction
networks. Understanding the organization of biological systems and how it
relates to function is one of the fundamental questions of modern molecular
biology. A classical approach to characterizing cellular organization is to
probe a cell with combinations of genetic perturbations and observe the
resulting phenotype. This approach has recently been applied on a genome-wide
scale in model organisms like yeast, where experimental technologies have
enabled the construction of millions of combinatorial mutants. Preliminary
studies hint that these data may provide an unprecedented view of cellular
organization, but our ability to generate mutants and measure quantitative
phenotypes has quickly surpassed our capacity for systematic interpretation of
them. This project will support the development of computational infrastructure
for addressing this need, including three specific objectives: (1) novel
algorithms for comprehensive mining of genetic interaction network structure,
(2) predictive models of genetic interactions from diverse genomic data within
and across species, and (3) software tools for integrative analysis and
visualization of genetic interaction networks to facilitate
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of the project are integrated
with an educational component, which will address a critical need in
interdisciplinary science: the issue of identifying talented students early
enough such that they are able to establish a broad, but solid, foundation for
interdisciplinary research. The PI will start a bioinformatics outreach program
in which area high-school science and math teachers, particularly those from
rural communities, are invited to participate in and develop their own
educational programs highlighting recent successes and future directions in
genomics and bioinformatics. The PI is also developing new computational biology
courses at both the undergraduate and graduate level and involving undergraduate
and graduate students in highly collaborative, interdisciplinary projects. More
about the project can be found at http://www.cs.umn.edu/~cmyers.