* 0953837
* CAREER:  Investigating the Ultimate Mechanisms of Embodied Cognition
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2017
* Joshua Bongard, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 04/30/2017
* USD 499,999.00

To date, relatively little success has been achieved in realizing machines that
continually perform simple yet adaptive behaviors in unstructured environments
(compared to a structured environment such as a factory). The prevailing
approach to create such machines is to copy physiological and neurological
systems observed in animals, and build them into robots. This raises the issue
however of what from among the infinitude of existing biological structures
should be copied. Research under this award is pursuing an alternative approach:
rather than copy existing biological systems, evolutionary dynamics are copied
and connected in a virtual space. The resulting evolutionary algorithm optimize
virtual robots' neurological structures that control behavior and their body
plans. Importantly, evolution in these studies is task and behavior
specific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is intended to make important
contributions to robotics and biology. For roboticists, this work will enable
computers to automatically design the body plans and neural controllers for
robots that are more adaptive and robust than robots designed manually.
Automatically-designed virtual robots can then be built as physical devices and
deployed into real-world environments, to include those that are dangerous to
humans. For biologists, our studies will provide insight into why and how
particular structures evolved in nature. For example, if legged robots
originally evolved for locomotion are then selected to locomote and grasp
objects, computational evolution may re-purpose the robot's front legs into arms
and grippers; or, it may add manipulatory appendages onto the existing body
plan. Either outcome would be of great interest to evolutionary
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, experiments are being housed in online
tools that will allow graduate, undergraduate and K-12 students to run
evolutionary simulations passively on their own machines, as well as actively
participate in the process: they may design novel virtual environments in which
the robots must evolve. This active participation is intended to motivate
students to understand the physics, biology, engineering and computational
processes underlying evolution.