* 0953375
* CAREER: Educative Learning Progressions as Tools for Teacher Development (ELEvATE)
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Erin Furtak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 06/30/2017
* USD 687,627.00

The goal of this study is to produce an "existence proof" of how an educative
learning progression designed for high school biology teachers and their
students can be used to improve instruction, and as a consequence, improve
student outcomes. A learning progression consists of sequences of increasingly
sophisticated ideas intended as guides for curriculum and assessment development
for a particular science topic or "big idea". The study focuses on a learning
progression for student understanding of natural selection designed to be
educative; that is, to improve teachers' understanding of natural selection and
deepen their understanding of why it is difficult for students to learn. The
learning progression serves as a scaffold for teachers in inquiry-based settings
by helping them to anticipate not only the ideas that students have, but also
suggest instructional strategies tailored to these ideas. The PI would partner
with about 12 biology teachers in two high schools in diverse schools in a large
Colorado district to conduct this five-year research project on this educative
learning progression.

This study will be guided by three research questions: -How does engagement with
the learning progression impact teachers' ability to design instructional
experiences, as well as recognize and respond to student thinking? -How do
teachers' practices change over time through repeated use of the educative
learning progression? -How does teachers' engagement with the learning
progression impact student learning? This project focuses on 12 biology teachers
at two schools, and includes about 35 biology classes over five years with about
25 students per class, for a total of about 900 students. The project
establishes baseline data for teachers' instructional practice in Year 1, and
measures student learning with a pre-post assessment of students' natural
selection understanding for each class taught by each teacher. In the following
years, the study would track and measure changes in teachers' classroom
practices when teaching natural selection, using a multiple methods approach.
The goal is to see whether changes in teachers' instructional practices are
associated with changes in student learning about evolution. The study uses HLM
to model student growth for each year, and models growth for each teacher using
teacher content and instructional strategies codes to predict student outcomes.
A strong advisory board guides the evaluation of this research.

This study is important because of increasing interest in the development of
learning progressions as guides for the development of standards, assessments,
and curriculum and instruction. However, to date, there have been no close
studies of how a learning progression can serve as a guide for instruction or
how sustained professional development centered on a learning progression can
improve classroom practice and student learning outcomes. This study can inform
the field about how students learn natural selection, and how teachers may come
to teach it more effectively. Through these contributions, it will also provide
implications for the design of new curriculum materials and guidance for
focused, sophisticated, and effective professional development.