* 0953080
* CAREER:  Structural and Biochemical Studies of the Tiam1 GEF, a Paradigm for Understanding Modular Protein Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Ernesto Fuentes, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,077,835.00

The Rho-family of small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) proteins are essential
for many basic physiological processes, including cell differentiation,
division, chemotaxis, axonal development, and polarity. GTPases act as binary
"on/off" switches and control communication within a cell. Guanine nucleotide
exchange factors (GEFs) tightly control the active state of GTPases and
coordinate their function. However, the fundamental mechanisms for how GEF
proteins are regulated and how they direct GTPase signaling remain poorly
understood. This project is focused on Tiam1, a large, modular GEF that
specifically activates a GTPase (Rac1) that regulates cell polarity, adhesion,
and migration. Under normal conditions Tiam1 GEF inhibits its own activity by
protein-protein interactions and/or by phosphorylation. Upon activation, Tiam1
is capable of interacting with multiple protein targets and influencing many
cell processes. In this study a combination of structural, biophysical, and
biochemical approaches will be used to define the molecular basis of Tiam1 auto-
inhibition, its activation, and its signaling specificity. The basic concepts
learned from this project will enhance our understanding of signal transduction
and provide new insights into the coordinated regulation of modular signaling
proteins. In addition, this research will contribute to our understanding of
diverse fields including protein allostery and dynamics, and promote the
rational design of artificial scaffold proteins with desired regulatory features
and functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The major educational goal
of this CAREER project is to expose faculty and students from primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUI) to cutting-edge biophysics research. The PI
will conduct a yearly "Biophysics Workshop" to establish research and education
collaborations with PUI faculty throughout Iowa. These workshops will introduce
PUI faculty and their students to modern experimental biophysics and provide
access to the infrastructure necessary for them to expand their research
capabilities. In addition, the PI will design an "Honors Tutorial Series" to
introduce advanced high school and undergraduate students to web-based protein
and gene analysis tools to enhance their summer research experience. The
audience for this series will be drawn from ~100 high school and undergraduate
students that participate in summer research programs across campus, including
the SROP/McNair Scholars Program, Iowa Biosciences Advantage Program, Iowa First
Nations Summer Program, and Secondary Student Training Program for high school
students. Collectively, these activities will engage faculty and students,
including members of minorities under-represented in science, in advanced
biophysical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by
the Cellular Systems Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division
and the NSF EPSCoR Office