* 0953331
* CAREER:   An integrated study of the effects of nutrient additions on grassland soil microbial communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Noah Fierer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 654,624.00

Terrestrial ecosystems across the globe are receiving elevated inputs of
nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) due to human activities. The microbes that live
in soil are likely to respond to these elevated nutrient inputs and such
responses could have far-reaching effects on ecosystems given that soil microbes
play critical roles in the maintenance of ecosystem health and productivity.
However, how the overall structure and diversity of microbial communities may be
altered by nutrient additions, and whether microbial responses mirror plant
responses, are not yet known. To address these knowledge gaps, soils will be
collected from 35 grasslands throughout the world that have been receiving
standardized, experimental additions of N and P. The microbial and plant
responses to nutrient additions across these grasslands that represent a broad
range of soil and site characteristics will be compared to build a more
comprehensive understanding of microbial responses to nutrient additions than
would be possible by focusing on just a single site or a handful of sites. A
series of laboratory experiments to discern the specific mechanisms that may be
responsible for the microbial responses observed in the field will also be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is innovative in that it takes
advantage of recently-developed pyrosequencing methods and phylogeny-based
community analysis approaches to yield a far more comprehensive inquiry into
soil microbial responses to nutrient additions than any previous study. Results
of this study will lead to a predictive, mechanistic understanding of soil
microbial responses to changes in nutrient availability and it will improve
fundamental understanding of the factors structuring belowground microbial
communities in grassland ecosystems. Since grasslands are one of the most
widespread and productive ecosystem types on Earth, understanding how the
structure and function of grasslands may change in response to elevated loadings
of N and P from human activities (namely fossil fuel combustion and the use of
agricultural fertilizers) is of critical importance. Better understanding of how
microbes will respond to these nutrient inputs is needed because soil microbes
play key roles in the maintenance of soil fertility, the terrestrial carbon
cycle, and the overall health of ecosystems. The results, methods, and concepts
to be developed from this work will be communicated and investigated through
several key educational and outreach activities. (1) The initiation of a "hands-
on", 2-week summer training course for U.S. and international graduate students
focused on the use of molecular methods to assess soil microbial diversity. The
course will provide a comprehensive introduction to the tools and approaches
used to survey microbial biodiversity while fostering collaborations among the
next generation of researchers inside and outside of the United States. (2) The
development of a series of 'soil ecology' learning activities to introduce local
middle-school students participating in the after-school Math, Engineering, and
Science Achievement (MESA) program for students underrepresented in science and
technology careers to the diversity of belowground biota and the importance of
soil organisms in ecosystems. (3) The mentoring and training of graduate and
undergraduate students who will be directly involved in the research project
over the next 5 years.