* 0953165
* CAREER: Meeting Deadlines: Theories and Algorithms to Support Delay Constrained Communication in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2010,10/31/2012
* Lei Ying, Iowa State University
* Continuing grant
* Min Song
* 10/31/2012
* USD 248,000.00

Wireless technology has emerged as a low-cost and infrastructure-free method to
deploy communication networks and has inspired a wide range of applications such
as wireless mesh networks for public safety, wireless sensor networks for
unmanned surveillance, and vehicular networks for accident warnings. Many of
these applications require effective delay control for desired performance,
which, however, is one of the most difficult problems in wireless network design
due to the inherent weaknesses of wireless communication such as limited
bandwidth, channel fading, and interference.

In the past few years, a major breakthrough in wireless network research has
been to harness the power of optimization theory and stochastic network theory
for network design. These advances, however, shed little light on communication
latency (or delay) because the focus is almost exclusively on the long-term
throughput. This project takes a bold step to break away from today's
throughput-first mentality, and embraces a delay-oriented approach where delay
is a primary design objective, not a byproduct of throughput-oriented designs.

The expected results of this project include: (i) new network theories that
quantify fundamental delay and throughput limits of wireless networks; (ii)
transformative algorithms (functionalities spanning multiple network layers and
their interactions) that are optimized for communications requiring delay
guarantees; and (iii) distributed and low-complexity implementations.
Theoretically, this project will lead to a union of stochastic analysis and
optimization for quality of service control in wireless networks. Practically,
this project will produce transformative algorithms for supporting delay
constrained applications.