* 0953390
* CAREER:  Working with student scientists to understand global patterns in the present and future ecological consequences of ants
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Robert Dunn, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2015
* USD 709,974.00

Understanding the distribution of species and the processes they mediate is a
major focus of ecology. Yet no studies model the consequences of ecologically
important animal groups across the globe. In part, the difficulty stems from the
fact that the best-studied groups globally (i.e., birds, mammals), are also
among the most difficult ones to study in terms of their ecological effects.
Because dominant insect groups such as ants have large, direct ecological
effects, processes mediated by insects are easier to study. But studies of these
effects have been limited by the lack of global data on insect assemblages,
geographic ranges and diversity patterns. Taking advantage of a global network
of collaborators and a student scientist outreach program, the proposed work
will investigate the climatic drivers of the diversity and abundance of
different functional groups of ants (e.g., predators, herbivores or generalist
foragers) at global and local scales and develop global models of rates and
dynamics of the impact of ants based on field data. These impacts will include
predation, nectar and other sugar consumption, seed consumption, and seed
dispersal by ants. It will then examine whether changes in temperature, due to
experimental warming in outdoor arrays, influence ant functional effects as
expected based on global models. Finally, a synthetic model of global patterns
in ecological functions mediated by ants will be developed and used to project
changes in those functions under climate change scenarios. This proposed
research program tests these and other scenarios and then uses the results of
the tests to develop synthetic models of the effects of ant communities (and
changes in ant communities) on plant and animal communities both today and in
the context of global change.

Course modules will be developed for 7-12th graders in the US (in schools
predominately serving minorities) and around the world that teach participants
about climate change, insects, and biogeography. All learning modules will be
made available online so that any student scientist that wishes can participate
in the project. In addition, this project will involve undergraduate, graduate
students and postdocs in every component, including interactions with the
younger students. All data will be posted on our existing 'global ants' website
(http://www.antmacroecology.org/) and permanently archived in the Harvard Forest
Archives (http://harvardforest.fas.harvard.edu).