* 0954895
* CAREER: Extragalactic Astronomy with the High Altitude Water Cherenkov Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Tyce DeYoung, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 02/28/2015
* USD 774,087.00

This award supports the PI in his development of the HAWC (High Altitude Water
Cherenkov detector) data systems and online data processing, and his leading
role in the analysis of HAWC data. This analysis will include searching for VHE
(very high energy) emission from GRBs (gamma ray bursters) and developing a
multiparticle analysis of AGN (active galactic nuclei) emission by combining
HAWC observations with IceCube, Fermi, Swift, and RXTE data. HAWC will have a
sensitivity 10 -15 times greater than previous instruments exploring VHE cosmic
rays. The source of these cosmic rays remains unclear but possible candidates
for these are AGNs and GRBs. HAWC is modular in design and data taking will
begin when the first modules are commissioned. The PI will also use what is
learned by HAWC to tailor a search for neutrinos with the IceCube array.

HAWC is planned to be built in Sierra Negra Mexico, which will lead to strong
international collaborations between scientists from the US, Mexico, and other
countries. In addition to mentoring graduate students and postdocs, the PI will
enhance Penn State's Upward Bound Math and Science Program for students from
urban Pennsylvania schools who attend a summer program at the university.

This award is supported by the Physics Division and the Office of International
Science and Engineering of the National Science Foundation.