* 0954450
* CAREER: Loop engineering of protein surfaces for tunable self-association and phase behavior
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Peter Tessier, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/29/2016
* USD 438,095.00

0954450&lt;br/&gt;Tessier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antibodies represent an
increasingly important class of molecules to treat human disease. There is
significant interest in controlling the phase behavior of these macromolecules,
ranging from preventing their condensation (in high concentration therapeutic
formulations) to promoting it (for protein crystallization). The objective of
this project is to elucidate how antibody self-association and phase behavior
can be modulated in a systematic manner through alteration of solvent exposed
loops on antibody surfaces. Importantly, little is known about how solvent
exposed residues impact protein selfassociation and phase behavior, which we
argue is due to: i) the lack of relevant homologous protein libraries with
sequence variations only on their surface; ii) the inability to introduce
significant, systematic alterations to protein surfaces without disrupting their
folded structure; and iii) the difficulty in measuring protein self interactions
in a reliable and rapid manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In this
project it is postulated that solvent-exposed peptide loops (5-20 residues) on
the surface of small antibodies (12 kD) can be engineered to regulate the self-
association and phase behavior of both natively and non-natively folded
antibodies, and that these loops can be used to control the corresponding
solution behavior of unrelated proteins via loop grafting. Moreover, it is
postulated that small antibodies with well-defined surface loops are attractive
model proteins for such studies since they are highly tolerant to large changes
in loop size and composition without altering their folding stability.
Therefore, to test these hypotheses, the investigators propose four Specific
Aims that build on our unique strengths in biophysical analysis of protein
solution thermodynamics, colloidal and interface science, and molecular biology
and biochemistry. In Specific Aim 1, it is planned to investigate the impact of
sequence variations (hydrophobicity, charge, length and flexibility) in a single
solvent exposed antibody loop on native antibody self association (in terms of
the osmotic second virial coefficient) and phase behavior. Next, in Specific Aim
2, they propose to elucidate the mechanisms by which antibody loops studied in
Aim 1 influence native antibody self-interactions, and to determine if a subset
of these loop sequences are capable of regulating the corresponding
thermodynamic behavior of unrelated proteins via loop grafting. Then, in
Specific Aim 3, they propose to ascertain if the unique non-native solubilities
(after transient heat treatment) of antibody variants studied in Aims 1 and 2
(which differ only in their loop sequences) can be linked to measurements of
their native protein self interactions, akin to the "crystallization slot"
concept that links attractive protein self interactions to low solubility (and
increased likelihood of protein crystallization) of natively folded proteins.
Finally, in Specific Aim 4, they propose to elucidate how an antibody closely
related to those studied in Aims 1-3 that is aggregation prone (in both its
native and nonnative states) can be engineered to be aggregation resistant with
minimal sequence alteration through comprehensive mutational and self-
interaction analysis of the contribution of each loop residue to the undesirable
antibody self-association behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project, deeply rooted in molecular thermodynamics and interfacial engineering
science, has broad implications for preventing disease-associated protein
aggregation, making potentially more stable therapeutic proteins, and
manipulating assembly of protein crystals. In terms of education, the PIs are
committed to modernizing their curricula at Rensselaer by introducing
undergraduate and graduate students to molecular-level concepts through a new
course (Biomolecular Engineering) and laboratory
experiment&lt;br/&gt;(crystallization). They are also committed to strong
outreach to underrepresented minorities and other disadvantaged peoples through
two efforts: i) a 4th grade science outreach program in an elementary school
with a significant fraction of reduced lunch (~80%) and African American (~40%)
students focused on molecules using animated cartoons and hands-on activities to
interest these students in science at an early age; and ii) a 12th grade
outreach program to diverse students from rural towns in New York's Capital
District lacking advanced science courses that involves these students in the
process of discovery and development of a therapeutic antibody to encourage them
to pursue biomolecular aspects of science and engineering during their
undergraduate and graduate education.