* 0954126
* CAREER: Robust Design and Control of Parallel Server Systems: Analysis via Augmented Fluid Models and Heavy-Traffic Asymptotic Regimes
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Tolga Tezcan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* michael fu
* 03/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to identify effective control policies and build new theoretical tools for
the analysis of these and other commonly used policies in complex systems
operating under demand uncertainty. The research consists of two main parts. In
the first part, a new framework, referred to as augmented fluid models, will be
established to study the stability of commonly used control policies such as
static priority policies and queue length based policies. Augmented fluid models
enable one to establish the stability of such systems using much simpler
deterministic fluid models and they extend the application domain of traditional
fluid models. In the second part of the research, the focus will be on joint
determination of capacity and control of queueing systems facing demand-rate
uncertainty with the objective of providing a desired level of quality of
service. New control policies will be developed that do not require any arrival-
rate information and that do not use any explicit statistical learning when
making scheduling decisions. Effectiveness of the proposed policies will be
established using a many-server asymptotic analysis.

If successful, this project will provide explicit solutions for the stability
region of commonly used policies in practice. This will in turn improve the
design of systems arising in modern service, manufacturing and communication
networks. The resulting policies have the potential to be applied in a variety
of applications facing time-dependent and random arrival rates as well as in
those applications that may become overloaded. Applications in service systems
and communications networks will result in effective use and distribution of
available resources on a real time basis among users with different
characteristics. The findings of this research will be integrated into
undergraduate and graduate courses. Contemporary applications, especially from
service systems, will be incorporated into teaching activities via
collaborations with companies from the industry.