* 0954578
* CAREER: Multiplex microfluidic and automation tools for neurogenetics and live imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Hang Lu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,518.00

0954578 Lu

The long-term objective is to develop and use powerful microfluidic and
automation tools to understand genetic pathways that regulate the biochemical
communications between neurons and other tissues in C. elegans. Microfluidics is
ideal for studies of small organisms such as C. elegans because of the relevant
length scales and the possibility of integration and automation. The research
objective of the CAREER project is to engineer a microfluidic system for live
imaging of dynamic processes in vivo, to accomplish automated image processing,
and to identify roles of genes in neuronal biochemical communications.This
system will significantly increase the throughput and accuracy of in vivo live
imaging experiments in model organisms. It streamlines and automates the
painstakingly manual procedure of microscopy, in some cases enables some
experiments that are otherwise impossible to do, and reduces the noise and
artifacts in these experiments. The image analysis algorithms will provide
quantitative data with large throughput to allow good statistics. The approach
is innovative because the technologies developed here dramatically increase the
capabilities and throughput of current assay tools, enabling key biological
experiments that are not currently performed. Furthermore, the technology is
broadly applicable to other biological systems and could potentially lead to new
therapeutics for related diseases.