* 0954891
* Research Coordination Network for Haemosporida of Terrestrial Vertebrates: A Model Parasite-Host System
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Robert Ricklefs, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2016
* USD 499,998.00

Haemosporida, malaria blood parasites, are diverse and widespread and are major
parasites and pathogens of birds, reptiles, and mammals, including humans and
domestic animals. Despite their ecological, evolutionary, and public health
importance, these parasites, their distribution, and their evolutionary biology
are poorly known, in large part owing to the dearth of trained investigators
familiar with the molecular techniques required to identify infections in wild
populations. Additionally, Haemosporida form a model group for study of host-
specificity of disease organisms and the emergence of novel diseases through
such mechanisms as host-switching.

This Research Coordination Network (RCN) will improve understanding of malaria
blood parasites, and of the disease risks they entail, through an integrated set
of actions. The RCN will establish and operate a website to provide information,
sources of data, and tools for parasite identification, and will contribute to
advancing ability to classify these single-celled blood parasites that are known
primarily from DNA sequences obtained from the blood of infected hosts. A major
feature of the RCN will be the establishment of one-week summer schools with
intensive training for young investigators, particularly from developing
countries, in the techniques of working with malaria parasites, from collecting
blood samples in the field to the molecular lab techniques for obtaining DNA
sequence data and using the analytical tools to interpret their findings. The
Network will be completely open to interested individuals and will serve as a
forum for promoting research and collaboration on these model disease organisms.