* 0954819
* CAREER: Promoting Chemical Biology Education and Research: Understanding Molecular Recognition in Membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Hang Yin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2016
* USD 648,798.00

This award in the Chemistry of Life Processes program of the Chemistry Division
is co-funded by the Biomolecular Systems Cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences. The award supports work by Dr. Hang (Hubert) Yin at
the University of Colorado at Boulder to carry out fundamental studies on
understanding the molecular recognition in cellular membranes and to establish a
solid foundation for an integrative chemical biology educational program in the
Front Range region. Integral membrane proteins regulate pivotal biological
processes through their transmembrane domains. But molecular recognition in the
cellular membrane is little understood due to the lack of available probes with
high affinity and specificity. Dr. Yin's group aims to develop a generally
applicable method to probe molecular recognition in representative membrane
protein systems (e.g. Escherichia coli aspartate receptor, Tar). The pedagogic
activities involve establishing an infrastructure for a progressive, integrative
chemical biology program that empowers diverse groups of students, researchers
and educators. Collaboration with local high schools will be carried out,
promoting chemical biology and biotechnology interest in the youth. Another
major focus of our integrative research and education program is on promoting
under-represented minority groups in science within the Boulder population. This
work will positively impact scientific advancements and the local community by:
(1) expanding the fundamental understanding of molecular recognition in cellular
membranes; (2) shedding light on the poorly understood mechanisms of signal
transduction across membranes, and (3) integrating research, teaching, and
outreach activities at the University of Colorado at Boulder.