* 0954125
* CAREER: Graph Information System: Deciphering Complex Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2018
* Xifeng Yan, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 03/31/2018
* USD 495,536.00

Graphs and networks are ubiquitous, encoding complex relationships
&lt;br/&gt;ranging from chemical bonds to social interactions. Hidden in
these&lt;br/&gt;networks are the answers to many important questions in
biology,&lt;br/&gt;business, and sociology. In order to analyze complex
networks, users &lt;br/&gt;have to master sophisticated computing and
programming skills. It &lt;br/&gt;indeed becomes a pain point for many
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to change the
state of the art by developing a &lt;br/&gt;general graph information system,
which is able to address the needs &lt;br/&gt;of searching and mining complex
networks. Real-life networks are &lt;br/&gt;complex, not only having topological
structures, but also containing &lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous contents and attributes
associated with nodes and &lt;br/&gt;edges. The mixture of structures and
contents raises two challenges &lt;br/&gt;that require new solutions for smarter
and faster graph analysis. &lt;br/&gt;First, new types of graph search and
mining operations, such as graph &lt;br/&gt;aggregation, graph association, and
graph pattern mining, are &lt;br/&gt;emerging. Second, when graphs become
complex and large, most of &lt;br/&gt;existing graph mining algorithms cannot
scale well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses these challenges and
performs a &lt;br/&gt;comprehensive study of a general graph information system.
&lt;br/&gt;The system includes three major components: complex graph search,
&lt;br/&gt;graph pattern mining, and graph indexing. &lt;br/&gt;It covers
emerging structure queries in social, &lt;br/&gt;biological, and information
networks, new graph mining operators &lt;br/&gt;such as graph summarization and
association, and innovative indexing&lt;br/&gt;methodologies, e.g., differential
graph index.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is tightly integrated with
education through student &lt;br/&gt;mentoring and curriculum development.
Publications, software and &lt;br/&gt;course materials resulted from this
project are disseminated on the &lt;br/&gt;project website:
http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~xyan/gis.html.