* 0954570
* CAREER:Deciphering the Neural Code From Perception To Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2015
* Gabriel Kreiman, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 04/30/2015
* USD 503,398.00

Human beings can recognize objects in a highly selective, robust and fast
manner. One of the remarkable properties of our recognition machinery is the
possibility to selectively recognize objects even after transformations such as
rotation, translation, scaling, occlusion and clutter. How the human brain
accomplishes recognition is not well understood. More is known about processing
of sensory information from receptors to the initial stages in cortex than about
the subsequent transformation of perceptual data into cognition. In parallel,
over the last decades, major progress has been made in building ever more
accurate and sophisticated computers and devices to capture sensory information
but progress has been slower in terms of developing algorithms and hardware to
automatically interpret the sensory data. With support from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Gabriel Krieman is undertaking research whose aim is to
elucidate the computational steps and algorithms implemented by the cerebral
cortex to transform incoming inputs into cognitive functions and behavior. The
research focuses on one particular aspect of cognitive experience, the neuronal
mechanisms and circuits that underlie visual processing. While vision is only
one of many aspects of cognition, lessons learnt from studying visual cortex can
also eventually help describe other aspects of cortical function and can pave
the way for research on other challenging aspects of cognition. To investigate
visual cognition, Dr. Kreiman takes advantage of a rare opportunity to both
stimulate and record electrical activity at high spatial and temporal resolution
directly from the human brain in epilepsy patients. The study investigates tasks
where visual cognition is dissociated from the incoming sensory processing in
order to isolate the cognitive operations involved in recognition. The
discoveries about the function of biological neural circuits will be applied to
develop biophysically-inspired robust machine vision algorithms.

Visual recognition is essential for most everyday tasks including navigating,
reading, and identifying objects, faces and emotions. By furthering our
understanding of the transformation of perceptual information into cognition,
the study is contributing to two broad goals: (1) Helping to alleviate the
challenging conditions that involve cognitive disorders through the development
of brain-machine interfaces; and (2) Applying knowledge about neuronal circuits
to develop computational algorithms to extract cognitive information from
sensory data. Building a fast, robust and reliable artificial vision system
would have profound repercussions in many areas of science and engineering
including pattern recognition, surveillance and security, automatic navigation,
clinical image analysis and others. These scientific and engineering advances
could in turn translate into important real-world applications of interest for
industrial partnerships. Dr. Kreiman pursues these goals by studying the best
possible system that can solve visual recognition challenges, the human brain.
Understanding the visual system relies on many skills ranging from computer
science to engineering to physics to neuroscience to psychology. The project
serves well to train a generation of multidisciplinary students who can build on
the fundamental science knowledge and apply this knowledge to challenging
biological problems.