* 0954274
* CAREER: Characterizing reproductive isolation within the Hawaiian Metrosideros species complex
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Elizabeth Stacy, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2016
* USD 750,029.00

The origin of species remains an especially difficult problem in biology because
the processes through which reproductive barriers arise between diverging
populations remain poorly understood. This project will advance understanding of
the origins of diverse tropical plant taxa through study of the nature of
reproductive barriers in Metrosideros, a highly diverse genus of tropical forest
trees that vary in their degree of divergence and isolation. This project will
integrate molecular genetic methods and field experiments to determine the
nature and degree of pre- and post-zygotic barriers to hybridization between co-
occurring taxa at sites that vary in rates of natural hybridization. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide insight into the speciation process in
long-lived forest trees, a group that is responsible, directly or indirectly,
for much of the high diversity of tropical forest ecosystems. This CAREER
project integrates research and education to promote scientific literacy and
skills at all levels of the education pipeline in one of the most culturally
diverse regions of the U.S. The project will engage students from
underrepresented groups in the STEM pipeline, which will broaden the career
choices for these individuals while helping to advance the diversity of the
science and technology workforce. The project includes development of graduate
and undergraduate courses that include authentic research experiences, mentoring
of undergraduate and graduate students, and outreach to K-12 teachers and
students.