* 0954999
* CAREER: Towards Reliable Hybrid CMOS/Nanoelectronics On-Chip Interconnection Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Paul Ampadu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to investigate and create run-time adaptive
error control methods for hybrid CMOS/nanoelectronics networks-on-chip. The
approach is to exploit dynamic cooperation among layers in the on-chip network
protocol stack, in order to adapt the error control to changing noise
environments and achieve the required quality-of-
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research addresses the
critical reliability problem of integrating deep nanometer CMOS and emerging
nanoelectronics processing and storage elements on a single chip. These
dissimilar cores communicate with one another over closely spaced unreliable
interconnect links, requiring effective error control methods to improve link
reliability at moderate energy and performance costs. The research will (i)
investigate, analyze, and construct run-time adaptive cooperative error control
methods that adjust the error control to channel conditions for average-case,
rather than worst-case energy performance; (ii) develop models that accurately
capture realistic traffic and system behaviors of these unique hybrid networks-
on-chip; and (iii) demonstrate a reliable heterogeneous network-on-chip
prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will accelerate
realization of reliable low-cost energy-efficient heterogeneous systems-on-chip,
potentially leading to societal and economic breakthroughs in biology,
computing, communications, defense, and infrastructure monitoring. Knowledge
acquired will be disseminated via workshops, lectures, and a public website.
Further, the research will support development of a new course and the first
textbook on the subject. Through the PI's already established community
engagement and mentoring, this research will be used to inspire, recruit, and
retain underrepresented students in engineering. Finally, ongoing international
collaborations will enhance the research and global perspectives of US student
participants.