* 0954656
* CAREER:  Electroplate and Lift Lithography: Easily Making Patterned Nanowires Using Non-Sacrificial Templates
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Michael Zach, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2015
* USD 401,442.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop a new paradigm for nanomanufacturing called electroplate and lift
lithography. Alternating thin layers of electrically insulating and conducting
(un-doped and nitrogen-doped) ultrananocrystalline diamond make electrode
templates for nanowires. The conductive diamond is almost entirely concealed
within the insulating layers. Conductive layers are exposed only at the edges of
holes etched through the multilayer electrodes. The thinness of the conductive
layer limits where metals can be electroplated. The precision nanowire patterns
are dictated by shaped holes that are etched through the diamond. Diamond's
extreme durability, hardness, low adhesion to most materials and chemical
inertness allow many deposits to be lifted away in a polymer film. Lifting away
the wires also strips any contamination, eliminating the need for a clean room
manufacturing environment.

This project is important because it provides a new method for nanomanufacturing
complex patterns from almost any material utilizing only the electrodes and
simple equipment. When fully developed, this technique should enable the bulk
quantity manufacturing of complex nanowire circuits with multiple materials. It
will shorten the manufacturing time from many hours or days to minutes between
duplicate copies. The templates are reusable and it is a low energy process;
thus, it considerably improves the environmental friendliness for
nanomanufacturing. This development is being done at an undergraduate-only
institution with the help of national laboratory facilities. It educates and
inspires undergraduates who would otherwise not be exposed to high-tech,
cutting-edge manufacturing.