* 0954037
* CAREER: Embedded DSP with Underwater Renewable Energy: Towards Sustainability for Cyber-Aquatic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Lei Wang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 502,919.00

Dedicated digital signal processing (DSP) is a key technology for a diversity of
embedded applications. Recently, underwater autonomous distributed systems have
received growing interest in aquatic observation and exploration. These systems
pose significant challenges for sustainable signal processing due to the high
communication cost and new constraints on energy supply in the harsh underwater
environment. The relatively mature and predictable energy harvesting techniques
are either not applicable in the underwater environment or do not offer
sufficient capabilities. This raises dual challenges to the design of dedicated
DSP for cyber-aquatic systems with respect to what alternative energy sources
are available and how to effectively and reliably utilize renewable
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project seeks to overcome these
challenges arising at the cyber-aquatic interface. The goal is to develop a new
DSP design framework that allows dynamic tuning of system complexity/performance
and energy-efficiency levels in adaptation with renewable underwater energy
sources. The results from this research will enable sustainable cyber-aquatic
systems that have great potential for innovations but have remained largely
unexplored so far. Design tools and optimization methods developed from this
project can be applied to a wide range of embedded applications powered by
various energy sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component of this
project seeks to strengthen interdisciplinary education through a dynamic
curriculum that builds on this research project. Through industry collaboration
and outreach programs at UConn, this project will offer research opportunities
to students especially women and underrepresented minority students, and enhance
engineering awareness and interests among high-school students.