* 0954361
* CAREER:  Dynamics and Control of Motion Coordination for Information Transmission in Groups
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Derek Paley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 03/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The long-term goal of this CAREER project is to improve our understanding of
information transmission in biological groups and apply this understanding to
synthesize bio-inspired motion- coordination algorithms for autonomous vehicles.
How do schooling fish respond collectively to an external stimulus that is
perceived by only a few individuals? How might we enable a fleet of autonomous
vehicles to coordinate their movement using only sensory perception? In pursuit
of this goal, the research objectives are (1) to use tools from estimation
theory and computer vision to perform quantitative analysis of collective
behavior in schooling fish; (2) to conduct laboratory experiments to test the
hypothesis that schooling fish use motion coordination to amplify external
signals and attenuate noise; (3) to construct an analytical modeling framework
for information transfer in a kinetic interaction network; and (4) to synthesize
bio-inspired motion-coordination algorithms using nonlinear-control
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term educational goal of the PI is to
cultivate an engaging environment for creative, rigorous application of dynamics
and control theory that propels a diverse population of students to pursue STEM
education and careers. In pursuit of this goal, the educational objectives are
(1) to conduct K-12 outreach activities that broaden the STEM participation of
minorities and women; (2) to pioneer a K-12 outreach framework that uses the
topic of collective behavior in fish to create a partnership with a middle-
school educator; and (3) to provide research experiences for aerospace
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and
importance of the proposed research activities lie in the promise of improved
understanding of collective behavior in biological groups and improved capacity
to model and synthesize collective motion in engineered networks. Improved tools
for tracking biological aggregations can be used to understand mosquito swarms
in malarial regions; to monitor the role of krill swarms in carbon
sequestration; and to assess the impact of bacterial aggregations on human
disease processes. Research in biologically inspired coordination of unmanned
systems has applications in the inspection of aging civil infrastructure;
improved forecasts of hurricane intensity; and environmental monitoring of
climate variability. It is not presently understood what motion coordination
strategies yield fast and accurate information transmission in biological
systems because sufficient data to quantitatively analyze and model three-
dimensional motion in large groups are not available. The proposed fish-tracking
research will yield new tools for automated, three-dimensional trajectory
reconstruction of the position, orientation, and shape of individual fish in a
high-density school.