* 0954507
* CAREER: Reaction dynamics study of biomolecular ions with electronically excited singlet molecular oxygen using guided-ion-beam scattering and direct dynamics trajectory methods
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2017
* Jianbo Liu, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2017
* USD 589,287.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jianbo Liu and his research
group at the Queens College of the City University of New York will study the
reaction of biomolecules such as amino acids and dipeptides with a reactive
oxygen species called singlet molecular oxygen (^1 O2). Singlet O2 is generated
in nature from normal oxygen molecules in the presence of visible/ultraviolet
light from the sun. The reaction of biomolecules with singlet O2 is not only
interesting from the standpoint of chemical reaction dynamics, but is also an
important topic because of connections to biological processes such as aging and
diseases (e.g. cataracts and some skin cancers), as well as photodynamic therapy
for cancer and photochemical transformations of biological species in the
atmosphere and oceans. Professor Liu and his team will conduct a systematic
study of the reaction of biomolecules with singlet O2, aimed at achieving a
molecular level understanding of the reaction mechanism and reaction
kinetics/dynamics. The experimental systems range from isolated biomolecules in
the gas phase in the absence of water, through gas-phase hydrated biomolecules
with a few water molecules attached, to biomolecules in liquid water. The
experimental techniques employed include guided-ion-beam scattering and
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. Since the photosensitization method
for producing singlet O2 often produces ozone and other undesirable species that
complicate the results, Professor Liu's laboratory will employ a chemical
technique to generate pure singlet O2 for reactions with biomolecules. The
experimental work will be complemented by theoretical calculations, including ab
initio electronic structure calculations and direct dynamics trajectory
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Liu's research program will train
not only graduate and senior undergraduate students at CUNY, but will also
involve high school students through his participation in the Queensborough
Bridge Program and MARC-U*STAR Program, which engage community college students
and minority students in science. Also, in coordination with the CUNY pre-
college summer research program, students from local high schools will work in
the Liu laboratory, and their results will be translated into competitive
science fair research projects. This research program is also integrated into
Professor Liu's formal course teaching. He will use his research equipment to
develop new experiments (e.g., simulations of ion trajectories, and collision-
induced dissociation of molecules) in Physical Chemistry and Instrumental
Analysis Laboratories.