* 0954966
* CAREER:  Human-Inspired Safety-Preserved Agile Vehicle Maneuvers
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Jingang Yi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 03/31/2016
* USD 428,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to fundamentally understand human expert driving skills and the human-
machine-environment (HME) interaction, and to design new human-inspired control
of agile maneuvers for enabling the next-generation active vehicle safety
technology. The proposed research is inspired by extremely agile human driving
skills (e.g., professional racing car drivers and motorcycle riders) for
handling and recovering unstable vehicle motion in emergencies, such as high-
speed obstacle avoidance and skidding on icy roads. This CAREER project will
develop new modeling and control strategies for agile-maneuvering systems,
including (1) a human-driving skill-capturing framework through modeling HME
dynamic interactions; (2) a new control system design for handling transient
unstable vehicle motion with guaranteed-safety; (3) a new sensor-enabled
tire/road interaction modeling framework for real-time predicting vehicle safety
limits; and (4) experimentally testing and validation of the proposed modeling
and control framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will result in
significant contributions, both theoretical as well as practical, in bio-
inspired control of dynamic systems. The success of this CAREER project will
provide new HME formulations and models, novel control strategies for tracking
unstable target HME dynamics with guaranteed transient motion performance, new
sensor-enabled adaptation techniques and new sensing mechanisms and models for
dynamic interactions between deformable and rigid components in mechanical
systems (e.g., tire/road interaction). One of the direct project outcomes is to
advance active safety technology for the next-generation of ?accident-free?
vehicles. The project will use online virtual driving environment development
and the project website to disseminate the research outcomes, designs, models,
source codes, experimental data, and documentation to the general public. In
addition, the educational objectives of the project include developing a number
of integrated research and education programs to attract students from
underrepresented groups into engineering fields, such as active participation in
the Rutgers TARGET and SUPER programs, involve undergraduate students into the
research activities, and participate in international collaborations for global
graduate education.