* 0954020
* CAREER: EASE: Enhancing the Security of Pervasive Wireless Networks by Exploiting Location
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Yingying Chen, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 02/29/2016
* USD 504,791.00

Wireless systems have become an inseparable part of our social fabric, which
allow users to move around and access the services from different locations
while on the move. However, wireless security is often cited as a major
technical barrier that must be overcome before widespread adoption of mobile
services can occur. Traditional approaches have focused on addressing security
threats on a case-by-case basis in an ad-hoc manner as new and specialized
threats are uncovered. Furthermore, as wireless networks become increasingly
pervasive, the ubiquity of wireless is redefining security challenges (e.g.,
attacks can be conducted by new and rapidly evolving adversaries with little
effort). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to build location-oriented
information into any wireless network stack and serve as a promising new
dimension across different layers to complement conventional security solutions
and enhance wireless security. A suite of location-enabled techniques are
integrated into wireless network stacks as a true partner to cope with attacks
and collaboratively defend against adversaries. The solutions are developed
generic enough to apply across heterogeneous mixes of wireless technologies
through the interaction with industry collaborators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project results are expected to assist conventional
security methods and advance our knowledge in exploring generic security
approaches across a wide-range of wireless technologies, which will contribute
significantly to the successful deployment and adoption of emerging wireless
services. The project also strengthens the education and research of
undergraduate and graduate students in related areas of wireless networks and
security, and helps to prepare students to face the challenges of future
information technology.