* 0954202
* CAREER:  3D Optoelectronic Devices Fabricated via 2-Color Photo-inhibition/initiation Lithography
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Robert McLeod, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 01/31/2015
* USD 480,932.00

Objective Traditional photolithography begins with single-photon absorption of
patterned light by a photo-initiator to locally expose a resist. In two-color
photo-inhibition/initiation (2PII) lithography, these exposed regions are
confined by a surrounding pattern of inhibitors generated by one-photon
absorption of a second color in a photo-inhibitor. The specific research goal of
this proposal is to test the conjecture that the resolution limit of 2PII
lithography is enforced by inhibitor diffusion. This will be accomplished by
incorporating the 2PII chemistry into thick, solid resists which self-develop
index structures in response to 3D direct-write lithography. The resulting
solid, photo-patternable materials are foundations for 3D optoelectronic devices
in the areas of silicon photonics packaging and high-performance data storage.

Intellectual Merit The current generations of both semiconductor lithography and
optical data storage are at the technological limits of resolution. Although
these applications are at opposite ends of the cost spectrum, both industries
share an uncertain future in the face of the diffraction limit. By combining 3D
resolution superior to existing nonlinear absorption methods with the high
sensitivity of photo-resist, the proposed lithography method has the potential
to transform optoelectronic micro- and nano-fabrication across a broad spectrum
of technologies.

Broader Impact The research will be integrated into education via the
development of an undergraduate optics sequence featuring senior-level design,
fabrication and test of 3D optoelectronic and nanophotonic circuitry via
software-controlled lithography and self-developing materials. This sequence
will be founded on teaching methods featuring design as the core skill of
engineering