* 0954186
* CAREER: Electrochemically Active Biofilms
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Haluk Beyenal, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 402,071.00

Beyenal, Haluk Washington State University CAREER:Electrochemically Active
Biofilms 0954186

Electrochemically active biofilms (ECABs) where microorganisms are grown through
the direct electrochemical stimulation via electrodes, as opposed to being
exposed to chemicals that serve as electron donors and acceptors, are widely
used in bioremediation, wastewater treatment, biofuel and biochemical
production, microbial fuel cells, corrosion studies, and in sensor development.
The electron transfer processes between biofilm cells and the solid electrodes,
however, are poorly understood. This research quantifies redox-mediated electron
transfer rates with the goal of determining fundamental scientific
understandings of how to stimulate or, depending on the application, limit
electrochemically-induced cell growth rates and/or product formation. The work
will also create a quantitative, mechanism-based, mathematical model that can be
used to predict rates of biofilm cell growth and product formation using
electrochemical, diffusion-reaction, and genome-scale constraint-based models to
predict electron transfer rates and their impact on microbial metabolic
processes. Research will involve experiments with three model organisms:
Geobactor sulfurreducens, Zymonmonas mobilis, and Acinetoobater baumanii.
Experiments will be carried out in flat-plate reactors and constant-depth film
fermentors. Critical aqueous phase characteristics and electron transfer rates
will be measured using innovative voltammetric techniques, microsensors that can
measure local chemistry, and the electrochemical activities of the biofilms.
Biofilm structure will be examined via confocal scanning laser microscopy.
Broader impacts of the work are far-reaching and include potential societal and
economic implications related to microbial fuel cells, biofuels, bioremediation,
and biomedical applications. The project will produce the first mathematical
model for predicting electron transfer rates and their correlation to microbial
metabolic reactions, which can be used to predict metabolic reactions and cell
growth and biofilm production rates. In addition, the project demonstrates the
strong integration of education and research that includes creation of a novel,
hands-on, microbial fuel cell education module for college undergraduates and
another for high school students. High school teachers and students from schools
in Idaho and Washington State with high Hispanic and Native American enrollments
will be engaged in the project to try and broaden participation of minority
students in STEM fields.