* 0954541
* CAREER:  Engineering Meta-magnetic Shape Memory Alloys as the Future Generation of High Performance Magnetic Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Haluk Karaca, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 05/31/2016
* USD 418,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to study the fundamental properties of meta-magnetic shape memory alloys
(SMAs) to establish composition, microstructure and property relationship and to
engineer the microstructure through thermo-mechanical treatments to result in
magnetic actuators with high stress output. Meta-magnetic SMAs are a new class
of smart materials where their actuation mechanism is based on field-induced
phase transformation which results in one order of magnitude greater actuation
strain than magnetostrictive materials and one order of magnitude higher
actuation stress than well known NiMnGa magnetic SMAs, comparable to those of
conventional SMAs. A deeper understanding of meta-magnetic SMA behavior will be
gained by a systematic study of the effects of composition, crystal orientation,
magneto-thermo-mechanical treatments and stress state on shape memory and
magnetic properties including superelasticity, shape memory effect,
transformation temperatures, hysteresis, Curie temperature, and saturation
magnetization of transforming phases.

If successful, this research will enable the fabrication of a new generation of
magnetic actuators at various scales that will provide an alternative to the
existing solid-state actuator technology which in turn will benefit the economic
development of our society. These actuators are expected to result in high
actuation stress (>30 MPa/Tesla), high actuation strain (2-4%), and to operate
at medium frequencies (<10 kHz) under low magnetic fields (< 2 Tesla). An
integrated research and educational program will be built on strong foundations
by bridging mechanics and materials science communities, through the use of
smart materials in particular, to expose undergraduate students to
multidisciplinary research early in their academic careers. Educating,
empowering and exciting "front-line" middle and high school teachers by
involving them in projects on smart materials through collaborations with well-
established local outreach programs available at University of Kentucky will
attract a large number of under-represented and economically-challenged students
to pursue their future careers in engineering.