* 0954048
* EAGER:   Creative IT:   Hyper Drama Storytelling: Engaging and Nurturing Creativity in K-12 Students
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Francis Quek, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 298,053.00

This research explores the concept of grounded imagination where creativity is
grounded in knowledge and informed by experience. How might one nurture and
cultivate such grounded imagination in K-12 students? To address this question,
this project will develop and deploy a storytelling system for authoring and
interacting with hyper-dramas. It incorporates the theory advanced by Lev
Vygotsky, that creativity involves a process of combinatory imagination by which
an individual creates new things for herself from elements of prior experience
encoded in everyday concepts and new culturally transmitted information. This
situates creativity within two developmental streams: intellectual development
(acquiring grounding in the form of knowledge and experience), and the process
of flexible re-combination. The aspect of social-cultural engagement suggests
that creativity is a discourse with the larger culture and society. Drawing from
this theoretical foundation, this project explores whether the creativity trough
(decline in creativity from the 4th grade through middle school) may occur
because social-cultural awareness precedes intellectual development so that the
student judges herself an inadequate contributor. Facilitating hyper-drama
authoring will allow students to draw on their experience in hyper-media and
dramatic presentation, and thus nurture the combinatory creativity
process.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this research, students will construct non-
linear hyper-narratives in which each path through the narrative tree represents
an individual narrative arc. Each node represents an occurrence along the
narrative timeline, called a story fragment, that may happen in one or more
places. The occurrence in each place takes the form of an animated dramatic
scene. Storytelling, then, becomes a process of authoring the story along with
the hyper-narrative, and the content and goings on within each scene (including
the characters, activities, animation, scenes, and dialogue). This project will
test the system and address two scientific questions by deploying different
versions of the authoring system in classes at the elementary, middle, and high
school levels within the Roanoke County School District. The complexity of
stories constructed and the kinds of content will be graduated to match the
learning goals within each level. This research will follow cohorts of these
students over a period of two years as they transition between elementary,
middle, and high school. Two key questions are: 1. How does a situated process
of storytelling employing a hyperdrama model support creative imagination? 2.
How does one engage a generation of students in a media-saturated world to
become creative participants, rather than passive consumers of digital media?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immediate research aim, to enhance and nurture
creative processes in K-12 students, has significant implications for society. A
more innovative workforce is critical to the success both of the nation and of
the individual worker. Furthermore, creativity is necessary for all learning,
including mathematics and science. By addressing the fundamental process of
creativity, this project can positively impact learning of all domains including
STEM. More directly, the explicit construction of hyper-narratives, and the
assembly of resources (graphics, animation, characters, etc.) for each hyper-
drama node make explicit the algorithmic and flow-of-control mechanisms
necessary for mathematics, science, and engineering. Second, the will develop
interest in scientific research among elementary, middle, and high school
students. Third, the software and intellectual product of this research will be
disseminated broadly through publications and open source mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;