* 0954398
* Genetics, Geometry and Evolution
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Eric Siggia, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2016
* USD 729,942.00

In this project the PI develops arguments for convergent evolution in gene
networks based on simulation and bifurcation theory (or the geometric theory of
differential equations). This requires defining a measure of fitness that the
network optimizes and showing that mutation rates (which are unknown) to not
bias the result. Darwin understood that complex organs such as the eye could
evolve by continual small changes if all the intermediate steps increased the
fitness. The same question will be posed for networks and answered
computationally: what networks can be learned by gradient ascent (ie hill
climbing). When evolution proceeds by hill climbing, the same local maxima are
found irrespective of mutation rates. Generic fitness measures for embryonic
patterning and the input-output response of signaling systems are suggested that
may capture the phyla-wide properties of developmental networks. In situations
where the network produces a static pattern, bifurcation theory enumerates the
types of patterns that occur as parameters change continuously. Near the
bifurcation point there are simple polynomial equations that collapse many
physical variables into a few, and thus provide a description of the system with
as few parameters as mathematics allows. Geometric models with fixed points,
saddle points and sources may be an effective way to quantitatively model
biological networks, and possibly evolution itself. A complementary experimental
program will time cell divisions and other markers during embryonic development
in the worm C.elegans to see if their fluctuations conform to geometric models.
To see whether the structure of developmental signaling pathways can be
understood from their input-output response, TGF-beta pathway in Xenopus will be
probed with time and space dependent stimuli and time-lapsed imaged in sheets of
embryonic cells. Students and postdocs will be engaged in research projects
related to this proposal.