* 0954242
* CAREER: Small-Molecule-Regulated Signaling Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Dustin Maly, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2016
* USD 650,000.00

This award in the Chemistry of Life Processes program of the Chemistry Division
is co-funded by the Cell cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences. The award supports work by Professor Dustin Maly at the University
of Washington in Seattle to engineer mammalian signaling enzymes that can be
regulated with cell-permeable small molecules. Conversion of external stimuli
into complex cellular behaviors is mediated by networks of interacting multi-
domain signaling enzymes. The use of engineered signaling enzymes that can be
controlled in a rapid, reversible and dose-dependent manner with small molecules
in living cells allows the roles of individual proteins and proteins domains in
specific signaling events to be determined. Uncovering the roles and
contributions of components in these networks provides insight into aberrant
cellular phenotypes and facilitates efforts to rationally engineer cells with
novel behaviors. The interdisciplinary nature of this research allows the
participation of undergraduate and graduate students with diverse scientific
interests. Furthermore, this research program serves as a vital scientific link
between the University of Washington and local area high schools that contain
large populations of disadvantaged and under-represented students. External
information is converted into complex cellular behaviors such as growth,
differentiation and motility by networks of signaling enzymes. By re-engineering
signaling enzymes from simple modules and observing the effects of these
synthetic proteins on cellular behavior, it will be possible to uncover the core
design principles behind complex biological systems. Determining the roles and
contributions of the proteins involved in specific signaling events provides an
understanding of the molecular wiring of cells. Furthermore, determining the
logic of signal transduction networks facilitates the rational engineering of
cells with unique phenotypic behaviors.