* 0954845
* CAREER:  Bio-inspired MEMS imaging platform with ultrawide, dynamically tunable field-of-view for biomedical and assistive applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Jaeyoun Kim, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 01/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this CAREER project is to advance optical MEMS technology by
developing an ultrawide field-of-view imaging system utilizing biological
inspirations. Coherently integrated plans for promoting interests in science and
technology at early stages of education, especially in female students, through
education and outreach are also included.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This project aims to develop a novel optical MEMS platform interfacing a
highly curved array of light-collecting optics with a flat array of optical
detectors to accomplish ultrawide field-of-view imaging. A bundle of flexible
polymer waveguides, inspired by the unique eye structure of deep-sea amphipods,
connect the two arrays optically. In contrast to previously reported wide field-
of-view solutions, the proposed scheme allows separate fabrications of the two
arrays and enables dynamic tuning of the viewing angle. Biology-scale
miniaturization of the proposed structure, based on a new class of polymeric
fabrication techniques, is also an objective. The developed technologies will
find applications in biomedicine, assistive devices, and environmental
imaging/sensing. The combined utilization of optics and MEMS in biomimetic
framework will promote transformative developments in future science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The successful demonstration
of imaging systems with dynamically tunable, ultrawide field-of-view will
generate significant impact on optical MEMS and accelerate the pace of the
nascent field of biomimetics greatly. With endoscopic imaging and assistive
safety monitoring as their immediate applications, they will benefit human
welfare significantly. The knowledge and techniques obtained in the course of
the proposed research will create interdisciplinary influences and widen the
boundaries of science and technology through the proposed curricula and extra-
curricula activities. The easy and interesting theme of the project will appeal
to children and female students, encouraging their interests in science and
technology.