* 0954297
* CAREER: Chemical Approaches to the Investigation of Protein-Lipid Binding
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Michael Best, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2015
* USD 577,980.00

Lipids present within cell membranes directly control many critical cellular
processes, and defects in lipid composition and activity result in a number of
debilitating diseases, including cancer and diabetes. A prominent role pertains
to protein-lipid binding interactions, in which lipids enforce the recruitment
of proteins onto the surfaces of cellular membranes. These processes regulate
both protein function and localization, resulting in tight control over numerous
physiological processes. Despite this significance, many aspects of protein-
lipid binding remain poorly understand due to the inherent challenges of
studying events that occur within biological membranes. Herein, comprehensive
strategies are proposed to surmount these challenges and unravel the details of
these complex binding interactions. One aspect of the proposed research involves
the design and synthesis of chemical probes corresponding to important signaling
lipids. Here, modular synthetic strategies will be devised for efficient
generation of a range of probe structures for use in numerous biological
studies. In addition, the Best group will develop novel approaches for
characterizing the biological activities of lipids. One such strategy is that of
microarray analysis, in which high-throughput techniques employing different
formats and conditions will result in rapid detection of the details of membrane
binding. In addition to answering important questions about these processes,
these platforms will also be used to detect variations in lipid activities
between normal and disease-associated systems to study the roles of these
compounds in disease. Finally, a probe-based approach will be developed to
achieve selective purification and identification of proteins that interact with
a particular lipid from complex cell extracts. The Best group will partner with
teachers and students at local schools to increase awareness of the merits of
scientific research. For example, students from a local high school will perform
research in their laboratory and present a poster to showcase their results. In
addition, the PI will make presentations at meetings of the school's science
academy to inform students about the exciting advancements that result from
scientific research. Further, the Best group will partner with local middle
school teachers such that graduate students will participate in laboratory
courses to enhance these sessions. Through these efforts, they will extend their
research to the local community to cultivate a greater understanding of
scientific research.