* 0954489
* CAREER: Research and Educational Program in Affinity-Based Drug Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2016
* Horst von Recum, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 03/31/2016
* USD 517,450.00

0954489 von Recum

The long-term research goal of this work is to create polymeric drug delivery
platforms with broad applicability and a wide range of tunable release
parameters using rationally designed affinities between the drug and polymer.
The research objective of this CAREER proposal is to develop a mathematical
model of an existing affinity-based platform, and to evaluate two new affinity-
based systems, testing on a cancer model. Specifically, the research goals are
to: 1) develop a mathematical model comparing previously studied cyclodextrin-
adamantane affinities, and extend that model to a drug delivery platform
multiplexing those affinities 2) evaluate the use of antibodies / antigens
affinities to provide a greater breadth of unmodified protein drug delivery; and
3) evaluate the use of oligonucleotide affinities to allow for a more tunable
delivery through use of single nucleotide additions and changes. Long-term
educational objectives are to introduce concepts of drug delivery to the general
public, integrate engineering concepts behind drug delivery mechanisms into
graduate and undergraduate education, and achieve representational participation
of under-represented groups in the field of Biomedical Engineering. The specific
educational goals of this proposal are to include: 1) promote participation of
women and under-represented minorities through outreach to local schools; 2)
increase participation of undergraduates in drug delivery education and research
through creation of a Drug Delivery curriculum sequence; and 3) make a graduate
level education available to local industry, law students, etc. through creation
of a non-thesis Master's program and use of web-based course materials.

Intellectual Merit: Although there is anecdotal evidence that molecular
affinities between drug and polymer can delay the release of drug, these
affinities have not been carefully modeled to examine how rational choice of
drug and polymer can be exploited to customize drug release across a broad range
of therapeutic agents and disease treatments. The novelty of this work is that
at the completion of the proposed research the concept of affinity-based
delivery will be applicable to many new categories of drugs and drug delivery
including protein based drugs such as polypeptides or antibodies, as well as
oligonucleotide drugs such as anti-sense DNA, or small interfering RNA (siRNA).
This work will be transformative in assisting future researchers in tuning drug
delivery rates to those much slower than currently available (using cyclodextrin
multiplexing), those with a broader range of tunability (using
oligonucleotides), and those with unmodified molecules such as full-length
proteins. The proposed research has relevance to pharmaceutics and pharmacology,
chemistry, biomaterials, and biocomputing, a newly emerging field in which well-
tuned biochemical affinities are used to recreate mathematic or computational
tasks at an atomic level.

Broader Impact: Although this work will only test affinity-based delivery for
treatment of human disease, specifically cancer, better understanding of how
molecules interact will be useful for other applications such as
neutraceuticals, cosmetics, as well as environmental applications such as
paints, coatings, marine anti-fouling mechanisms, etc. The proposed educational
plan includes community outreach, as well as undergraduate and graduate
enhancement through coursework and research experiences. New classes, web-based
materials, an undergraduate education sequence, and a graduate non-thesis
Master's track will introduce this field to a larger audience, bringing those
interested to research jobs in industry or academia. Findings from this proposed
research effort will be broadly disseminated through publications in peer-
reviewed journals, discussions with collaborators, and student presentations at
national meetings. In addition these findings will be made available on the web.
Finally the proposed research will allow the investigator to continue his
efforts at mentoring future scientists and engineers, particularly women and
underrepresented minorities. This will be possible through outreach to local
high schools, participation in the departmental NSF undergraduate research
program, and in the outreach activities of the Layered Polymers Science and
Technology Center at Case.