* 0954258
* Chromatin dynamics in C. elegans behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2012
* Noelle L'Etoile, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 03/31/2012
* USD 449,999.00

An animal's nervous system endows it with the ability to react to its
environment and to learn from its experiences. How specific molecules within
cells of the nervous system are changed by an animal's experience is not well
understood. A powerful model organism, C. elegans, will be used to study the
genetic basis for plasticity of behavior. The central dogma that DNA, the cell's
genetic material, makes an intermediate RNA which then makes protein has been
expanded recently to include regulation of protein synthesis by RNA. This study
will add another layer of regulation to the dogma by showing that RNA can also
modify the DNA itself. To test the hypothesis that small RNAs can modify the
activity of neurons to change an organism's behavior, C. elegans that lack key
RNA or chromatin molecules will be examined. The prediction is that animals
lacking the small RNAs or specific DNA binding proteins will not be able to
alter their behavior and will be unable to learn from experience. This would
indicate that there is feedback through which small RNAs regulate DNA that
encodes genes needed for learning and complex behaviors. This work will provide
training opportunities for a postdoctoral scholar, a recent graduate and an
undergraduate student and will generate valuable data and reagents to share with
the scientific community.