* 0954486
* CAREER: Nanoscale Ballistic Spin Transport in Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Hui Zhao, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 01/31/2016
* USD 417,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Along with charge, electrons have a
quantum mechanical property known as ?spin.? A future technology that would be
based on the spin of electrons has been named ?spintronics.? Spintronic devices
are expected to be more powerful, less expensive, lighter, and consume less
energy than the present electronic devices. To develop this spin-based
technology, it is necessary to study movement of spin in semiconductors. This
Faculty Early Career Award supports a project that will investigate nanometer-
scale spin transport in semiconductors. So far, most studies have focused on
spin transport at the micrometer or even larger length scales. To integrate
spintronics with nanotechnology, it is crucial to understand and control
nanometer-scale spin transport in semiconductors. Such transport will take place
on very short timescales. This project will address this key issue using novel
laser techniques that are capable of detecting events as fast as 70 femtoseconds
and spin movements as small as one hundredth of nanometer. Gallium Arsenide and
its nanostructures will be used to study several key aspects of the collision-
free spin transport (known as ballistic spin transport). This project will
advance our knowledge of spin dynamics in semiconductors, and provide
comprehensive information for nanoscale spintronics. The education component of
this project is well integrated with the research efforts. A new course on laser
principles and techniques will be developed. The cutting edge research will
involve graduate and undergraduate students, as well as high-school teachers.
Outreach projects concerning what happens at very short time scales as well as
projects concerning fundamental processes in materials will also be developed
based on the research topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Award supports experimental
investigations of nanoscale ballistic spin transport in semiconductor bulk,
quantum wells and quantum wires. Spin transport is a fundamental process in
spintronic devices. So far, most studies have focused on transport on large
length scales where the transport is dominated by the drift-diffusion processes.
Since the size of electronic devices on integrated circuits has been reduced to
60 nm, which is comparable to or even smaller than the mean free path of
electrons, it is necessary to understand and control ballistic spin transport on
the nanoscale. In this project, nanoscale spin transport in semiconductors will
be studied by using ultrafast laser techniques with a temporal resolution of 70
femtoseconds and a capability of detecting movements as small as 10 picometers.
Nanoscale ballistic spin transport will be directly observed and studied by
tracking the position of spins in real space and real time. Several key aspects
of ballistic spin transport will be studied. The proposed research will provide
comprehensive information for nano-spintronics and reveal rich physics involved
in ballistic spin transport. The education component of this project is well
integrated with the research efforts. A new course on laser principles and
techniques will be developed. The cutting edge research will involve graduate
and undergraduate students, as well as high-school teachers. Outreach projects
will also be developed based on the research topics.