* 0954991
* CAREER: Natural Organic Matter Mediated Processes in the Subsurface: Heavy Metal Adsorption and Nanoparticle Migration
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2016
* John Lenhart, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2016
* USD 408,274.00

0954991&lt;br/&gt;Lenhart &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural organic matter (NOM),
the product of natural biological and chemical processes, is a heterogeneous
mixture of organic molecules of varying size and reactivity that is ubiquitous
in nature. NOM controls the environmental fate of contaminants and particles and
this career development plan will elucidate specific details of how NOM acids of
environmental significance influence the fate of lead and nanoparticulate iron
oxides in soil and ground water systems. The specific research objectives are
to: (a) characterize the coordination structures of NOM acids at iron
oxide/water interfaces and determine how the acids influence lead coordination
at the same interfaces, and (b) relate the coordination modes and structures of
NOM acids at iron oxide/water interfaces to the resultant transport of nano-
sized iron oxide particles through porous media. The research will combine
atomic-, molecular-, microscopic-, and macroscopic-level techniques with
hydrodynamically-active experiments in order to provide direct information of
unprecedented detail on lead speciation and nanoparticle transport as influenced
by NOM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will elucidate specific detailed
information of NOM coordination at mineral interfaces. Current reactive
transport and chemical speciation models do not appropriately account for these
interactions and produce erroneous predictions. The role that different
components of NOM, namely acids of known structure and those of heterogeneous
structure, have on determining heavy metal behavior will be determined. Research
on the transport of nano-sized hematite through porous media in the presence of
NOM will contribute to the emerging fields of environmental nanoscience and
nanotechnology and will provide information needed to assess the risk of
nanoparticles in the environment. The novel combination of macroscopic-,
microscopic-, molecular-, and atomic-level techniques for NOM and lead
adsorption will provide information of unsurpassed resolution. In addition to
the direct benefits to contaminated site management and particle transport, the
detailed information collected from this work will also benefit research on in
situ contaminant remediation and water treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solving
the critical environmental problems our society faces will require a concerted
effort by scientists, engineers, and policy makers with widely varying
backgrounds. Preparing these individuals for such a task requires an educational
system that places emphasis on providing all students with a sound foundation in
the natural and physical sciences as they apply to the environment. The goal of
this educational plan is to establish a framework to impart sound environmental
science and engineering concepts to multiple components of the STEM pipeline,
from middle school through graduate school and to students across a spectrum of
ethnic, social, and gender groups. To meet this educational goal the PI will
perform outreach to K-12 teachers and students through professional development
and electronic videoconferencing initiatives, integrate undergraduate and
graduate students into multi-disciplinary teams, and enhance learning outcomes
in graduate and undergraduate courses by incorporating real-world examples,
team-based assignments, and professional practice topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated research and education efforts will reach a
wide audience, and through outreach and recruitment activities, will increase
the participation of diverse groups in science and engineering. Outreach
initiatives will reach out to K-12 students and teachers in the local community
and across the country. Dissemination of the scientific results will be wide and
will contribute to the fields of environmental engineering, environmental
chemistry, surface chemistry, and aqueous geochemistry. New course components
will incorporate critical skills such as team-work, leadership and problem-
solving thereby better preparing students for professional success upon
graduation. The improved mechanistic and structural information of heavy metal
speciation in heterogeneous systems will benefit society by improving site
remediation and management practices. The details on the transport of the nano-
sized hematite will also provide specific information needed to develop a
regulatory system to manage the discharge of anthropogenic nanomaterials.
Finally, it is expected that closely coordinating the research, educational and
outreach activities will foster a greater awareness among all participants of
the importance and application of research and engineering in society.