* 0954795
* Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp) 2009 Doctoral Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2010
* Abdelsalam Helal, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 02/28/2010
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports a Doctoral Colloquium (DC) at the 11th International
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp 2009) to be held September 30 -
October 3, 2009 in Orlando, FL. The International Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing is the premier outlet for novel research contributions that advance
the state of the art in the design, development, deployment, evaluation and
understanding of ubiquitous computing (ubicomp) systems. The conference is a
competitive and interdisciplinary venue for publishing and presenting research
that spans and integrates pervasive, wireless, embedded, wearable and mobile
technologies to bridge the gaps between the digital and physical worlds.

The DC will provide intellectual interaction with experts and peers that will
improve the near term contribution of their doctoral dissertation research. The
interaction will broaden the students' perspective about the future directions
of research in a range of topics connected to Ubiquitous Computing. It will also
enable the students to network with each other and with the experts. Finally,
the focused attention and unique exposure given to the students will in and by
itself draw and attract more students to work in the Ubiquitous Computing area.
This should hopefully increase the number of graduates in this area, which
should drive innovation and generate highly trained workforce working in field
of Ubiquitous Computing.