* 0954069
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Evaluation Methodology for Sustainability and Resiliency of Complex Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* James Momoh, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2011
* USD 75,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the sustainability and resiliency of
interconnected networks of distributed resources. The particular focus is on
electric power networks and communication networks and their interdependencies.
The project seeks to develop a scheme for the deployment of distributed
resources on a first-come, first-served basis. Such a scheme requires efficient
optimization algorithms that select which distributed resource is feasible given
economic, technological, and interoperability constraints. The scheme considers
resource conflicts and congestion on the interconnection network. Efforts
include developing models and metrics for networks of distributed resources,
developing a computational platform for evaluation, and visualizing performance
and interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, the
project develops a synergy between research on electric power networks and the
resiliency of communication networks. The project examines optimization methods
and connection schemes for interconnected distributed networks and their
associated resiliency and sustainability. The research approach relies on
finding general principles and methods for interconnected networks of
distributed resources. Data from prior disaster situations is used to evaluate
the proposed approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts,
the project has the potential to improve the sustainability and resiliency of
two important types of critical infrastructures, electric power networks and
communication networks. Graduate students involved in the project receive the
cross-disciplinary education necessary for this research. The project
facilitates cross-disciplinary and cross-institutional research collaboration
between two faculty members.