* 0954084
* CAREER: Locomotion of Small Organisms in Complex Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Paulo Arratia, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

0954084 Arratia

An understanding of the locomotion of animals is of great practical and
scientific importance. Despite much effort, many questions remain unanswered
regarding the effects of fluid rheology (e.g. viscoelasticity) on the motility
of small living organisms. Answers to these questions can lead to potentially
useful applications spanning many fields such as engineering, robotics, physics,
and biology. For example, motility investigations of model living organisms can
provide a powerful tool for the analysis of new and existing mutations involved
in Muscular Dystrophy (MD), a disease that affects millions of people worldwide
but, to date, has no cure. This project aims to (1) advance our understanding of
the forces governing nematode motility in complex media including viscoelastic
fluids and to (2) measure non-invasively the biomechanical and material
properties of healthy and mutant nematodes carrying MD. The organism of choice
is the nematode (worm) Caenorhabditis (C.) elegans, which is a promising
candidate for motility investigations at low Reynolds numbers in complex fluids
due to their small size (L~ 1 mm) and adaptability to various fluidic
environments. C. elegans is also a model biological system used to explore
potential causes and treatments for human diseases because their genome has been
completely sequenced. In addition, the motility of C. elegans is controlled by
95 muscle cells that are highly similar in both anatomy and molecular makeup to
vertebrate skeletal muscle. These muscle cells express many genes associated
with human muscular dystrophies, such as genes homologous to Dystrophin and
(Duchennes MD) and Dysferlin (Limb Girdle MD). This research is motivated by two
primary objectives. The first is devoted to the fundamental investigation of the
effects of fluids that exhibit both solid and fluid-like behavior such as
viscoelastic fluids on the motility of C. elegans in the low Reynolds numbers
regime. Many relevant living organisms move in viscoelastic fluids such as
mucus, and bio-molecular fluids, and suspensions. However, little is known about
the effects of elastic stresses on the motility behavior of living organisms.
Important questions include: (i) how do fluid elastic stresses affect the
motility kinematic and swimming behavior of nematodes at low Reynolds numbers?
(ii) Do nematodes swim faster or slower in the presence of elastic stresses
and/or shear rate dependent viscosity? (iii) Do nematodes adjust or adapt to
their fluidic environment by changing their swimming gaits such as frequency and
amplitude? The second involves applying this knowledge to estimate the
biomechanical and material properties of swimming nematodes. By estimating such
properties, the PI will be able to phenotype wild-type and mutant nematodes
carrying MD, which ultimately will contribute to developing quantitative,
reliable diagnostic tools for MD.

Intellectual Merit:

The research is based on the PI's previous efforts in understanding complex
fluid flow phenomena, and will make new valuable contributions that are both
fundamental and applied. From a fundamental perspective, the PI will (1) use
high spatial and temporal resolution experiments to characterize the flow
behavior and nematode motion in complex fluidic environments. Such a
quantitative, engineering based analysis of muscle function provides a new
paradigm for the study of muscle physiology and other diseases; (2) develop
theoretical and numerical models to characterize the biomechanics of nematodes
in order to non invasively obtain estimates of their material properties; and
(3) investigate the effects of fluid rheological properties on the motility of
nematodes. From an applied perspective, the PI will develop diagnostic tools
capable of quantitatively investigating nematodes carrying genetic mutations
including those associated with Muscular Dystrophy. Since C. elegans offer many
advantages for defining the molecular basis of environmental stress signaling,
this research program will contribute to a better understanding of motility
based diseases such as Muscular Dystrophy.

Broader Impact:

An integrated research and educational program lies at the rich interface
between (fluid) mechanics and biology. It includes: (1) recruiting undergraduate
students for summer research internships from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities that do not possess an engineering graduate program. One of the
main objectives is to increase the participation of historically under
represented minorities such as African Americans, Native Americans, and
Hispanics in research; (2) training graduate students by offering new graduate
level courses in complex and bio-fluids as well as research opportunities; (3)
involving K-12 teachers in the research and educational program. Finally, the
results of this research and educational program will be broadly disseminated
and will have potentially important benefits to society. In particular, the
results will increase understanding of new fluid mechanics phenomena and certain
types of diseases.