* 0954673
* CAREER: Fate and Transport of Aerosols from Animal Feeding Operations
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2017
* Lingjuan Li, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 01/31/2017
* USD 404,663.00

0954673&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal feeding operations
(AFOs), while a vital link in America's food supply, pose a major risk to the
environment. There is a critical need to study the fate and transport of
hazardous aerosol emissions from AFO facilities. This will provide a basis for
further study of health effects and risk assessment associated with AFO
aerosols. The dynamics of animal housing/biological systems make the
characteristics of aerosols emitted from AFOs different from other industrial
pollutants. Although the science community has a fundamental understanding of
aerosol formation, fate and transport, significant knowledge and technology gaps
still exist regarding fate and transport of AFO aerosols/bioaerosols. The
objectives of the proposed work are to (1) quantify the impact of particle size
distribution (PSD) on the federal reference method (FRM) PM10 sampler's
measurements such that it will lead to improvements of the FRM PM sampler
measurements for broader applications; (2) characterize the spatial and temporal
variations in the physical, chemical, and biological properties of aerosols
emitted from AFO facilities such that it will result in improved understanding
of the mechanism of generation, fate and transport of those aerosols; and (3)
develop an interactive simulation model to predict the fate and transport of
bioaerosols emitted from AFO facilities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
involves theoretical and field experimental studies on FRM PM measurement
techniques and on the fate and transport of AFO aerosols/bioaerosols. The field
study will be conducted on two commercial AFO farms. The proposed work will
yield (1) theoretical/empirical models to correct measurement errors of FRM PM
samplers caused by interaction of PSD and performance characteristics of the
sampler; (2) valuable knowledge on the fate and transport of AFO aerosols and
bioaerosols; and (3) Bio-Aerosol Responding/Notifying System (BARNS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term career goal of the PI is to develop
interdisciplinary research and education programs to bridge the gaps between
environmental engineering and biological and agricultural engineering
disciplines in the context of air pollution as well as those between classroom
education and real-world practices. The broader impacts of the proposed work
will reflect on (1) improvements to FRM PM sampling technique that could be used
by multidisciplinary investigators; and (2) the advancement of our understanding
of fate and transport of aerosols/ bioaerosol in rural environment. This
advanced knowledge will provide a better understanding of aerosol control and
regulation and enhance the nation's capacity to protect the AFO industry from
disease losses and threats. Moreover, better understanding source, fate and
transport of aerosols/bioaerosols may improve our understanding on the complex
linkages among source, exposure, and health outcome. The proposed work will not
only benefit the AFO industries, but also investigators in the area of health
and risk assessment studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed
work will be broadly disseminated through several educational activities. High
school students will be exposed to the proposed work through an annual summer
camp program. Underrepresented undergraduate students will be engaged in the
proposed projects. Two graduate students will be trained. Extension workshops
will be provided for AFO producers, integrators, government agency personnel and
decision makers. The PI is committed to recruiting more female and minority
students into engineering and set them on a path to science and engineering
careers. The PI will actively work with professors in a female college, Meredith
College, to recruit their outstanding undergraduates to an undergraduate summer
research program. The undergraduate summer research program will foster
interdisciplinary and hands-on education at an early stage and bring more
students, especially women and minorities, into the research fields.