* 0954109
* CAREER: Methodology of Aliphatic Biodegradable Photoluminescent Polymer Development
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Jian Yang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 02/28/2013
* USD 500,000.00

This Career award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials
Research to the University of Texas Arlington is to design, synthesize,
characterize and identify fluorescent mechanism in biodegradable
photoluminescent polymers (BPLPs). Fluorescent labeling and imaging are in
increasing demand for analyzing biomolecules, tracking biological processes, and
visualizing diseases and therapeutic efficacy. Biodegradable polymers have been
widely used in vivo biomedical implants, tissue engineering scaffolds, and
orthopedic devices. However, none of the current biodegradable polymers can
function as both implant materials and in vivo bioimaging probes without using
exogenous imaging agents such as photobleaching organic dyes or toxic quantum
dots. This project will establish a methodology to custom-design many types of
BPLPs to meet the versatile needs for functional biodegradable polymers.
Successful completion of this proposal is expected to significantly advance the
biomaterials science and bring paradigm shifts in the use of biodegradable
implant biomaterials in a broad range of biological and biomedical fields
including biosensing, bioimaging, drug delivery, tissue engineering, and
nanomedicine. The proposed education activities focus on establishing a team
consisting of the PI, graduate students and high school teachers for high school
curriculum enhancement. The PI and graduate students will train high school
teachers in the PI's laboratory and they together will help to identify valuable
educational tools that would enhance the existing high school curriculum. This
teacher training program is expected to give high school teachers hands-on
experience and provides latest scientific knowledge in biomaterials and tissue
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomaterials are critical components of
biomedical devices and products. A novel biomaterial may create new fields of
studies and opportunities to tackle unmet biomedical needs. Biodegradable
polymers have been intensively used in many biomedical applications such as
tissue engineering, drug delivery and orthopedic devices. The PI has recently
developed a unique biodegradable polymer that can emit bright fluorescence by
itself without adding toxic imaging agents in detecting early cancers, tracking
cancer drug delivery process and monitoring medical implant performance. This
proposal will explore the fundamental sciences of this fluorescent polymer, and
then establish a methodology to custom-design many different types of
fluorescent biodegradable polymers. In the educational area, high school
students and teachers will be trained in the PI's laboratory with cutting-edge
technologies and sciences in biomaterials and tissue engineering. This research
effort by teachers and students is expected to identify valuable topics that
could be used later to enhance the existing high school curriculum. This
collaborative effort with the largest high school in Texas, Martin High School,
Arlington, is expected to generate a wide scientific impact on the high school
education.