* 0954390
* CAREER:  Computational Approaches for Multi-scale Design of Magnetostrictive Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Veera Sundararaghavan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 01/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is the theoretical and computational investigation of thermomechanical processes
for manufacturing low-cost polycrystalline iron-gallium alloy (Galfenol) with
properties comparable to expensive single crystals. Significant changes in
properties occur during thermo-mechanical processing of Galfenol. Warm-rolled
and annealed specimens retain high magnetostriction but become brittle; whereas,
cold rolled specimens have high yield strength but lose their magnetostriction.
The research will focus on predicting and controlling these changes by modeling
microstructure evolution during processing. The validated model will capture
crystallographic texture evolution, grain nucleation, grain growth and evolution
of magnetization orientation using multi-scale crystal plasticity simulations. A
finite strain homogenization technique will be developed to investigate final
microstructural response under coupled magnetic and stress fields. Thermo-
mechanical processes that lead to optimal properties will then be identified
using a multi-scale sensitivity analysis algorithm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will lead to the development of inexpensive sensors and actuators in
magnetomechanical devices including load sensors, energy harvesting devices,
tracking and positioning systems. An educational tool for undergraduate
engineering mechanics students will be developed that will allow graphical
selection of microstructural features that maximize magnetostrictive actuator
performance under various deformation modes. The research component will be
integrated into a larger educational effort through graduate student training,
hands-on research opportunity for undergraduate students through the SURE
(Summer Undergraduate Research in Engineering), SROP (Summer research
opportunity for minority undergraduate students) program and outreach programs
for K-12 education through the Office of Engineering Outreach and Engagement at
the University of Michigan.