* 0954908
* CAREER: Multiscale Investigation of Warm-Season Precipitation Extremes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2010,10/31/2011
* Russ Schumacher, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 10/31/2011
* USD 209,682.00

This study will examine the processes and predictability associated with
midlatitude warm-season extreme precipitation on multiple spatial and temporal
scales. Despite the great need for accurate precipitation forecasts and flood
warnings, the prediction of warm-season heavy rainfall continues to be one of
the greatest challenges in weather forecasting. Investigating the weather
systems that produce extreme rainfall and deadly flash flooding will provide us
with basic understanding of these systems.

The ultimate goal of this research is to improve prediction of the weather
systems that lead to extreme warm-season precipitation. This research will
identify the mechanisms that enhance or limit predictability in warm-season
convective systems.

Intellectual merit. One focus of this research will be elevated, linear
mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) that have been observed to produce extreme
local rainfall and flash flooding. The lack of knowledge about elevated,
organized convection limits the ability to produce accurate forecasts and
warnings of potential flash-flood situations. To address this issue, numerical
simulations will be conducted to quantify the large-scale controls on the
initiation, organization, and rainfall production of elevated linear MCSs,
particularly the respective roles of tropical, subtropical, and midlatitude
influences. These simulations will also be combined with observations to
quantify the interactions between frontogenetical circulations and convective-
scale processes in the evolution of these MCSs.

At larger scales, widespread, multiple-day heavy rainfall events, such as those
that affected the Southern Plains of the United States in 2007 and the Midwest
in 2008, have far-reaching impacts. In some cases, the heavy rainfall occurs in
association with a series of feedbacks between deep convective activity and the
development and maintenance of long-lived, slow-moving circulations at the mid-
levels of the atmosphere. Preliminary research has shown that events such as
this have low predictability at the medium range. This research will create an
observational climatology of heavy rainfall associated with such mesoscale
circulations. Then, ensemble forecast data will be used to assess the
predictability of these events, the processes that lead to their development and
to the success or failure of numerical forecasts, and their larger-scale
effects.

Broader impacts. Extreme precipitation, and uncertainties in predicting it, can
also have considerable impacts on society. This study integrates research and
education by introducing students in the atmospheric sciences to research
methods that explore these impacts. Graduate students will be trained in
established social-science methods, and a multidisciplinary undergraduate course
will be developed to provide the basis for discussions and inquiry into the
relationship between weather and society. The meteorological research on extreme
rainfall described above will be enhanced by performing student-designed
societal analyses of local flood and flash-flood events. A regional workshop
will bring together students, researchers, practitioners, and stakeholders to
forge new collaborations and to address the complex challenges associated with
extreme rainfall. Furthermore, integrated analyses of weather events will engage
the public, and will reveal areas where forecasts and warnings can be improved
from both the meteorological and societal perspective.