* 0954797
* CAREER: Bridging epileptogenic molecular level changes to neuronal network synchrony to reveal basic mechanisms of epilepsy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Theoden Netoff, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 09/30/2016
* USD 438,203.00

PI: Netoff, Theoden I.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0954797&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The etiologies of pathological behaviors that emerge in networks are especially
difficult to diagnose. The causes are usually subtle changes in the dynamics of
the nodes that lead to changes in population behavior. These multi-scale
problems are very general. Epilepsy is an example of disease where molecular
level changes in neurons caused by genetic mutations lead to pathological
neuronal activity generating seizures. While there are many hypotheses, very
little is known about how and why these mutations cause seizures, which prevents
us from developing better treatments. Understanding how synchrony in networks
are affected by known epileptogenic mutations and antiepileptic drugs with known
molecular effects will provide a model system in which multiple scales may be
bridged. A synergistic approach using numerical simulations electrophysiology
experiments and computational simulations will be used. Computational models of
neurons will be used to predict how epileptogenic mutations and antiepileptic
drugs change the phase response curve (PRC) of a neuron. The PRC is a measure of
a neuron?s sensitivity to synaptic inputs. From the PRC it is possible to infer
how changes caused by epileptogenic mutations and antiepileptic drugs would
alter synchrony in a network of neurons. Predictions from the modeling will be
tested using dynamic clamp experiments, where a computer running a real-time
interface is interfaced to a neuron through a patch clamp amplifier and
electrode. Dynamic clamp experiments will be used to measure the effects of
epileptogenic mutations (introduced thorough electrical knock-in) and bath
applied antiepileptic drugs on the phase response curve of the neuron. Hybrid
networks will then be created using the dynamic clamp to simulate synaptic
connections between two patch clamped neurons in which effects of epileptogenic
mutations and antiepileptic drugs on synchrony will be measured directly.
Physiological experiments will be used to provide parameters to run large scale
simulations where synchrony will be measured. Preliminary data is presented from
simulations and electrophsiological experiments that epileptogenic mutations in
voltage gated sodium channels decrease synchrony and antiepileptic drugs
increase synchrony. These findings are in contrast to the popular view of
epilepsy that epilepsy is caused by hypersynchrony. By developing our
understanding of how these mutations and drugs actually work, we may develop new
and better approaches to treating this disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal
of this proposed research is to test the hypotheses that changes in the dynamics
of neurons caused by epileptogenic mutations increase network synchrony, and
that the modulation of neurons by drugs that prevent seizures decrease network
synchrony. By proving, or disproving these hypotheses, we will understand if
developing new drugs or deep brain stimulation to prevent seizures should be
optimized to decrease network synchrony. To test this hypothesis we propose the
following specific aims: 1) use single cell modeling to identify effects of
epileptogenic mutations and antiepileptic drugs on cell dynamics, 2) network
modeling to assess the effect of epileptogenic mutations and antiepileptic drugs
on network synchrony, and 3) characterize changes in cell dynamics caused by
mutation of SCN1A channel using hybrid experiments with real neurons and virtual
ion channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: The research proposed
here will help elucidate how changes in neuronal dynamics and topology of
network connectivity result in pathological neuronal activity such as seizures.
How neuron dynamics are affected by epileptogenic mutations and antiepileptic
drugs will be discovered to help develop better models of seizures. Effects of
known epileptogenic ion channel mutations and antiepileptic drugs on network
synchrony will be used to probe the role of neuronal population synchrony in
epilepsy. With this knowledge we will develop more rational approaches to
treating epilepsy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader impact: Electrophysiolgy data
acquired will be cataloged in a database available to any scientist interested
in analyzing the data. To complete the electrophysiolgical experiment, we will
generate many modules for the dynamicclamp which will be made available to the
community using the RTXI dynamic clamp. Code developed to run network
simulations using CUDA enabled machines for supercomputer performance on a
desktop will be made available to the public. Outreach plan includes
collaborations with the Bakken museum, the Epilepsy Foundation, the University
of Minnesota?s ?Brain U?, its summer high school program ?Exploring Careers in
Engineering and Physical Science?, and it?s North Star Alliance Program.