* 0954342
* CAREER: Theory and Modelling of Non-Uniform Superconductors and Superfluids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Anton Vorontsov, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 08/31/2016
* USD 419,992.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research and education to investigate non-uniform
superconducting states and their origin in novel superconductors and superfluid
helium-3. Inhomogeneous states appear due to a complex interplay of multiple
energy scales that lead to strong local modification of the quasiparticle
spectrum and, macroscopically, to states with new symmetries. Such states are
expected to play major roles in strongly correlated materials, systems with
competing orders, and in the interface regions of small-scale
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for superconductors with higher
critical temperature and better material characteristics has led to the
discovery of new families of complex materials with exotic properties. Besides
superconductivity, most display some kind of magnetic order which may
significantly influence superconducting properties, and may provide or
contribute to the pairing interaction that leads to superconductivity. Similar
behavior may have also been observed in spin-triplet superfluid helium-3 in
confined geometries. Experiments suggest many new condensate phases that are
thought to be non-uniform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on
presenting a comprehensive picture of non-uniform states in heavy fermion
materials, superconductors without inversion center, FeAs-pnictides, and
superfluid helium-3 films. New states and their thermodynamic, transport and
magnetic properties will be studied in these systems, including strong-coupling
and non-equilibrium phenomena. This project will advance understanding of the
nature of new superconducting states of matter and help to link theory and
experiment. The theoretical and numerical approach will be based on a
quasiclassical formulation of the theory of superconductivity that will include
magnetic degrees of freedom, multiple bands, and significant spin effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research may contribute to the
realization of superconductor-based devices with superconducting interfaces. The
study of magnetically active superconducting surfaces may influence appearance
of new charge- and spin-coupled electronics. The research inspires
demonstrations of the most influential principles of physics, such as symmetry
and emerging complexity in many-particle systems. This forms the basis of the
education component which involves the development of new courses on both
graduate and undergraduate levels, and the development of an educational website
with graphical demonstrations and links to other physics, chemistry and
biological research conducted at Montana State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research and education to
investigate the nature of superconductivity in materials, that are highly non-
uniform, have special arrangements of atoms, or display an interplay between
magnetism and superconductivity. Superconductivity is an extraordinary state of
electrons that can occur in some materials at sufficiently low temperatures.
Unlike common wires made of, for example, copper, a superconductor can carry
electric current without dissipation. Superconductors have other unusual
properties that make them promising for applications in future electronic device
technologies. This research will explore materials and conductions under which
superconductivity can vary or can change from one superconducting state to
another in the same material, for example in response to regions of magnetic
order. This research may predict new phenomena in superconductors and in
superfluids. Superfluids generalize the concept of superconductivity beyond
electrons in a material to liquid states, for example those that that occur in
liquid helium at temperatures approaching absolute zero. Superconductivity and
more generally superfluidity is an intriguing state of matter that requires a
quantum mechanical description and remains fertile not only intellectually in
the discovery of new superconducting states and phenomena, but also for its
potential applications, for example in new electronic devices and power
transmission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research inspires demonstrations of
some of the most powerful principles of condensed matter physics, such as
symmetry and emerging complexity in many-particle systems. It also forms the
basis of the education component which involves the development of new courses
at both graduate and undergraduate levels, and the development of an educational
website with graphical demonstrations and links to other physics, chemistry and
biological research conducted at Montana State University.