* 0954897
* CAREER:  Coherent Mid-Infrared Molecular Dispersion Spectroscopy for Ultra-Sensitive Chemical Detection
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Gerard Wysocki, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 01/31/2016
* USD 405,843.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to study a new spectroscopic sensing technique. The planned approach takes
advantage of the coherent laser radiation and combines the advantages of direct
laser absorption spectroscopy with a precision and noise suppression capability
that are characteristic to indirect, zero-baseline spectroscopic sensing
methods. The research will include theoretical investigations of the molecular
dispersion, spectroscopic modeling, studies of optimum detection techniques, and
research on mid-IR lasers optimized for dispersion spectroscopy. To overcome the
limitations of existing laser absorption spectroscopy techniques, a novel
approach based on the measurement of dispersion will be investigated. Included
in the investigation are fundamental physics and the solution of engineering
problems in the construction of new EC-QC lasers. Sensitive and versatile
chemical detection technology and new implementations in variety of field
applications including distributed atmospheric sensor networks, and remote
chemical detection are the expected outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is expected to lead to development of highly sensitive gas and chemical sensors
capable of pptv-level resolution. The application of the proposed technology to
trace-gas detection will result in more sensitive, smaller and more versatile
sensors. New applications including large area spectroscopic sensor networks for
atmospheric monitoring, remote chemical sensing in defense and security, or
hand-held/wearable gas exposure monitoring will benefit from the proposed
research. How the interdisciplinary nature of the project would provide a
spectrum of education and training opportunities integrated with the research
goals is presented.