* 0954127
* CAREER: Investigating University Students' Conceptions of Macroscopic Biological Phenomena
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2017
* Kimberly Tanner, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 05/31/2017
* USD 621,997.00

The purpose of this CAREER research study is to determine how undergraduate
students conceptualize and explain complex biological phenomena, including: (1)
cancer, and (2) genetic modification of organisms. In addition, this study
explores the psychological basis for how these students learn about these
subjects. Four study/survey groups are being compared: (1) entering biology
majors; (2) graduating biology majors; (3) non-biology majors; and (4) expert
research biologists, all located at San Francisco State University (SFSU).

The overarching research hypothesis is that entering university biology majors
and graduating biology majors hold multiple explanatory frameworks for their
understanding of these complex biological phenomena. If this is the case, then
biology majors may employ different explanations for a biological phenomenon,
like cancer, depending on whether or not they are cued to apply their basic
biology knowledge learned in school. A specific aim of this proposal is to
investigate what conceptual changes biology majors undergo as a result of their
undergraduate training and to what extent do they develop biological expertise
during their university education.

This research includes three approaches to gaining insight into biology learning
during the proposed five-year funding period: (1) a comparative, cross-sectional
survey of a large number (~1800) of university students; (2) more detailed
videotaped survey interviews with a subset (~120) of the above-referenced
university students; and (3) a longitudinal study over the entire funding period
of 20 non-biology majors as compared to 20 biology majors.

This research study is being carried out by Tanner and her graduate students in
the SFSU biology department. This represents a unique opportunity for STEM-
content-based (biology) graduate students to receive training and experience in
science educational research. Furthermore, the PI is developing a new
concentration in biology education research as part of the Masters degree in
biology. As an urban-serving institution, this project includes a broad
representation and diversity of the target undergraduate population. This study
is being enhanced by input received from an advisory committee composed of
cognitive scientists and science education researchers, as well as through
ongoing formative assessment.

The results of this research will inform both the science education and
biological content communities. Research findings will be widely disseminated
via presentations at national meetings and articles published in peer-reviewed
professional journals. It is anticipated that these research results will
contribute to understanding how undergraduate students learn complex biological
phenomena and lead to insights that could influence how these ideas are taught
in higher education throughout the U.S.