* 0954490
* CAREER: Plasmon Tomography
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2015
* Luis Grave de Peralta, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2015
* USD 403,897.00

This project concerns the development of an advanced microscopy system for
visualizing the propagation of light confined to nanometer-scale structures, to
aid in the design of next-generation microchips integrating photonics and
electronics. Photonics involves the transmission and manipulation of information
using photons, in contrast to electric charges used in electronics. Great
potential is seen for devices integrating the two technologies. A major obstacle
to this integration is the relatively large scale of photonic structures, which
are typically on the order of several micrometers in size. By comparison, state-
oft-the-art electronic components are as small as tens of nanometers in
size?almost 1,000 times smaller. A promising solution to the problem of
disparate scales is found in surface plasmon polaritons, a type of
electromagnetic wave that propagates along metal-dielectric interfaces when the
interface is excited by a photon. While the frequency of a surface plasmon
polariton is that of the exciting photon, the wavelength is much smaller?on the
order of nanometers. Thus structures fabricated to guide and manipulate surface
plasmon polaritons are of the same scale as features in state-of-the-art
electronics. The high losses inherent to electromagnetic wave propagation in
metal are addressed by incorporating an active gain medium into the structures.
The science of manipulating surface plasmon polaritons is plasmonics. Plasmonic
devices may be designed to carry out many information-handling functions now
implemented by electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a relatively new field,
plasmonics lacks the multitude of diagnostics available in a more mature area,
such as electronics. Progress in plasmonic device development will be greatly
facilitated by new imaging and visualization tools. The subject of this project
is plasmon tomography, in which an advanced microscope is designed to image
surface plasmon polariton propagation in nanoscale structures. The microscope
may also be configured to use plasmonics to perform optical microscopy with sub-
wavelength, nanometer-scale, resolution. This will provide imaging performance
comparable with much more expensive alternatives, such as scanning electron
microscopy. Plasmon tomography has a diverse range of applications, including
biological research and medical diagnostics. Massively parallel arrays of
plasmon tomography-based sensors may be produced, with applications to chemical
and biological threat detection for homeland security, defense, and
environmental monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities under this CAREER
program span a broad range of technical and educational issues in science and
engineering, and address important applications. The major research topics are
as follows: 1. Image formation in surface plasmon microscopes: a comprehensive
description of the relation between the back focal plane and sample?s images
will be developed through combined experimental and theoretical approaches. This
will allow further optimization of these microscopic techniques. 2. Surface
plasmon propagation in plasmonic structures: novel plasmonics structures
including an active gain medium will be fabricated and plasmon propagation
through them will be characterized using the developed imaging techniques. When
integrated, these studies will result in advanced quantitative methods for
characterization of plasmon propagation in plasmonic devices and sensors with
huge parallel capabilities. The research plan will be integrated with
educational development and outreach activities. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be involved in interdisciplinary research at the Texas Tech
University Nano Tech Center relevant to our nation?s technical training needs.
In addition, under this CAREER project the PI will prepare and offer a course on
plasmonics with emphasis in plasmon-based imaging techniques for advanced
undergraduate and graduate students and will be involved in local programs for
recruiting students, emphasizing under-represented groups, to work in science
and engineering.