* 0954013
* CAREER: Integrated Micro-Electro-Mechanical-System for  Cellular Mechanotransduction Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2017
* Yi Zhao, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 02/28/2017
* USD 748,711.00

Cellular mechanotransduction, the mechanism by which cells convert a mechanical
stimulus into biochemical activities, widely affects a broad array of
physiological processes. The mechanical stimulus is perceived and processed by
cells and tissues through a highly complicated process regulated by a large
number of biomolecules, subcellular components and extracellular structures,
which eventually leads to appropriate biochemical responses. Understanding
mechanotransduction requires engineering devices that can provide in situ
assessment, in a controlled environment, of the cell response to systematically
variable external mechanical stimuli mimicking the combinatorial mechanical
loads (compressive/tensile) found in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CAREER
project, fully automated cellular mechanotransduction analysis will be
streamlined through the development of an integrated micro-electro-mechanical-
system (MEMS). The device will simplify the analysis of cells and tissues by
minimizing external influence and will provide direct correlation between an
applied mechanical stimulus and the activity of critical mechanosensitive
biomolecules. The device will enable application of independently controllable
combinational mechanical signals with preferred magnitudes, frequency, and
duration to cells on loading sites. The use of a microfluidic network will allow
parallel actuation of a large number of cells, and in situ intercellular and
intracellular analysis. Use of the device will be simplified by developing
instrumental and software interfaces. The efficacy of the device will be
evaluated using skeletal myoblasts C2C12. By enabling quantitative study
mechanotrandcution pathways, the device will help in the study of mechanisms
that govern physiologic and pathologic conditions of mechanosensitive
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER project will integrate the PI's research,
education and outreach activities. The research outcome will be incorporated
into courses and laboratory modules, benefitting students from both engineering
fields and biology. The research discoveries will be disseminated through
archival journals and conference presentations. Meanwhile, the research will
provide a vehicle to deliver math, technological and engineering science in an
exciting, practical, and interactive environment to minority and women students
through the institutional Engineers in Motion program, and to K-12 students
through collaboration with a local high school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
outcome will also be available at the lab website http://www.bme.ohio-
state.edu/yizhao/.