* 0954566
* CAREER: Nucleic acid circuitry for programming gene expression
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Georg Seelig, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 01/31/2016
* USD 535,000.00

0954566&lt;br/&gt;Seelig&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will enable a
potentially transformative technology for controlling cellular behavior using
nucleic acids. The PI will engineer synthetic molecular circuitry that can
analyze RNA expression inside living cells and { based on this analysis {
autonomously control gene expression. The PI will show that nucleic acid
circuitry can distinguish between di_erent cell types and states and can
specifically regulate a target gene only in a subset of cells. A central aim of
this project is to increase the specificity of conventional antisense and siRNA-
based therapeutics by combining drug delivery with sensing and logic. Specific
research objectives are: (i) The design of hybridization-based molecular sensors
for the detection of RNA in living cells; (ii) the design of controllable
molecular actuators based on antisense oligonucleotides and silencing RNA; (iii)
the construction of integrated sensor-actuator systems for conditional gene
regulation. This program provides the basis for the construction of complex
multi-component circuits for programmable control of gene expression. This work
will lead to new molecular tools for temporal and spatial control of gene
expression, with the potential for wide-spread applications in disease therapy
and in basic biology research. The proposed research is tightly integrated with
an outreach program with two main aims. The first aim is to develop an
educational framework that teaches the interdisciplinary skills required to
succeed in synthetic biology research. The second aim is to leverage this
framework to attract and engage students who are not traditionally involved with
life-science research, or would not consider enrolling in one of the traditional
tracks in an electrical engineering or computer science program (the PI's home
departments are EE and CS).