* 0954696
* CAREER: Anharmonic Dynamics of Thermal Transport in Nanotransistors and Across Hard-Soft Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Sanjiv Sinha, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 01/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

0954696

Sinha

This CAREER project is aimed at tailoring phonon transport phenomena in
nanostructures through the control of coherence and anharmonicity effects.
Coherence-scale phenomena are prominent in, for example, field-effect
transistors while anharmonicity affects transport at interfaces separating hard
and soft matter. The long-term goal of this project is to enable and advance
pertinent applications ranging from nanoelectronics to nanomedicine. Theoretical
tools will be developed to analyze coherence effects, while novel experiments
will be devised and conducted to probe the spectral properties of phonons
participating in thermal transport at hard-soft interfaces.

Intellectual Merit: A systematic investigation of the role of anharmonicity (in
soft matter) and coherence (in hard matter) during thermal transport will be
conducted. A phonon wave transport theory will be extended to include particle-
like behavior to enable the prediction of thermal responses in sub-10 nanometer
transistors. A novel time-resolved Raman scattering approach to experimentally
probe temperature-dependent anharmonic shifts in the frequencies of
macromolecules will also be developed, providing a means to gain insight into
the anharmonic dynamics of phonons in soft matter.

Broader Impacts: The project is aimed at developing a fundamental understanding
of thermal transport in soft and hard matter, and across interfaces separating
these materials. This understanding may lead to new pathways for developing
small-scale transistors, discovering new cancer therapies, and creating novel
energy harvesting thermoelectric materials. The education plan will motivate
students at multiple levels to pursue careers and research in energy conversion
and the thermal sciences. New laboratory experiences will be incorporated into
undergraduate laboratory courses at the PI's institution. Likewise, a new
graduate course in nanotransport will be developed. Teaching kits will be
developed for K-12 teachers, and outreach will include summer camps to introduce
energy conversion principles to high school girls.