* 0954420
* CAREER: Reliability Engineering for Electrical Energy Systems 2020: Smart Grid Applications and Beyond
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Alejandro Dominguez-Garcia, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 01/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Objectives;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to create
reliability engineering tools to address planning and operation challenges of
future electrical energy systems. These tools will focus on i) quantifying the
impact of coupling between cyber and physical components on reliability, ii)
quantifying the impact of coupling between system dynamics and component stress
on reliability, and iii) implementing mechanisms for effective fault tolerance.
The approach is to tailor a blend of reliability- and control-theoretic tools to
the unique structural features of electrical energy
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will provide a taxonomy of faults in cyber components of electrical
energy systems. Analytical models to assess the impact of these faults will be
constructed using results from switched system stability. Stochastic hybrid
system formalisms will be used to provide an analytical framework for capturing
the interplay between system dynamics and component stress. Fault diagnosis in
electrical energy systems, which has been primarily restricted to physical
components, is paramount for fault tolerance. Switched system invertibility
techniques will be utilized to address fault diagnosis of cyber
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will forward the Smart Grid vision by providing tools for engineering
more reliable and responsive electrical energy systems. Educationally, the goal
is to develop materials that provide a unified view of the disciplines relevant
to this project - electrical energy systems, reliability, and control - for
training the next generation of power engineers. The PI will collaborate with
the Educational Equity Programs Office and the Office of Minority Student
Affairs at the University of Illinois to attract underrepresented minorities.