* 0954704
* CAREER: Streaming Data Analysis in Sensor Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Yajun Mei, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

This research aims to offer statistical foundation and a host of efficient
scalable methodologies for streaming data analysis in sensor networks. In many
applications, sensor networks are deployed to online monitoring of changing
environments over time and space, with a goal of early detection of some
particular trigger events that can cause significant damage. However, the nature
of streaming data from distributed, diverse sources and the constrained network
resources (on communication, computing, costs, privacy of raw data, etc.) pose
significant challenges, which require the development of new statistical tools,
methods and theories. In this project, the investigator proposes a novel general
framework for monitoring sensor networks in which a trigger event may affect
different sensors or data streams differently. Some specific research topics
include pure (consensus or parallel) detection and inference after detection,
under different scenarios, depending on the models for sensor observations and
the design requirements of sensor protocols. In addition, the research will
integrate research and education by infusing the research findings into the
curriculum, by organizing seminars and workshops, and by advising graduate and
undergraduate students.

Senor networks have broad real-world applications, including but not limited to
health and environmental monitoring, biomedical signal processing, wireless
communication, intrusion detection in computer networks, and biosurveillance. On
the one hand, this research project will offer crucial statistical tools to
effectively and efficiently monitor and analyze dynamic data streams in these
sensor network applications. On the other hand, it also has a frustrating yet
profound implication in these applications: Faced with the limitations implied
by the (asymptotic) optimality theories of the proposed research, practitioners
and researchers may need to constantly look for better data sources to achieve
desired system performance in their specific applications rather than relying on
an improved methodology for existing data sources.