* 0954380
* CAREER: Designed Peptide Conjugates for Precisely Controlling the Fabrication, Structure, and Properties of Nanoparticle Superstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Nathaniel Rosi, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2016
* USD 609,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CAREER award, funded
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and the Biomaterials programs of the
Division of Materials Research, Professor Nathaniel Rosi proposes to develop a
new synthetic strategy for simultaneously controlling both the synthesis and the
assembly of inorganic nanoparticles. Nanoparticle properties depend
intrinsically on their size, shape, and composition and also their local
arrangement within an assembled nanoparticle superstructure. However, precisely
controlling the structure of nanoparticle superstructures and precisely
controlling the placement and registry of nanoparticles within these
superstructures is a significant challenge. Synthetic methods capable of
addressing this challenge would enable the design of nanoparticle
superstructures with arbitrary structural complexity and highly specific and
tunable physical properties. The proposed work focuses on the development of a
new class of peptide conjugate molecules designed to simultaneously direct the
nucleation, growth, and assembly of inorganic nanoparticle superstructures. The
peptide conjugates will be programmed to control both the composition of the
nanoparticles and the ultimate topology of the nanoparticle superstructure. This
methodology will be optimized in order to allow for control over nanoparticle
size, composition, and interparticle spacing. These factors will be
systematically tuned to prepare nanoparticle superstructure-based substrates for
surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. The successful execution of the proposed
work will lead to new methodology for precisely controlling the synthesis,
assembly, and physical properties of nanoparticle
superstructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles are envisioned to be the structural
and functional building blocks for next-generation materials and devices. The
physical properties of nanoparticles depend largely on how they are arranged
into a material or device. Therefore, in order to control the properties of
these next-generation materials, it is important to be able to precisely control
the arrangement and assembly of their constituent nanoparticles. The proposed
work aims to address fundamental challenges associated with nanoparticle
assembly, and it will lead to the development of new methodology for controlling
the synthesis, assembly, and properties of nanoparticle superstructures. These
basic research efforts will be coupled with outreach efforts aimed at attracting
high-school students, especially minorities, to participate in university-based
chemistry research. Undergraduate and graduate students will develop important
mentoring skills while training high-school collaborators in a cutting-edge and
highly interdisciplinary laboratory environment. &lt;br/&gt;