* 0954157
* CAREER:  Communication System Design for Future Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Li Shang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/29/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Over the next decade, advances in integrated circuit (IC) communication systems
will encounter a number of interdependent challenges from system and
architecture design to physical technology integration. With increasing system
integration and technology scaling, the performance and scalability of
electrical interconnect have become the primary bottleneck in IC design. Power
and process variation induced thermal and reliability challenges further
complicate IC communication system design and run-time operation. Looking
forward, emerging system and physical technologies will vastly change the
landscape of IC communication -- the move towards many-core systems and parallel
applications increases the communication requirements and calls for new
communication solutions to support system-level performance and functionality.
Meanwhile, emerging physical technologies, such as nanophotonic interconnect and
three-dimensional (3D) integration, are gradually becoming commercially
feasible. Their adoption will offer new opportunities but also pose new
challenges to IC communication system
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this CAREER development plan is to systematically investigate communication
system design for future ICs and address the corresponding research challenges
from system exploration, modeling and analysis, to technology integration,
emphasizing a unified study of emerging communication system and physical
technologies. More specifically, it will focus on addressing the following two
system-level and physical challenges: (1)How emerging many-core systems will
change the communication system design; and (2) How emerging physical
technologies will change the communication system design. This work aims to
discover scientific knowledge necessary for a unified exploration of IC
communication system design, and deliver new communication architectures and
physical solutions, modeling and analysis methods, design methodologies, and
optimization techniques. The end results will be demonstrated and validated with
chip designs.