* 0954088
* CAREER: Interacting with Cyberinfrastructure in the Face of Changing Science
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2017
* Charlotte Lee, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2017
* USD 577,583.00

This research will develop a framework to understand the set of sociotechnical
relationships that comprise cyberinfrastructure (CI). Cyberinfrastructures are
distributed organizations supported by such technologies as supercomputers and
high-speed networks. Scientific cyberinfrastructures, or eScience projects, are
multiplying rapidly because they can be brought to bear on some of the world's
most important problems in energy, the environment, health, and security. The
technical challenges of cyberinfrastructure are already so demanding that
projects often have little time to engage reflexively on how
cyberinfrastructures are used and created in the current state of rapid
scientific change in which the necessity of data sharing and multidisciplinary
approaches is putting pressure on disciplinary boundaries. While the ability to
pool data can enable scientists to answer questions that no single investigator
or laboratory could answer individually, large-scale databases also bear the
significant burden of supporting scientific sub-domains with different
priorities and requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use
ethnographic methods, including participant-observation and semi-structured
interviews, to investigate: How scientists and engineers decide which
cyberinfrastructure resources (e.g. databases and tools) to use and under what
circumstances; Under what circumstances do scientists and engineers decide to
create their own resources; How are scientists and engineers mixing disciplinary
practices within their own laboratories; When do scientists and engineers adopt
hybrid identities (e.g. computational biologists and bioinformaticists).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make empirical and conceptual
contributions to research in areas such as computer supported cooperative work,
science and technology studies, and the study of CI. It will provide a corpus of
material describing how local concerns shape the use of CIs and the development
and use of alternative local resources. By contributing to a more sophisticated
understanding of how eScience is dependent on both technical and social
transformation, this research will stimulate and support the development of
future eScience research. This project will benefit cyberinfrastructure users
and developers, funding bodies and policy makers, by creating a typology of
change related to scientific practice, training, and technological change. The
education components will give students hands-on involvement in research
including developing research instruments, collecting and analyzing data, and
writing papers. Diverse students from undergraduate to postdoctoral level,
including women and minorities, will emerge with practical skills as well as
exposure to theoretical issues related to collaboration and eScience.&lt;br/&gt;