* 0954314
* CAREER:  Multifunctional Biorenewable Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Michael Kessler, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2014
* USD 400,001.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to investigate biorenewable thermosetting polymers derived from vegetable
oils and to explore the use of microencapsulated liquid healing agents in these
bio-based polymers as multifunctional composites with the ability to heal damage
autonomically (i.e. self-healing bio-based polymers). These biorenewable
polymers will be synthesized from the ring-opening metathesis polymerization of
modified castor, soybean, and linseed oils to maximize the thermal and
mechanical properties of the resin for structural composite materials. The
research approach then examines whether viable and compatible self-repair
mechanisms can be incorporated into these systems to mitigate damage, similar to
those developed for synthetic epoxy systems.

If successful, the results of this research will provide biorenewable
alternatives to petroleum-based resins. These bio-based thermosets employ
substantial amounts of renewable resources which are substantially cheaper than
the petroleum-based feedstocks used in conventional composites, suggesting that
this technology should have a huge impact economically and environmentally. In
addition, polymeric structural materials are prone to microcracks and the
ability to heal them will enable structures with longer lifetimes and less
maintenance. Though the potential benefits are quite high, there are several
practical limitations (such as crack healing kinetics, manufacturing
limitations, and stability of the healing agent system to environmental
conditions) that need to be overcome in order for the benefits to be realized in
society. This research program is a first step in transitioning this technology
to biorenewable polymers and overcoming the limitations that plague the current
state-of-the-art in self-healing materials. The goals of the project will be
realized by actively involving both undergraduate and graduate students in the
research process and in the development of an immersive educational video game
about bio-renewable and multifunctional polymers, broadening the type of
resources currently utilized in polymer science outreach.