* 0954651
* DDIG: Commitment and Flexibility in the Developing Parser
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Colin Phillips, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2012
* USD 11,966.00

Language learners must identify linguistic properties that differ across
languages in the language input that surrounds them, and much recent research
has explored the potential importance of distributional regularities in the
language input for successful learning. However, other recent findings on child
sentence understanding have shown that children's immature language
comprehension system is prone to mis-parsing of the input. This raises the
possibility that informative distributional information might be missed by the
learner: if a child misanalyzes sentences in the input, then the true input
distribution from the perspective of adults and researchers may be different
from the 'intake', i.e., the effective input distribution that feeds into the
language learning mechanism. This project investigates this issue through
studies of incremental sentence parsing and reanalysis in question constructions
in English and Japanese. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Colin
Phillips and Dr. Jeffrey Lidz, Mr. Akira Omaki will conduct studies using eye-
tracking, question-after-story and truth value judgment measures in English and
Japanese in order to assess a) whether children, like adults, make early
commitments to the interpretation of questions ('active dependency processing'),
and b) whether children are able to successfully reanalyze in cases where their
initial interpretation turns out to be incorrect. The experimental findings will
be supplemented with a corpus analysis and a computational modeling study will
be combined with the experimental findings, in order to generate an estimate of
how the distribution of wh-question constructions appears from a child's
perspective. A novel feature of the project is that it combines experimental and
corpus-based approaches to gain an understanding of how children's language
comprehension system might lead them to apprehend distributional regularities
that do not correspond to what is actually present in their input. Thus, one
broader impact of the project is that it could have important implications for
any research that emphasizes the role of distributional regularities in the
language acquisition process. A second broader impact of the project is that it
will help to establish new partnerships for language acquisition research on
Japanese, based on developing institutional connections with preschools, and
will facilitate future international collaborations on comparative language
acquisition studies.