* 0954958
* CAREER:  Advanced Acceleration Control Methods and Substructure Techniques for Shaking Table Tests
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Narutoshi Nakata, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 400,205.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program
project is to develop methodologies that enhance accuracy and capabilities of
shake table testing of structures. In particular, this study aims to improve
acceleration control methods to reproduce reference accelerations at shake table
and to develop substructure techniques to account for dynamically varying
boundary conditions. The accurate reproduction of reference accelerations is
critical for the investigation of their true impact on structures. By combining
feed-forward and feedback control, innovative, high-performance acceleration
control methods will be developed through analytical and computational studies.
These acceleration control methods will be experimentally validated based on
multiple stability and performance criteria under various conditions. Special
attention will be paid to acceleration trajectory tracking performance. When
partial structural models are tested on a shake table, substructure techniques
that take into account interactions with boundary members are essential for the
systems level assessment. Substructure techniques for shake tables will be
explored using two approaches: 1) inertial force approach, where the
acceleration of a supplemental inertial mass is controlled to generate an
inertial force that is equivalent to the boundary force, and 2) direct force
approach, where the dynamic boundary force is directly imposed by dynamic
actuators. Numerical integration algorithms that are required for the
substructure techniques will also be developed. Capabilities and limitations of
the substructure shake table tests will be investigated through numerical and
experimental studies. The results of this research will have a direct impact on
earthquake engineering, by providing accurate experimental means for seismic
performance assessment of structures under dynamic loadings and boundary
conditions. This research also meshes well with the scope of the National
Science Foundation, George E. Brown Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation program. The project will provide integrated education and research
opportunities for students at all-levels. In activities for K-12 students and
the general public, the focus will be placed on linking their knowledge and the
project through hands-on laboratory experience. Specific targets include high-
school students in the Woman In Science and Engineering Program at the Johns
Hopkins University and the Practicum Program at Baltimore Polytechnic High
School. At the college level, this research will be integrated into a laboratory
for the undergraduate Dynamics course that the PI is currently offering. It will
also provide undergraduate research opportunities that help students develop
fundamental understanding of theories in dynamics and control. At the graduate
level, a new course, "Advanced Experimental Methods for Structures", will
integrate the project into the course lecture and laboratory activities. This
research will be disseminated through the project website, and the results will
be published through a number of significant journals and conference
proceedings.