* 0954836
* CAREER: A Computational and Analytical Approach to Single-Molecule Fluorescence Imaging for the Quantitative Analysis of Protein Interactions in Living Cells.
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,01/31/2017
* Keith Lidke, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 01/31/2017
* USD 512,269.00

In this CAREER project the PI will study pre-clustering of the IgE receptor
system. The proposed approach is to use the intermittent and independent
fluctuations of fluorescent probes that are either photo-switchable or naturally
intermittent to extract individual trajectories even when there are clusters of
fluorophores with sizes below the diffraction limit. The approach is based on
finding parameters and states in hidden Markov models and this approach will be
further developed. The specific aims of this project are (1) to use fluorescent
probes that are either photo-switchable or naturally intermittent to find single
membrane protein trajectories of high density membrane components; (2) to use
the trajectories of closely spaced proteins in conjunction with physical models
to extract the binding kinetics between single molecules and to map out the
energy landscape of the cell membrane; (3) using the developed techniques, to
characterize the behavior of the IgE binding receptor of RBL-2H3 cells. The
project will provide multidisciplinary training for a graduate student as well
as undergraduate students and offer annual, paid research mentorships to high
school students in the Albuquerque, New Mexico area. A student exchange program
with the Quantitative Imaging group at Delft Technical University, Netherlands
will allow up to 3 months annual international study for graduate students or
promising undergraduates. An upper level Biophysics course will be developed
based on the research interests of the PI's department. Speakers will be invited
from within the U.S. to give talks on related research in a biophysics seminar
series.