* 0954667
* CAREER: Adaptive Operational Coordination Methodology for Uncertainty Reduction in Product Life Cycle Reliability and Service Logistics
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Haitao Liao, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 06/30/2012
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop a cohesive, adaptive operational coordination methodology for
overall uncertainty reduction in product life cycle reliability and service
logistics. The methodology consists of three stages: robust accelerated testing
(AT), AT-enhanced condition based maintenance, and operational coordination,
each of which needs its own mathematical models and computational tools. In
particular, this methodology offers a new optimal experimental design approach
for planning robust AT that preliminarily reduces the uncertainty in product
reliability estimate under generic (e.g., stochastic) operating conditions.
Based on the refined reliability estimate, mathematical and statistical models
will be developed to enable the real-time control of product reliability. By
incorporating the information about service delays, maintenance and logistic
processes will be adjusted along with the real-time control of product
reliability to reduce the overall uncertainty involved. The methodology will be
validated through ongoing wind energy research involving wind turbine test bed
development and collaboration with leading industry partners.

If successful, this research will lead to fundamental contributions to
reliability testing, condition based maintenance, and service logistics, as it
integrates disjoint tasks into a more efficient and viable framework.
Essentially, the increased understanding of adaptive coordination in a product
life cycle will make radical changes to the current research direction and
industry practices that demand advanced mathematical tools. Moreover, this
research will support the development and use of renewable energy technologies
in the US, as a national priority, for energy security and independence. It will
positively impact multiple engineering fields, such as composites materials,
sensors, controls, and power systems. Finally, the planned educational
activities in a multidisciplinary environment will help students and working
professionals acquire both analytical and experimental skills as well as systems
thinking capabilities to meet societal needs.