* 0954608
* WORKSHOP:  Shared Organizing Principles in the Biological and Computing Sciences
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Ralph Greenspan, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2011
* USD 98,570.00

&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will provide a forum to stimulate creative
thought and?@productive interactions among scientists whose research interests
lie at the interface between two diverse and vibrant fields, Computing Science
and Biology.?@?@These two scientific communities have a history of mutual
influence whereby the?@transfer of ideas, approaches, and technologies has
significantly advanced both?@fields. Recently, it has become apparent that a
similar set of scientific questions?@are being asked by computer scientists and
biologists. The identification and?@articulation of shared organizing principles
is the next logical step in the ongoing?@dialogue, and a workshop that brings
together leading researchers whose?@research bridges the two fields is an ideal
venue to achieve these goals. The?@proposed workshop will include both
informational and ?gbrainstorming?h sessions?@in which participants will discuss
the current state of the art, key challenges and?@mechanisms to catalyze
advances in this important emerging research area.?@?@The specific topics to be
covered are (1) information representation and?@processing; (2) networks and
communication; (3) system synthesis and design;?@(4) control systems; and (5)
learning and adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop is an outgrowth of the activities
of?@the CISE-BIO Working Group, which is comprised of NSF Program Directors
who?@have been meeting for over a year to discuss strategies to promote research
at?@the interface between these two Directorates. Through an exploration of
the?@above mentioned areas, the proposed workshop seeks to enhance
existing?@programs and identify new directions, with the ultimate goal of
creating an?@integrated discipline in which shared organizing principles from
the Biological and?@Computing Sciences will give rise to new paradigms that are
distinct from, yet?@related to, those that drive research in the parent
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
workshop will be a true ?gmeeting of minds?h by?@virtue of bringing together a
diverse group of scientists who do not normally?@attend the same conferences. In
addition to developing a clearer vision for future?@research at the interface
between Computing and Biological Science, it is?@expected that specific new
collaborations will be forged at the workshop. The?@discussion topics,
identified challenges and proposed future directions will be?@disseminated
online after the workshop to enhance awareness of these initiatives?@among a
broad and diverse audience. This is expected to attract students as?@well as
more established scientists to undertake research at the CISE-
BIO?@interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;