* 0954465
* CAREER: Internal Biofluid Dynamics in Embryonic Cardiovascular Development, Morphomechanics and Comparative Ontogeny
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2015
* Kerem Pekkan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2015
* USD 463,999.00

0954465&lt;br/&gt;Pekkan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The aim of
this research is to develop cardiovascular fluid mechanics tools that can
analyze and predict the 3D vascular changes due to the growth and remodeling
process (GR) during early embryonic cardiac development. Mechanical flow-induced
loading, in addition to the genetic factors, is an essential regulator of this
GR feedback process. Fluid-induced vascular 3D changes will be computed through
transformative aims at the system and at the organ levels; that are coupled to
the lower-level GR theories. At the system level, the rich diversity of
circulation systems found in nature inspired a novel reduced-order lumped
parameter circulation model (LPM). For the first-time, LPM is integrated with
multi-scale continuum mechanics vascular GR theories in order to establish a
numerical feed-back loop between the GR response and instantaneous hemodynamic
circuit parameters. A general network-based LPM model is proposed, again for the
first time that covers the entire hydrodynamic network space where the numbers
of vascular compartments, ventricles and their branching patterns evolve freely,
but are subject to the cost functions founded on the biological optimality
principles. Formal engineering optimization routines and novel circuit
similitude parameters that allow an unbiased energetic comparison will be
developed to realize this aim. This framework will provide the global GR
response of the entire circulation during development, energy/exergy budgets of
complex congenital heart disease pathologies, and impact pediatric surgical
treatments. At the organ level, integrated with a high-resolution in-house 3D
immersed boundary computational fluid dynamics (CFD) solver, an innovative
optimization based arterial GR paradigm that eliminates the need for commonly
employed growth rate laws or micro-structurally motivated phenomenological
models is proposed. A fully automated shape-optimizer, geometry parameterization
and dedicated moving boundary Cartesian meshing will be achieved through a
unique interdisciplinary engineering collaboration. The tools developed will
also transform the broader patient-specific CFD technology, which is currently
used in clinical decision making, by addressing the dynamic 3D morphologies and
facilitating simulations at multiple biological time-points predicting the acute
tissue response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: The educational component
of this project seeks to convey the fascinating biomechanics of embryonic
vascular development, biomedical engineering and the distinctive science of
hemodynamics at all levels from pre-kindergarden through graduate school by
providing excellent training and enrichment opportunities. A widespread high-
impact outreach program is proposed: (1) Integrate all proposed research
objectives to the institutional undergraduate and graduate teaching program. (2)
Transform the teaching and research laboratory culture so that student teams are
encouraged and supported in designing and executing innovative outreach
activities themselves as part of their regular graduate or undergraduate
program. (3) Train in-service and pre-service science teachers through
biomedical engineering workshops and at Research Seminar courses collaborating
with Leonard Gelfand Center for Service Learning and Outreach at Carnegie Mellon
University and School of Education at University of Pittsburgh, respectively.
(4) Within the framework of Carnegie Mellon Institute for Talented Elementary
and Secondary Students Program (C-MITES), develop novel hands-on, interactive
activities about cardiovascular fluid dynamics and bio-inspired engineering. (5)
Collaborate with the regional early-education centers and organize pedagogical
activities in the form of scientific games and attract scientific curiosity as
early as possible particularly for girls and minorities. (6) Develop long-term
contacts at regional museums and share ongoing research achievements by
participating actively in their community events. Finally, the engineering aims
of this project will have an important impact on the pediatric and fetal
cardiology, and cardiovascular surgery by giving researchers access to
quantitative physiological information from which new discoveries and biomedical
applications will materialize. Embryonic cardiovascular fluid dynamics is an
emerging research field that challenges the human-centric bias and apathetic
viewpoint of the static mature and healthy cardiovascular system at all
educational levels.