* 0954752
* CAREER:  Integrated Research and Education in Self-powered Micro-sensing for Embedded and Implantable Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Shantanu Chakrabartty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 03/31/2015
* USD 406,000.00

The research objectives of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is investigating novel battery-less, self-powered micro-sensors that can operate
at fundamental limits of energy harvesting (picowatt-nanowatt power consumption)
and hence can be used for long-term monitoring of fatigue in civil, mechanical
and biomechanical structures.

Intellectual Merit

A novel piezoelectricity driven ionized-impact hot electron injection(p-IHEI)
principle which exploits the computational primitives inherent in the interface
physics between piezoelectric transducers and floating-gate transistors. The
p-IHEI principle is being used for self-powered computation of mechanical usage
statistics (strain, strain-rate, acceleration, dwell-time and spectral
statistics) which are useful to prognosticate fatigue. Also a novel
piezoelectricity driven harmonic radar where the piezoelectric element scavenges
ambient mechanical noise to amplify and reflect harmonics of any impinging
radio-frequency signals. This principle bypasses many of the signal processing
steps in a conventional radio-frequency identification technique and has the
potential for interrogation distances beyond 100m.

Broader Impacts

Battery-less micro-sensors will be developed which could become an integral part
of the next generation of ?smart" structures that can self-diagnose damage and
fatigue before the occurrence of any catastrophic failure. The outreach
component of this project is focused on developing an electrical-civil-
engineering forum in the area of electronic sensing systems for structural
health monitoring. This forum is being used to train graduate and undergraduate
students and students belonging to under-represented communities.