* 0954234
* CAREER: Control of Information Security Risk Using Economic Incentives
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Terrence August, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2016
* USD 529,991.00

Security risks associated with software that communicates over networks have
become an increasingly costly problem for consumers, firms, and governments. A
key characteristic of any interconnected system (e.g., network software such as
Apache HTTP server, the smart grid, and airline baggage operations) is that
choices made in the design, deployment, and usage of these systems can have
significant implications for security risk. Because these choices are often
driven by economic tradeoffs, both firm and consumer incentives can be designed
to encourage the development of systems that are less vulnerable. Further, due
to the fact that seemingly disparate systems are connected through the network,
security weaknesses in one system can rapidly cause major problems for another.
Because of these negative externalities, governments may need to intervene
through regulation or legislation to ensure the security of critical components
of the public infrastructure (e.g., the Internet). This project develops a
research framework to analyze the relationship between government policy,
economic incentives of firms and consumers, and software security risks of
networks. The goal of the project is to gain new insights into how the efforts
of firms, consumers, and government can be coordinated to improve software
security. To better understand this socio-technical problem, the research will
generate formal economic theory to analyze the complex interactions between
these entities, each of whom has varying economic incentives. Three important
aspects of the software security landscape are studied: software liability, the
impact of software deployment models, and open source software incentives for
security. To clarify the interplay between public and private forces on
security, this research program rigorously studies the role of government in
setting policy on software liability, security investment, and technology-
specific subsidization to help control software security risks. It will provide
guidelines on how software liability should be employed in a context with
security interdependence. Also, since design choices by software firms partially
determine a given product?s risk exposure to both directed and undirected
security attacks, a modeling framework is built to examine how each type of
attack distinctly influences software security in consideration of user
behavior; the results have important implications for optimal software design.
An important outcome of the work is to combine for the first time research on
the economics of open source software with that on security risk, two
significant streams of research in the literature. In this dimension, the
project investigates whether open source software can lower security risks and
lead to socially preferable outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By advancing one?s
understanding of how to manage software security risk, this project will have
wideranging impacts. First, the results will provide guidance to policy makers
on how to craft policies which account for firm and user behavior while
mitigating the enormous social and economic losses from security attacks on
software. Since software security is critical to national defense, one priority
is to keep an open dialogue with appropriate government agencies on the
project?s outcomes. Second, this work can advise software firms on improved
software design and using source code strategy to achieve greater security.
Third, society can benefit substantially from improved software and reduced
economic losses. By involving undergraduate and graduate students in the
research process, the project will provide mentorship on economic modeling and
quantitative analysis. As part of the educational activities, a case study that
focuses on the interaction between open source incentives and security risk will
be generated.&lt;br/&gt;By integrating the research findings and the case study
with IT curricula, the project will educate future business leaders on IT
strategy and security.