* 0954016
* CAREER: Development of 13C-assisted Metabolic Flux Analysis Tools for Metabolic Engineering of Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Yinjie Tang, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 02/28/2015
* USD 500,000.00

Cyanobacteria possess a complex and unique network for carbon metabolism,
enabling them to thrive on the minimal nutrients available in aquatic
environments. This research develops and applies 13C-assisted metabolic flux
analysis tools to study photoautotrophic metabolism in the model cyanobacteria
Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 and Cyanothece 51142. The research objectives include:
1) improving GC-MS-based metabolite and isotopomer (isotopic isomer) measurement
techniques, 2) developing a dynamic flux model to decipher carbon fluxes and
metabolic regulation based on isotopomer distribution in fast-turnover
metabolites, 3) applying the flux model for metabolic engineering of
cyanobacteria to synthesize butanol via non-fermentative pathways. This research
will generate 13C-assisted flux analysis tools to understand enzyme functions
and metabolic regulations in cyanobacteria. This study will also develop strains
to produce biofuels from carbon dioxide and
sunlight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
explores cyanobacterial applications, offering a potential solution to both
energy and environmental crises. The 13C-assisted flux analysis tools developed
in this project can be used to investigate many other photosynthetic organisms
including plants used for commercial agriculture. Furthermore, research and
education efforts will be combined through the following: 1) Two biotechnology
courses (Bioprocess Laboratory and Synthetic Biology) will be created to improve
both biological laboratory skills and bioscience knowledge for undergraduate
students; 2) the CAREER research will be integrated with the Washington
University iGEM (International Genetically Engineered Machine Competition) team
project, encouraging participation of female/minority students; 3) the CAREER
research will be integrated with the Clean-Coal Program at Washington University
(supported by local companies in St. Louis) to provide students with industrial
experience.