* 0954985
* PECASE:  Nanoscale Assembly Approaches Toward High Performance Micro Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2018
* Andre Taylor, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2018
* USD 427,000.00

0954985&lt;br/&gt;Taylor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fuel cells were once championed as
viable alternatives to existing battery technology for energy storage. However,
such hopes have not been realized due to poor assembly of the catalyst interface
contributing to the meager performance of these devices. The research proposed
here will use a new, integrated approach, combining the advantages of top down
(microfabrication) with bottom up (electrostatic assembly) to obtain high-
performance fuel cells. The work will integrate high-performance nanomaterials
into a CMOS microfabricated fuel cell architecture, resulting in self-assembled
nanomaterial/polyelectrolyte composites through water-based processing methods
integrated into a silicon-based, microstructured fuel cell architecture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct alcohol fuel cells (DAFCs) are of particular
interest because of the high power density of renewable liquid fuels such as
ethanol. The proposed fuel cell architecture will be achieved by etching
microfluidic channels into a silicon-based substrate with integrated electrodes,
heaters, and temperature sensors. The substrate will serve as a platform for the
layering of the catalyst nanomaterials (e.g. decorated carbon nanotubes,
polymers) on top of a monolithic, open face, fuel cell architecture. Exploration
of the assembly methods as well as a comprehensive assessment of materials
suitable for this approach would transform this field by creating next-
generation power sources that can readily be integrated with electronic devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
novel because it combines the advantages of top-down microfabrication with
bottom-up electrostatic assembly to obtain unique fuel cell device structures.
Furthermore, this research is potentially transformative because this new
fabrication approach and its resulting device architectures have significant
potential to make the breakthroughs needed to achieve high-performance alkaline
fuel cells that convert ethanol, a renewable liquid fuel, directly to
electricity for use in vehicles. Although the specific work will focus on
alkaline direct ethanol fuel cells, the systems generated should prove to be
applicable to hydrogen and bio-fuel cell systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research plan incorporates top-down, bottom-up, and integrative approaches.
First, in the top-down approach, an integrated monolithic microstructured fuel
cell design will maximize bulk and surface micromachining processing
capabilities originally developed for integrated circuits and MEMs devices.
Design rules will be derived to capture operating conditions (e.g., flow rates
and temperatures) and design parameters (e.g., channel length, electrode design,
and active area) to maximize the performance of an individual microstructured
fuel cell. Second, in the bottom-up approach, nanomaterials that exploit the
advantage of superior electrocatalytic activity at both the anode and cathode
will be employed, using carbon nanotubes decorated with transition metal
catalysts. Third, in the integrative approach, the electrostatic layer-by-layer
(LBL) assembly method will be used to generate ultrathin films (on top of the
monolithic fuel cell) through the alteration of polycationic and anionic
polymer/nanomaterial systems. This alteration will enable the nanoscale
manipulation of thin film composition and the creation of molecular level blends
that would be difficult to produce using conventional fuel cell assembly
methods. Parameters (e.g. ionic strength and polyion composition) will be varied
to generate a highly tuned membrane electrode assembly interface built directly
on top of the integrated silicon based
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the traditional interdisciplinary training of graduate
and undergraduate students, web-based distance learning approaches will be used
to reach a larger, broader audience of students from under-represented groups
through a two-stage collaborative pipeline. The first stage is the development
of electrochemistry modules for a Detroit High School chemistry class using
YouTube, and the second is to have undergraduates at Armstrong Atlantic State
University lead the design and development of a spray coat layer-by-layer
deposition machine aimed to decrease the fabrication time of functional thin
films used in the research. Other activities include development of modules for
a course entitled Microelectrochemical Systems.