* 0954817
* CAREER: Understanding and Controlling the Integration of Magnetism into Semiconducting Mixed Metal Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,05/31/2012
* Pierre Poudeu Poudeu, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 05/31/2012
* USD 467,500.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The ability to develop in a single material, ferromagnetic and semiconducting
functionalities which are desirable for spintronics as well as thermoelectric
devices is a great challenge in solid state chemistry. This CAREER grant
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program seeks to
exploit the marked structural features of synthetic and naturally occurring
ternary and quaternary heavy main-group metal chalcogenides with general
composition Pb(n+2)Sb2(m+1)Q(n+3m+5 and MtPb(n-t+2)Sb2(m+1)Q(n+3m+5) (M = Mn,
Fe, Co; Q = S, Se, Te) to: (i) investigate the stability of the framework
structure upon changing the nature of transition metal elements and/or the
nature of chalcogen atom; (ii) investigate how the magnetism and the charge
transport properties of this family of compounds change with modification of the
composition and structure; and (iii) understand the correlation between the
charge carrier's concentration and mobility and the coupling between magnetic
centers in the structure. This will be done by combining two approaches: (a) the
nature and stoichiometry of elements within a given structure type will be
systematically varied and their effects on the magnetism and electronic
transport of the resulting materials will be assessed, (b) for a given system,
phases with structures closely related to each other (pseudo-homologous series)
will be used to investigate the effects of structural evolution (changes in
structure type within the homologous series) on the magnetism and charge
transport properties of the materials.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This research program aims to develop ferromagnetic and semiconducting
functionalities in a single material. The availability of such materials could
impact the architecture of modern computers where an entire computer is built on
a single semiconducting chip using a device capable of electronically writing
and reading information to and from a magnetic material. Additionally, the
materials can also be used to build a device capable of cooling the whole
computing system. The multi-component educational program proposed in this
CAREER grant will provide research and teaching experiences to K-12 teachers,
high school students, undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral
associates. Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will receive
outstanding training on state-of-the-art techniques in high temperature solid-
state synthesis, X-ray diffraction and physical properties measurements. They
will also be involved in data analysis as well as preparation of manuscripts for
publication. Although, the University of New Orleans (UNO) is located in an
"urban city" with about 58% of the population from African American origin, the
number of high school seniors from this group entering higher education is still
low. The proposed Community Services and Learning Experiences for Chemistry
Freshmen program will provide hands-on experience and training to current UNO
Chemistry freshmen while simultaneously stimulating interest among high school
students (sophomores, juniors and seniors) in chemistry.