* 0954211
* CAREER:  From Nonstop-Monitoring to Nano-ISA: An Adaptive Multi-Dimensional Framework for Processor Reliability
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2017
* Murali Annavaram, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 443,664.00

Successful use of computing technologies has enhanced quality of life. In fact,
it is hard to point to even one aspect of societal functioning that is not
impacted positively by computer systems. The tremendous advances in computer
system performance while simultaneously lowering the computing cost have been
the primary reason for the success of computing. However, shrinking device sizes
have recently lead to new challenges in system reliability. System reliability
is an uncompromising concern and is the primary focus of this proposed research.
Rather than addressing one single reliability concern, such as soft errors or
process variations, this proposal takes a multi-dimensional approach to improve
Mean-Time-To-Failure (MTTF). Reliability degrades extremely slowly over time and
hence the solutions proposed in this research are also low cost solutions. In
order to develop low cost solutions, the first step is to non-intrusively
monitor the health of a processor to understand its aging process before taking
proactive measures for detecting errors. When the error is detected, instead of
employing expensive hardware solutions, this proposal uses low cost and flexible
software mechanisms to correct the errors. While any one approach will certainly
extend MTTF, the true benefits of the proposed research will bear fruition when
error monitoring, detection and correction are employed in a hierarchical
framework based on reliability needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this proposal are on two fronts. The proposed research is
motivated by industrial concerns regarding system reliability. On the technology
front, the low cost solutions developed will be transferred for industry
adoption through close industry-academia interactions. Most of the proposed
research ideas will be designed and implemented by the research team as research
prototypes. These prototypes will be shared with industrial partners for further
evaluations in an industrial setting. Woman and minority student recruitment
will be one of the key driving force to encourage broader participation in the
proposed research. This objective will be achieved through active participation
and involvement of USC's Family of Schools in Los Angeles.