* 0954717
* CAREER:  Energy in Sustainable Infrastructure - Multi-scale/physical Approach to a Novel Hybrid Solar Roofing Panel
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Huiming Yin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 405,897.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will investigate and
improve infrastructure sustainability with experimental and modeling approaches
by studying the multi-physical properties of solar roofing materials and
fabricate a novel solar roofing panel with optimized multifunction. The panel
will contain a photovoltaic layer deposited on a thermoelectric layer and then
bonded to a plastic lumber substrate through a functionally graded interlayer
containing water tubes. Heat transfer and thermo-mechanical behavior of the
solar panel will be characterized by experiments and multi-scale/physical
modeling. Delamination and in-layer cracking will be investigated and simulated
for the structural design of the panels. An internal variable based model will
be introduced to describe the long-term performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-term educational goal of this CAREER project is to promote sustainable
engineering among the next generation of researchers and engineers at the
graduate, undergraduate and pre-collegiate levels. This CAREER project will
develop several educational components related to architecturally integrated
sustainable infrastructure for harvesting solar energy and increase awareness of
novel cost effective approaches that serve as viable solutions for global energy
and climate challenges. Three strategic approaches will be implemented: 1)
develop interdisciplinary undergraduate and graduate curricula that integrate
material manufacturing, instrumentation development, laboratory testing, and
technology innovation; 2) establish collaboration with a public school in the
Harlem community to promote STEM research course work related to sustainable
infrastructure and renewable energy among underrepresented youth, and; 3)
increase public understanding and awareness of the role of original research in
the development and implementation of sustainable energy and building solutions.