* 0954264
* EAGER: Low-Power VLSI Applications of Neuromorphic Circuit Construction with Nanoelectronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Yu Cao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2011
* USD 54,539.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
utilize nanoscale transistors beyond the CMOS scaling roadmap for low power,
high accuracy implementation of neural-inspired (neuromorphic) computing
modules. These novel devices include feedback FETs, impact ionization MOSFETs,
tunneling devices and ferroelectric transistors. The approach to achieve this
technology is to use a complex electrical model of a neural computing cell, and
map its behavior to a low hardware complexity circuit using future nanoscale
transistor models. Known problems associated with these novel devices such as
hysteresis behavior and inherent nonlinearity will be investigated as a
beneficial property for fundamental analog neural building blocks, such as
perceptron, achieving lower power and higher density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will be the first application and investigation of nanoscale devices to
self-learning neuromorphic computing platforms, enabling a very low power
operation. In this seed project, as an application platform traditional VLSI and
signal processing functions will be mapped to neuromorphic computing platforms.
These functions include receive channel equalizers and branch prediction logic
in RISC computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated circuit design,
characterization and modeling, with a deep understanding of future nanoscale
devices for VLSI technology is a critical and growing need for the semiconductor
industry. There is a growing need to move beyond traditional logic design for
signal processing and computing platforms. The experience of using future
nanoscale devices for various neuromorphic circuit blocks will be incorporated
to graduate level circuits and device modeling classes, with strong emphasis on
training future scientists and engineers with creative problem-solving skills in
overcoming limitations of future nanoscale devices.&lt;br/&gt;