* 0954423
* CAREER: Fundamental and Device-Oriented Approach to Energy Efficient Carbon Nanoelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2010,08/31/2014
* ERIC POP, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2014
* USD 418,000.00

The objective of this research is to examine fundamental aspects of energy
dissipation in novel devices and nanomaterials, with focus on carbon
electronics. The approach will study en-ergy loss and switching mechanisms in
carbon nanotubes and graphene, which have great intrin-sic electrical and
thermal properties, yet must be understood within in a device context.
Intellectual Merit: Energy use in electronics today ranges from mobile devices
(mW) to massive data centers (GW). Energy dissipation begins with nanoscale
transistors, which are sur-prisingly inefficient and waste significant power as
heat. This work will examine energy dissipa-tion in carbon nanoelectronics by
(1) studying the role of remote phonons to find the most energy-efficient
dielectrics, (2) exploring avalanche as an alternative switching mechanism, (3)
developing models for Joule heating and thermal breakdown, and (4) validating
them against electrical measurements and infrared thermal imaging. The
fundamental knowledge derived from this research will also extend to all charge-
based nanoelectronics. Broader Impacts: Optimizing energy dissipation in
electronics will impact a wide range of technologies, and up to 10% of U.S.
electricity use today. Progress in this area is crucial in a post-CMOS world,
and has great environmental implications as well. This project will train
students to think about fundamentals of energy dissipation, will engage
minorities and women, and encourage undergraduates to publish. Work with local
teachers and the Engineering Open House will engage local K-12 students, while a
collaboration with the nanoHUB will reach a global audience. A remote (web-
enabled) probe station will be built for testing nanoelectronics in class,
eventually allowing access for anyone in the world to do cutting-edge device
meas-urements.