* 0954829
* RCN-UBE:  Microbial Genome Annotation Network
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Cheryl Kerfeld, Augustana College
* Standard Grant
* christopher meyer
* 01/31/2016
* USD 546,400.00

This award will support a network of educators from community colleges,
undergraduate institutions, and research universities, together with the
Department of Energy-Joint Genome Institute (DOE-JGI), that will provide
accessible, inexpensive, and authentic research experience in genome annotation
to undergraduate students. Genome annotation is a process that attaches
biological information to DNA sequence data. Although some parts of this process
can be performed with computer-based algorithms, evaluation of those analysis
and functional genetic analysis are best performed by researchers. Those steps
provide the opportunity for students to learn and apply current research tools
and contribute to a large research effort. Microbial genome sequence data and
training in the use of online annotation tools will be provided by the DOE-JGI.
The network will recruit, train and mentor new members, and develop new
curricula that encourage authentic research experiences in entry-level through
advanced biology courses. The intellectual merits of the project will include
enhanced student learning in the biological sciences through the active and
inquiry-based learning strategy of relevant research, increased retention of
students in the biological sciences, including students from underrepresented
groups, and faculty development in the rapidly advancing field of genome
annotation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project will
include creation of a large and diverse cohort of educators and students
participating in authentic research that advances the field of microbial genome
science, fostering of interactions among the network's members and other
interested researchers on a focused scientific question that has long-term
potential as a vibrant research program; creation of a national model for
incorporating annotation-based research into the undergraduate curriculum, and
providing opportunities for many students to participate in authentic research,
especially at community colleges that normally cannot afford the time and
expense of an extensive and integrated research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported jointly by the
Biological Sciences Directorate and the Division of Undergraduate Education.