* 0954765
* CAREER: Programmable, Reconfigurable, and Tunable Photonic Integrated Circuit Platform through the Fusion of Photonic Crystals and Nano-Electro-Mechanical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Liang Dong, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The objective of this research is to develop a programmable,
reconfigurable, and tunable photonic circuit platform and to explore its smart
sensor applications. The platform will allow one to dynamically
configure/reconfigure, tune/detune, and erase/rewrite photonic circuits on a
single chip upon demand. The approach is combining nano-electro-mechanical
systems and planar photonic crystal technologies to manipulate light on the
wavelength scale. Nanocantilevers are fabricated over air holes in a photonic
crystal slab. Each nanocantilever is individually controllable to bend into an
air hole via an electrostatic actuator addressed by electronic integrated
circuits. Therefore, local effective refractive indices of photonic lattices can
be tuned and programmed flexibly to form various photonic devices and circuits.
The smart sensors can be realized by chemically modifying the surface of
nanocantilevers on the photonic circuit platform, making it sensitive to
specific analytes mechanically. Through dynamic tuning of the photonic platform,
the sensors can be agile enough to tune their internal optical circuits to adapt
to different situations and requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This research will provide an unprecedented photonic circuit platform with
unique reconfigurablity, tunability and programmability to satisfy the demand
for multipurpose and compact photonic chips. The proposed technology could
revolutionize photonic circuit design, and open up drastically new possibilities
in a broad range of areas, including photonic computing, optical communication,
environmental monitoring, biochemical defense, and lab-on-a-chip technologies,
thus having great potential economic impact. This research will generate broad
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, benefit
curriculum development, and provide opportunities for students to work on
research projects at both university and industrial laboratories. A pyramid
structure for educational outreach will be established to provide an efficient
way to introduce micro/nanotechnology into high schools, middle schools, and
grade schools of Iowa. Women and minority students will be attracted into
science and engineering through year-round open-lab tours, summer internships,
and in-class presentations.