* 0954360
* CAREER: Investigation of DNA Transport into the Cell's Nucleus
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Yang Yun, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 09/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

0954360&lt;br/&gt;Yun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once considered a promising field of
biomedical research, the enthusiasm for gene therapy has been tempered by the
near lack of clinical successes and by the potential toxicity associated with
viral gene carriers. Non-viral gene therapies are safer alternatives, but their
effectiveness has been limited by a low expression of therapeutic proteins.
Although many cellular barriers to transporting DNA into the cell's cytoplasm
have been surmounted with the advancement of non-viral gene therapy, a major
challenge that has impeded its usefulness for clinical applications is the
shuttling of DNA from the cytoplasm, through the nuclear pores, and into the
nucleus. Overall, this mechanism is poorly understood, and the coupling of an
active shuttling agent, such as a nuclear localization signal, with DNA has
yielded inconsistent and disputable results. These outcomes could possibly be
attributed to the complexing of a positively charged polymer, such as linear
polyethylenimine, to DNA (DNA complex) that has been previously coupled with a
nuclear localization signal in order to facilitate the transport of DNA into the
cell's cytoplasm. While the linear polyethylenimine is vital for the initial
stages of gene delivery, it may impede the nuclear penetration since most DNA
complexes are too large to fit into the nuclear pores, which are approximately
20 nanometers in diameter. Thus, the goal of this CAREER proposal is to
investigate the relationship of nuclear entry with the structural morphologies
and the dimensions of DNA complexes. Previous studies have not addressed this
topic and have therefore missed an important opportunity to improve the efficacy
of non-viral gene therapy. DNA complexes have been shown to form a variety of
structures, including rod, toroid, and globular conformations. Since most toroid
and globular conformations of DNA complexes are larger than 20 nanometers, it is
hypothesized that they are limited in their ability to gain entry into the
nucleus through the nuclear pores. Thus, this proposal involves the nanoscale
engineering of DNA complexes in order to control their sizes and/or to direct
their structural conformations into rods using different complexing processes.
Resolving this problem could be the transformative breakthrough that accelerates
the field of non-viral gene therapy from basic research to clinical
applications. If successful, non-viral delivery systems could be as effective as
viruses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activities include the
integration of research with teaching at all educational levels, recruitment of
undergraduate and graduate students, and outreach to local high schools. The key
components of this plan are indentifying and recruiting K-12 students that are
the first generation in their family to attend college and are under-represented
in the field of biomedical engineering. Since these students will be recruited
from economically depressed areas of Northeast Ohio, the summer mentoring
program includes paid research positions that are designed to enhance the
student's prospects for college acceptance and to help their competition for
scholarships. In addition, high school teachers will also be recruited to
conduct research. Ideally, these teachers will be paired with their own students
to form the basis of a research team that will also include graduate and
undergraduate students that are funded by this award. The graduate students will
undergo engineering and leadership training and will be given opportunities in
the mentorship of both K-12 and undergraduate students. This proposal also seeks
to enhance the broader impact activities by the distribution of educational
materials and by the development of a graduate level course that is designed
specifically for high school teachers. It is hoped that the proposed educational
activities would foster interest in students that have never considered
biomedical engineering as a viable career path.