* 0954110
* CAREER: Discovering New Oxidation Mechanisms at the Interfaces of Multilayered Ultra-High Temperature Ceramics for Application at High-Temperature
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2019
* Erica Corral, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 619,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on establishing a
comprehensive research and education program to advance the fundamental
understanding of high-temperature oxidation mechanisms in multilayered ultra-
high temperature ceramics (UHTCs) that have direct application in high-
temperature environments. New UHTC systems with enhanced oxidation resistance at
high temperatures will enable the materials necessary for scientific discovery
used in space exploration vehicles and new energy technology applications. As a
complement to the research, a multi-objective education plan designed to engage
and train underrepresented minorities in materials science and engineering
technologies will also be an integral component of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is
to investigate the fundamental oxidation mechanisms of novel multilayered UHTC
systems, which is a problem in non-equilibrium reaction kinetics where the
reaction process dynamics lead to new material formation dependent on the
microstructure of the constituents. It is well known that UHTC composites such
as ZrB2-SiC possess superior oxidation resistance over monolithic ZrB2 and SiC
because the composite naturally forms a complex multilayer oxide structure in
situ at high temperature. This research is driven by the need to further
understand the formation of the complex oxidation resistant oxides in order to
further enhance the oxidation resistance of multilayered UHTCs so they can be
used in future aerospace vehicles and energy applications. This research will
result in a new fundamental understanding of high-temperature oxidation
mechanisms that will enable oxidation resistance in multilayered UHTCs processed
using spark plasma sintering which are strongly dependent on specific
microstructure, geometry, and environmental conditions. This project will train
graduate, undergraduate and high school students in specialized techniques
required for ceramic processing and oxidation measurements of UHTCs. The project
team will also lead a summer research institute for undergraduate students
called, the Southwest Materials Research and Training (SMaRT) Program.
&lt;br/&gt;