* 0954313
* Role of FHY3 and FAR1 in transcriptional regulation of phytochrome A signaling in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Haiyang Wang, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Slocum
* 05/31/2011
* USD 191,847.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PI: Haiyang Wang&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Matthew
Hudson&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: IOS-0641639&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Role of
FHY3 and FAR1 in transcriptional regulation of phytochrome A signaling in
Arabidopsis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants use an array of
photoreceptors to sense the ambient light environment and undergo adaptive
growth and development. Phytochrome A (phyA) is the primary photoreceptor for
mediating various far-red light induced responses in higher plants. It is widely
accepted now that photo-activation of phyA initiates a signal transduction
cascade that leads to regulated gene expression change and subsequent
photomorphogenic development. FHY3 and FAR1, two homologous proteins that share
significant amino acid similarities with the MuDRA class of transposases, define
two essential positive regulators of phyA signaling in Arabidopsis. However,
their molecular function and how they fit in the phyA signaling pathway have
remained elusive. The central goal of this project is substantiate the
hypothesis that FHY3 and FAR1 may define a novel class of transcriptional
regulators, possibly domesticated from an ancient Mutator-like transposable
element, that act in the nucleus to regulate phyA-responsive gene expression and
photomorphogenic development under far-red light. The three specific aims are:
1. To characterize the transcriptional regulatory activity of FHY3 and FAR1 in
plant cells; 2. To identify their direct target genes and functional
characterization; and 3. To investigate their functional relationship with the
photoreceptor phyA. Results from these studies will lead to a better
understanding of FHY3 and FAR1 in regulating phyA-mediated gene expression and
add critical information toward establishing a coherent phyA signaling pathway.
The broader impacts expected from this work include training of different levels
of scientists, ranging from undergraduate students, to graduate students and
postdoc fellows. The PI will also participate in the training of local high
school teachers and introduce the "Plants-In-Motion" movies, which were created
by Professor Roger P. Hangarter at Indiana University, in local elementary
school classes to teach school children about plant responses to light and other
environmental signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;