* 0954811
* CAREER: The Evolution of Gas in Disks - Setting the Stage for Planet Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2010,12/31/2016
* Sean Brittain, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* joan wrobel
* 12/31/2016
* USD 597,664.00

Dr. Brittain will lead and carry out a project that will enhance our
understanding of the process of planet formation by studying gas in the inner
region of circumstellar disks. While it is accepted that planetary systems form
out of the gas and dust seen around newly formed stars, fundamental questions
remain about this process. This project will study the planet-forming region of
circumstellar disks using high-resolution infrared spectroscopy. This study will
be able to measure the amounts of warm gas present in these disks and will help
constrain the timescales for gas dissipation which is likely related to how
quickly gas giant planets like Jupiter can form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Broader Impacts of this proposal are centered on attracting, developing, and
retaining a diverse group of students to the sciences. The PI proposes to
develop astronomy related workshops for disadvantaged students through the
collaboration of elementary education and physics majors at Clemson. The
students come from the 'Creative Inquiry Initiative' program (which is already
established at active at Clemson) which matches teams of students with a faculty
mentor for a five semester project. Additionally, the research proposed here
will make up a significant portion of a Clemson student?s Ph.D. Dissertation.