* 0954222
* CAREER: Learning to Make Mathematical Connections
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Lindsey Richland, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 05/31/2013
* USD 398,720.00

The main goal of this mathematics education research project is to determine
through experimentation specific teaching strategies that can be used to support
middle school students drawing connections between mathematical representations
(fractions and ratios). The potential instructional strategies were identified
from the Third International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) video
analyses study as the ones that best distinguished high performing countries
from low performing countries. Prior studies were used to pilot the research
approach and potential results. The problem, expected solution responses, and
instructional sequences are drawn from a model of a Japanese lesson. This CAREER
award will be operated through the University of California-Irvine by Assistant
Professor Lindsey Richland. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six experiments
will be conducted, each on one strategy and designed to help develop optimal
instructional routines. The six conditions are: 1) making student responses or
key ideas visible, 2) making compared student responses or key ideas visible
simultaneously, 3) visually organizing the student responses or key ideas to
highlight key connections, 4) using at least one well-known student response or
key idea to compare with something new, 5) using gestures between connected
student responses, and 6) using visual imagery. Fifth and sixth grade students
from three classrooms will be randomly selected to participate in one of two
conditions (high support and low support) for the six experiments. For each
experiment, each condition will be studied with 30 students. Data for all six
experiments will be collected from a total of 360 students. All students will be
given the same word problem requiring proportional reasoning. Then students will
be shown an instructional video of a teacher presenting a lesson related to the
problem. Students will be given pre- and post-tests and a new problem to solve
as measures of effects. An ANOVA (pretest/posttest) with conditions as a
between-subjects variable (high support/low support) will be used in the
analysis. Two additional case studies will investigate the training of two
teachers to use the most effective of the strategies in the first six
experiments. Videotapes of these two teachers using the optimal strategies in
their classrooms will be analyzed using the same protocol used in TIMSS. A
highly qualified advisory board will serve as the external evaluation. An
education plan includes mentoring graduate students and undergraduate
researchers; educating pre-service teachers; collaborating through in-service
teacher professional development with teachers from regional schools; and
disseminating results in academic venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Positive results
of this application of cognitive science to the teaching and learning of
mathematics will inform the field of mathematics education on routine of
practices that distinguish high performing countries in mathematics achievement.
The work may be of greatest benefit to English language learners and other
under-represented groups. If the instructional strategies are viable, then
teachers will have specific ways they can reduce the cognitive load on students
who may be processing two languages while trying to learn mathematics.