* 0954381
* CAREER: Flapping in the wind - passive mechanisms in insect wings for flight stabilization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Haoxiang Luo, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 416,500.00

0954381&lt;br/&gt;Luo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many insects such as flies,
dragonflies, and butterflies impress us greatly with their amazing maneuvering
skills. Dashing briskly in breezes, they possess such a freedom of locomotion
which has long inspired us to imagine. The study of fluid dynamics involved in
insect flight can not only help us unravel the scientific enigma behind the
fascinating phenomena in nature, but also will transform design of autonomous
micro air vehicles (MAVs). Many recent efforts have been devoted to understand
the mechanisms of lift and thrust generation associated with insect wings and
have achieved exciting progress. However, the degree of freedom of the insect
body was typically excluded so that one could focus solely on the aerodynamics
of the flapping wing. Therefore, some of the important physical phenomena
associated with the interaction between the free flight and the wing-induced
flow have been largely overlooked. One such example is the unique built-in
mechanism that the flyers in nature utilize to stabilize their flight in the
presence of disturbances and to achieve agility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits When combined with the body motion,
the flapping movement of insect wings provides a counter drag and torque
resisting the translational and rotational disturbances to the steady flight. In
addition, the PI hypothesizes that the wing flexibility also provides a
mechanism for disturbance rejection by attenuating the unsteady loads on the
flapping flyers. Such passive flight stabilization features are drastically
different from those in the conventional airplane design, and they can be easily
disengaged by simply changing the wing kinematics to facilitate an active
maneuver. The PI will apply accurate numerical simulations to study the unsteady
flow behavior involved in these stabilizing mechanisms and also use an existing
theoretical approach as a complementary tool to characterize the damping effect.
The numerical approach is based on the efficient immersed-boundary solver
developed at the PI's lab. The approach is able to handle complex/moving
boundaries, capture detailed vortex structures in the flow, and address the
three- dimensional flow-structure interaction. Novel stabilizing mechanisms for
the flapping flight will be discovered and characterized through this research
program. This research will open a new front for understanding the multiscale
physics and active flight control of insects. The PI envisions that the results
from this research will have a direct impact on the development of effective and
efficient control strategies for biomimetic MAVs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts The broader impacts come from extensive applications of the highly agile
MAVs in the national defense, homeland security, and environmental safety. In
addition, the com- putational approach developed in this research can be
extended to study the flow physics associated with broader free-body locomotion
problems in nature and that associated with flow-structure interaction in
biological and biomedical systems, e.g., swimming fish, cardiovascular systems,
and larynges. The research project will involve graduate students, undergraduate
students, and under- represented groups. The research materials will be
integrated into the courses that the PI teaches at Vanderbilt and will be taught
with the innovative teaching strategies including interactive class- room
activities, cooperative learning, and multiple assessment methods. K-12 students
will be reached through incorporating high school students and their teachers in
the research program. Hands-on workshops and web-based interactive tools will be
designed to help K-12 students learn the science.