* 0954501
* CAREER: Pathogen Control for a Sustainable Reuse of Wastewater: Role of Surface Interactions on Natural Removal of Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Thanh Nguyen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2015
* USD 458,897.00

0954501&lt;br/&gt;Nguyen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partially-treated wastewater (PTW)
is a valuable resource that can be reused or reclaimed to enhance the supply of
freshwater. PTW can be used to recharge groundwater for subsequent withdrawal as
drinking water, or to prevent seawater intrusion. PTW can also be substituted
for freshwater to irrigate crops. Although wastewater reclamation and reuse play
an important role in sustainable water-resource management, risks of
contaminating groundwater or crops from pathogen-laden wastewater must be
avoided. The PIs career goals are: (1) to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms
that affect pathogen mobility and inactivation in water reuse applications, (2)
to help develop new management protocols and technologies to promote widespread
adaptation of wastewater reuse and reclamation, and (3) to disseminate this
information through both traditional (e.g., peer-reviewed publications) and
innovative educational (e.g., CleanWater wiki) approaches. The specific
objectives of the proposed work are: (1) to identify the environmental
conditions that control filtration of pathogens during groundwater recharge with
partially-treated wastewater, and pathogen inactivation during natural treatment
of wastewater in waste stabilization ponds; (2) to increase the number of
minority and female students in science and engineering by integrating research
and education on environmental issues; and (3) to provide students with
international experience in research and education. The PI will study viable
Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts, an important waterborne pathogen that causes
severe diarrhea in people and animals. The hypotheses guiding the proposed
research are: (1) Wastewater organic matter (WOM)including natural organic
matter, bacterial extracellular polymeric substances, and algal exudates
influences the interactions between oocysts and subsurface materials or
wastewater particles; (2) Interactions with WOM control oocyst transport in the
subsurface environment; and (3) Photo-oxidation of pathogens under sunlight
depends on the interactions between oocysts and WOM. The tasks to be completed
are: (1) select model testing systems; (2) characterize oocysts and model
surfaces; (3) quantify deposition kinetics of oocysts with the selected
surfaces; (4) quantify transport, retention, and release of oocysts at pore
scale and Darcy-scale; (5) determine the solution conditions that promote
oocyst-particle association and removal of oocysts by sedimentation; and (6)
study the role of WOM-oocysts and particle-oocyst association on inactivation of
oocysts by reactive oxygen species formed under sunlight.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be the first systematic study to focus
on how pathogen mobility and inactivation are influenced by surface interaction
between pathogens and wastewater organic matters. The results from well-
controlled laboratory studies conducted under conditions relevant to groundwater
recharge and wastewater treatment by stabilization ponds will lay an essential
groundwork for future fieldwork efforts. The results and the experimental
techniques developed in this project will be applicable to other studies on
environmental transport and inactivation of pathogenic bacteria, viruses, and
protozoan. The laboratory findings will directly benefit the PIs Engineers-
Without-Border project on pathogen removal using low cost and low maintenance
water-treatment methods in Guatemala. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural removal and
inactivation of pathogens for wastewater reuse potentially offer energy-saving
methods to control pathogens, supplement an often scarce resource (i.e.,
drinking water), and protect human health. Successful completion of the proposed
research will build an important foundation for a comprehensive risk assessment
of waterborne pathogens in reclaimed water. The PIs ongoing educational
activities include incorporating research results into class-room instruction,
and organizing workshops on water quality issues for Proyecto CHE (Project
Children for Higher Education). The PIs CleanWater Wiki site and workshop-based
TV programs developed for University of Illinois TV station will allow the PIs
educational activities to reach a broader audience. The PIs educational
activities have been and will be assessed for improvements by her education-
specialist collaborators.