* 0954505
* CAREER:  Computational Modeling of Microstructure Evolution during Vapor Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Douglas Spearot, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 02/29/2016
* USD 400,997.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to elucidate the fundamental nanoscale and mesoscale mechanisms associated
with microstructure development and evolution during vapor deposition, through
combined use of atomistic and phase-field simulations. Historically, models for
microstructure development during vapor deposition are formulated via extensive
experimentation and materials characterization. These phenomenological models do
not consider atomic or mesoscale material behavior and thus cannot predict
microstructure development in complex heterophase material systems, such as
alumina. In this work, atomistic simulations will be used to provide an
understanding of the role of ion flux on phase evolution and to compute
interface energies between solid metastable phases in alumina. This information
will be incorporated into a phase-field model and used to study phase formation
and evolution in alumina thin films during simulated physical vapor deposition
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physical vapor deposition is selected as the
application of interest in this CAREER proposal because of its broad relevance
across a diverse range of science and engineering disciplines. This proposal
strives for a predictive model of microstructure formation during vapor
deposition; such a model will allow industry to refine process conditions in a
simulation environment rather than through extensive experimentation and
materials characterization. This research plan is integrated with education and
outreach activities designed to inspire future generations of young men and
women to pursue science, technology, engineering and math (STEM). A partnership
is proposed with local Boy and Girl Scout organizations to create opportunities
for Boy and Girl Scouts to earn merit badges or project award patches in STEM
related fields.