* 0954621
* CAREER: Understanding, Development and Applications of Nanoscale Memristor Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 02/28/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop unconventional, high-performance
memory and logic systems based on nanoscale two-terminal resistive switches
(memristors). The approach is to carry out a systematic material and device
study that includes understanding the device operation from atomic-scale imaging
and transport measurements; designing a new device structure to improve device
reliability and performance; demonstrating memristor/CMOS integration; and
discovering new device and circuit functionality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Memristor is a
concise term for two-terminal resistance switching devices with inherent memory.
Recently proposed memristor/CMOS hybrid circuits can provide unmatched density
and connectivity and offer a promising approach for electronics beyond
transistor scaling. This research addresses critical fundamental and practical
questions related to memristor research. It will enable the development of key
nanoelectronic systems such as non-volatile universal memories with tera-bit
density and sub 10 ns access time, and reconfigurable logic systems with
function density two-orders of magnitude higher than conventional circuits.
Knowledge and techniques developed here will further stimulate studies on new
computing paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides having an immediate impact on semiconductor
research, this program aims to convey the excitement of nanotechnology to
students and the public through a number of educational and outreach activities.
Students from underrepresented groups will be recruited to work directly on the
project. Research results will be incorporated into a new undergraduate course
and disseminated to the general public through publications, technology
transfer, websites and a textbook. High-school students in inner-city, high-need
school districts will be engaged through a teaching module development, class
visits and online exhibits.