* 0954280
* CAREER: Search for Ideal Polymers for Highly Efficient Organic Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Wei You, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2015
* USD 550,020.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theme of this 5-year
integrated career plan is to advance the research and education in the area of
novel polymers for highly efficient photovoltaic cells. Built upon the PI?s
previous successes in the design, synthesis and characterization of new polymers
for photovoltaic applications, this CAREER proposal 1) summarizes the design
criteria for ?ideal? polymers to further improve the efficiency of polymer PV
devices, 2) proposes a design motif based on the PI?s previous systematic study,
and 3) will conduct an in-depth and systematic study of selected polymers to
test and enrich the proposed design motif. A weak donor ? strong acceptor
modular approach to construct copolymers will be used with the intention of
lowering the band gap and simultaneously tuning the HOMO/LUMO energy levels. The
donor moieties contain extended รฐ conjugation, which will promote the รฐ?รฐ
interaction between different polymer chains to improve the charge carrier
mobility. A series of acceptors with different electron-withdrawing ability will
also be prepared as the other building block for the polymers. A library of new
polymers with tunable band gaps and energy levels will be explored. In addition,
the PI will start a comprehensive device optimization including annealing,
applying additives, and employing interfacial layer. Furthermore, the PI will
carry on fundamental studies of exciton behaviors in these structurally related
polymers (e.g. exciton dissociation, recombination and diffusion), which should
provide more insightful information about why certain polymers are better than
others. Finally, the elucidated mechanism will assist future design of new
materials. The summarized design criteria of ideal polymers for solar cells, in
particular, the proposed design motif, will expedite the discovery of new and
better polymeric materials through rational design. New chemistry and novel
polymeric materials will be developed. This research can potentially lead to
highly efficient, affordable solar cells with low manufacturing cost, whose
impact would be tremendous to the fast-growing market of solar cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interdisciplinary nature of this research on polymer solar cells will impact a
wider range of disciplines, including synthetic organic and polymer chemistry,
physical chemistry, materials sciences and engineering. Integration of education
and outreach with research is the key feature of the proposed work.
Underrepresented groups, specifically women and minorities, are particularly
encouraged to participate in the proposed research through aforementioned
programs. Participants will have a unique opportunity to involve in many key
aspects of the development of polymer based solar cells. Students will receive
interdisciplinary training, from organic and polymeric materials development and
characterization, to device fabrication, and evaluation. Through partnership
with Climate LEAP and creating new programs for Science 360, the PI will produce
multimedia content and conduct energy education presentations and activities, so
as to reach out more high school students and teachers, and the general public.
All these activities will increase the public awareness of current serious
energy issues, and direct public attention to a sustainable future powered by
renewable (solar) energies.&lt;br/&gt;