* 0954919
* CAREER:  Inorganic Nanoparticles with Biological Properties:  Preparation, Characterization and Sensing Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2016
* Emanuela Andreescu, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2016
* USD 514,278.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0954919 PI: Andreescu, Emanuela ORG: Clarkson
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Inorganic Nanoparticles with
Biological Properties: Preparation, Characterization and Sensing
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The objective of this
career development plan is to develop and study a new class of inorganic
biomimetic materials, with focus on ceria based metal oxides. The plan is
designed to advance understanding of the mechanism that governs their biological
properties in relation to their physicochemical properties and to derive
structure-activity relations for the purpose of rational design of novel sensing
approaches based on these materials. The proposed research will provide key
experimental data in a new and unique area of biomaterials research, that of
inorganic materials possessing interesting bio-mimetic properties and oxygen
storage ability, and of their applications in sensing. Specifically, this will
be the first investigation of the enzyme-like activity of ceria based metal
oxides nanoparticles (NPs) in relation to their physicochemical and structural
characteristics. Research will involve: (1) optimizing and controlling surface
reactivity through tailored synthesis and systematic modifications of the NPs
surface, (2) identifying key parameters that regulate NPs reactivity and using
these properties to control their biological activity, (3) testing their
?enzyme-like? activity and (4) sensing applications that will take advantage of
their special biomimetic properties, and their oxygen storage
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This research introduces a
unique concept in the biomaterials research arena, that of inorganic materials
mimicking traditional biological catalysts and possessing oxygen storage/release
capabilities for advanced biomedical and sensing applications. The fundamental
knowledge gained from these studies will enable rational design of a new
generation of bio-mimetic materials and devices with unprecedented performance
in terms of stability, robustness, and low oxygen dependency. In addition to
biomaterials and biosensors, this research will also impact a variety of other
fields where these materials could find useful applications (e.g. biomedicine as
therapeutic drugs to inactivate reactive oxygen species, biotechnology as
catalysts that require operation at extreme conditions). The project will have a
major impact on course development, student training, recruitment and mentoring.
A new upper level undergraduate-graduate course and inquiry-based laboratory
modules will be developed to provide interdisciplinary education of Clarkson
students. Learning modules and instructor support materials for hands-on
experiments will be created for introduction to local high schools through the
planned outreach activities. Graduates and undergraduates will collaborate to
prepare high school and general chemistry versions of the proposed experiments
in consultation with faculty and high school teachers and students. A pilot
program for enhancing retention rates of entering freshmen will be instituted.
The project will contribute to the efforts of the Chemistry Department to
strengthen the biomolecular science program and increase and retain the numbers
of science majors at Clarkson. The proposed inquiry-based laboratory modules
will enhance accessibility to modern scientific technologies and provide
materials that are transferable to other institutions and to a larger number of
students including local high schools and community colleges. Through this
program, underrepresented minority students, recruited through on-going programs
and established collaborations of the PI, will be provided with an opportunity
to conduct independent research.