* 0954579
* CAREER:  Bridging Cognitive Science and Sensor Technology: Non-intrusive and Multi-modality Sensing in Human-Machine Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Yingzi Lin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2016
* USD 400,007.00

The objectives of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award are an
integrated research and education plan focused on investigation of a non-
intrusive biosensing paradigm and multi-modality cognitive inference approach
for human-machine systems. The transformative nature of the paradigm under
investigation is to build miniature sensing elements on machine surfaces, so
that human physiological signals can be acquired non-intrusively in real-time
through natural contacts during human-machine interactions. The new inference
approach is inspired by human biological learning behaviors and aims to infer
human cognitive states based upon individualized and multi-modality cues,
including physiological signals, along with integration of various cue-state
relation mechanisms. Two test-beds in transportation and medicine will be
established to validate the theoretical work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will transfer research outcomes into education curricula for a wide variety of
trainees, including graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students. Minorities and
underrepresented groups will be recruited into this interdisciplinary field.
This program will engage and train the general public through close interactions
with government agencies, industries, and international collaborators. It is
anticipated that the program will produce groundbreaking results in applying
sensor technology to human cognitive system modeling, and have huge impacts on
public safety and human health worldwide.