* 0954825
* CAREER:  Integrating Multi-Scale Mechanics and Biomaterials to Study the Translation of Mechanical Forces from Tissue to Cell
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Katherine Y. Zhang, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 01/31/2016
* USD 412,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to create a novel experimental methodology to investigate the local elastic
and viscoelastic properties and forces within extracellular matrix (ECM) with
well-defined global mechanical properties and under controlled tissue-level
mechanical loading; and quantitatively assess the impact of tissue-level
mechanical loading on the regulation of local cell contraction forces and ECM
microenvironment. ECM provides the principal avenue for mechanochemical
communication between tissue and cells. These signals play critical roles in
establishing tissue structure-function relationships and controlling cell fate.
To date, little is known about how mechanical forces are translated within the
ECM from tissue to cellular level. Such kind of information is critical for the
future expansion of the knowledge of cellular mechanotransduction within the
context of living tissues and organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly
interdisciplinary and integrative nature of this research will facilitate
advances in a wide variety of fields. Results from the research will allow us to
better understand the mechanisms by which ECM mechanics influence cell and
tissue behavior, and the onset of pathology in a number of tissues in which
altered mechanics play important roles. The education plan of this CAREER
project will incorporate several outreach activities that reflect the need of
early intervention and mentorship on increasing the participation of women and
minorities in science and engineering to existing outreach programs at Boston
University. The multi-disciplinary and multi-level education plan will establish
an attractive and collaborative learning environment for students from all
levels, help students acquire knowledge from different fields, and facilitate
students' communication skills across disciplines.