* 0954957
* CAREER: Surface-engineering of monocytes for anticancer drug delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Hu Yang, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2016
* USD 472,813.00

0954957&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term objective of this
CAREER research project is to develop a novel hypoxia-targeted delivery system
to enhance penetration of anticancer drugs into solid tumors. Particularly, this
new delivery system will be explored by hybridizing monocytes with dendrimer
nanoparticles through cell surface engineering, in which the nanoparticles
immobilized on the cell surface are intended for anticancer drug loading.
Dendrimers have highly branched nanoscale structures with a number of
functionalizable surface groups. They are capable of delivering a high drug
payload as well as a variety of therapeutics and functional entities through
proper chemical modifications, encapsulation, or surface interactions. Monocytes
are able to both migrate to and accumulate in hypoxic areas of tumor. However,
most anticancer drugs cannot be directly loaded into monocytes because of their
inherent toxicity. Drug delivery through the cell surface-immobilized
nanoparticles will potentially minimize the toxic effects of anticancer drugs to
the monocyte vehicle and represents a transformative way to utilize the best
aspects of both cellular and nanostructured carriers. The new treatment modality
derived from this project may eventually serve as a complementary means to
surgery and/or conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy, helping to eradicate
metastasis, improve survival rate, and increase quality of life for cancer
patients. &lt;br/&gt;To generate a broader impact, a nanoscience research-based
learning platform will be established to educate students of different academic
levels, enable them to conduct novel research and increase their knowledge in
the emerging scientific area of nanomedicine, and provide new opportunities for
women or underrepresented minorities particularly African Americans to pursue
careers in engineering and nanoscience. The outreach program will reach K-12
students by establishing a summer research program for local high school
students, providing on-site displays to introduce fundamentals of nanotechnology
through Science Museum of Virginia, and using 2-D tactile graphics and a
portable haptic feedback device to teach the concepts of nanotechnology to those
K-12 students who are blind or visually impaired.