* 0954499
* CAREER: Improving the science and practice of restoration with hydroecologic observatories
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2015
* Steven Loheide, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 404,734.00

0954499 Loheide

This project is on developing a new method for continuous monitoring of soil
water potential. The method will use distributed temperature sensing technology
by relating the heat pulse induced thermal response of a buried fiber optic
cable to the soil water potential. Three-dimensional, variably-saturated
groundwater flow modeling will be performed to extend in space and time already
extensive field data so that hydrologic niches can be estimated for past
climatic conditions. Using this knowledge, a coupled vegetation and hydrologic
modeling framework will be created to enable quantitative prediction of the
vegetation composition and patterning and hydrologic feedbacks that would result
from potential restoration strategies. With the models produced in this study,
the extent to which desired vegetation can be re-established by restoration
activities will be able to be predicted during the design phase of projects and
a set of guidelines will be created for restoration practitioners of the region.
The project has broader impacts related to both improving the practice of river
restoration and providing context-based educational opportunities to middle
school, undergraduate, and graduate students. This award is co-funded by the
Environmental Sustainability program in ENG and the Hydrologic Sciences program
in GEO.