* 0954116
* CAREER: Network Economics: Theory and Architectures for Incentive-engineered Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2017
* Rahul Jain, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* John Brassil
* 01/31/2017
* USD 425,000.00

The next generation networks are envisaged to be very large-scale, highly
complex systems that handle heterogeneous traffic in diverse environments, are
truly distributed and have even greater capacity, reliability and capability.
These attributes can be achieved by deploying sophisticated mathematical
techniques that require cooperative behavior among the various independent
entities that often have economic interests. Such cooperation however, can be
hard to achieve in practice leading to suboptimal performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we are developing a systematic and
foundational theory of network incentives and cooperation that aids in
methodical network architecture design for vastly greater capacity, more
efficient operation and improved reliability. The theory, mechanisms and
architectures for incentive engineered networks that we are developing combine
ideas from mathematical economics, game theory, information and queueing
theories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have substantial broader impact
on the development of science, technology and education by leading to
development of the emerging field of network economics, and has broad relevance
in improving the efficiency and reliability of networks for communication,
transportation, electrical power distribution, and civil infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing a new framework of network
market design for economics-informed resource allocation on the Internet, non-
cooperative multi-user communication theory for cooperative spectrum sharing,
and a new incentivized QoS network architecture for QoS provisioning on the
Internet. These have the potential to transform existing wireless and
communication networks. Conducted research shall be disseminated through a
tutorial on networks economic and games that the PI is writing, through
classroom teaching and a high school outreach program.