* 0954268
* EAGER:  Full Disclosure of Data Preparation and Use in Retrospective Studies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Leonard Shapiro, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Vijayalakshmi Atluri
* 08/31/2011
* USD 72,570.00

Although an overnight shipping company allows one to track the shipment of a
package from coast to coast and a credit card company can track your purchases
throughout the world, integrating, cleaning and using the various kinds of data
available for engineering and planning studies in health, transportation and
public infrastructure systems is extremely difficult. Such "retrospective"
studies require intense scrutiny of the data and involve a myriad of decisions
concerning the data and the definitions of the concepts involved to properly
"clean" or prepare the data for the study. These decisions are typically written
in English, if at all, and thus not automatically processable by any future user
of the data. In a similar way, integrating data from multiple sources is
difficult because of the details of the technology used to capture the data. The
critical problems are that data from multiple sources can be hard to integrate
and studies are almost never able to use data (that was carefully cleaned and
scrutinized for one study) in another study. This seriously limits the
opportunity to conduct larger or broader scale studies or to "re- run" studies
on new data. One can envision a world where retrospective studies can be easily
described, decisions about data use, data cleaning, and data integration can be
precisely recorded, and operations, management, engineering, and planning
activities can be informed by the results from studies as easily as we can
currently track our packages as they wend their way across the country. This
project envisions one solution to these problems; to devise methods and tools
that will declaratively (i.e., at a high level, described in a formal language)
document data manipulation activities in retrospective studies. Analysts will
then be able to use this declarative specification to greatly facilitate the
specification and conduct of new studies, making their jobs much easier. For
example, if an analyst wants to repeat a study with new data, or with different
parameters, the analyst will be able to use the declarative specifications saved
from the original study, instead of having to decipher the low-level notes which
may or may not have been saved from the original study. The declarative
specifications will also be useful for combining the results of previous studies
to create new studies. This project will focus three kinds of retrospective
research studies: 1) studies from the Clinical Outcomes Research Institute
(CORI), based on data concerning patient endoscopic procedures, 2) studies based
on the Portland Oregon Regional Transportation Archive Listing (PORTAL), data
containing years of highway loop-detector data as they conduct a study to
determine the factors that correlate with certain kinds of congestion, and 3)
studies based on data from the Portland, Oregon Water Bureau containing 8 years
of water consumption data reported every 15 minutes from households across the
city. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;By attempting to bring
the capability of state-of-the-art schema and data integration and data cleaning
systems into a set of tools that can be used easily by analysts and can be
interfaced seamlessly with existing analysis tools, the research team will make
contributions to the database field by identifying separable concerns (within
integration and cleaning) and by generalizing functions that are currently
available in more complex, all encompassing tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will have broad impact because
they are advancing the science of retrospective studies significantly. The
results will be applicable beyond the three areas being studied and will enable
researchers and analysts to perform their studies more efficiently and to
perform more studies. Results will be disseminated broadly, not only by the PI
and co-PI through the usual publication venues, but by researchers in the three
areas being studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major Themes/Keywords: Computer
Science/Information Technology. Engineering. Social Science. Intelligent
Transportation Systems. Health Systems. Water Consumption.