* 0954710
* CAREER: Substrate Activation and Catalysis by Low-Coordinate Metal Isocyanides
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Joshua Figueroa, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2015
* USD 575,000.00

This award in the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program supports work by Professor
Joshua S. Figueroa at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) to carry
out fundamental studies on transition metal complexes in unique geometric and
electronic structure environments. The specific goal of this work centers on the
construction of transition metal isocyanide complexes with low coordination
numbers. Such complexes have long been identified theoretically and in the gas
phase, but are unknown in the condensed phase. However, these molecules promise
to elicit a multitude of new reactivity patterns that are not only of
fundamental interest, but will have significance in alternative energy
processes, catalysis and commodity chemical production. Accordingly, the project
sets forth general strategies for the synthesis of low-coordinate transition
metal isocyanide complexes and details ensuing reactivity studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of the education component of this project
is to increase participation of a culturally diverse range of undergraduate and
high school students in modern chemical research. Specifically, undergraduate
and advanced high school students are introduced to modern computational
chemistry methods through a formal introductory seminar course. Quantum chemical
calculations are performed remotely by the students at the NSF funded San Diego
Supercomputer Center located on the UCSD campus. Students then interface with
faculty from UCSD and other Southern California institutions to use
computational techniques to solve cutting-edge chemical research problems. This
program is intended to serve as a distributed computational resource for
practicing research chemists throughout the Southern California Region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uncovers new and important properties for
transition metal containing molecules and positively impacts a broad range of
problems including alternative energy conversion, carbon dioxide remediation and
waste reduction in commodity chemical production. &lt;br/&gt;