* 0954133
* CAREER: anon.next: Privacy-Enabled Routing in the Next-Generation Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Matthew Wright, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 02/29/2016
* USD 515,880.00

Overlay anonymity systems like Tor are effective against many kinds of
attacks&lt;br/&gt;on privacy, but they have significantly slower network
performance than regular&lt;br/&gt;Internet traffic. The purpose of this project
is to explore the design of&lt;br/&gt;anon.next, an anonymity system for the
next-generation Internet. In anon.next,&lt;br/&gt;we embed anonymizing proxies
into new Internet architectures, so that the&lt;br/&gt;network itself can
provide efficient and effective privacy protection in a way&lt;br/&gt;that
overlay designs cannot. This project seeks to make major advances in
two&lt;br/&gt;areas key to the design of anon.next. First, methods to
construct&lt;br/&gt;high-throughput paths of anonymizing proxies to route the
user's packets to&lt;br/&gt;their destinations with minimal leakage of privacy.
Second, secure methods to&lt;br/&gt;locate those proxies without relying on
centralized directory servers or&lt;br/&gt;exposing the users' packet routes.
Both components require us to develop new&lt;br/&gt;metrics for the privacy
provided by a given anonymizing path and by the system&lt;br/&gt;as a whole. We
are conducting analysis and simulation studies and validating&lt;br/&gt;these
with extensive experimentation on GENI testbeds. These efforts
will&lt;br/&gt;provide major insights into the design of anonymity systems,
which provide&lt;br/&gt;personal privacy as well as censorship resistance and
protection for&lt;br/&gt;whistle-blowers, journalists, and intelligence
services. Our project is also&lt;br/&gt;part of the large effort required to
understand and design distributed systems&lt;br/&gt;in the next-generation
Internet. This project involves students at many levels,&lt;br/&gt;including
middle and high school students in summer camp settings,&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
students in research into finding new attacks against our&lt;br/&gt;systems, and
graduate students.