* 0954318
* CAREER:  Model-Based Control of Machining Processes and Scalability for Manufacturing System Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Laine Mears, Clemson University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2016
* USD 406,150.00

The research objectives of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
are to create a model-based control method for discrete parts machining at the
process level, and to show that this method can be scaled to effectively control
systems of machining operations. The approach to accomplishing these objectives
will be to apply model-based techniques from the chemical process industry to
the control of machined parts production, and to address issues of scaling the
method to control of machining networks, especially model form adaptation and
changes in uncertainty with system complexity. The educational objectives of
this work are to improve the instruction and experience of young technical
thinkers in South Carolina, and to attract future potential researchers to
pursue a graduate education in manufacturing. This will be accomplished through
leveraging ongoing work with the state of South Carolina to augment the
instructor education structure for the Gateway to Technology program, part of a
nationwide nonprofit middle-school technology curriculum that encourages the
involvement of women and minority students. The project structure includes an
annual teacher workshop to communicate and demonstrate research results, as well
as semiannual visiting days to the Clemson research center for middle school
students to explore research hands-on.

If successful, the broader impacts of this work will be more profitable
machining and more competitive manufacturing of high-quality parts for
automotive, aerospace and consumer products industries. The results will be
promulgated through the collaborating machine tool organization and their
partner network of 35 equipment companies, positively impacting manufacturing
quality and profitability at a national level. Broader impacts of the
educational activities will be to educate and directly expose students who are
at a critical decision point in their life plan to possibilities of a research
career and to establish a layered mentoring program whereby sponsored students
will mentor teams of Clemson undergraduates to prepare demonstrations of the
concepts. These efforts will help to improve the quality and number of
engineering students available to US manufacturers.