* 0954749
* CAREER: Novel approaches to integrating color perception and color memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2010,02/28/2018
* Sarah Allred, Rutgers University Camden
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 02/28/2018
* USD 487,155.00

Visual perception gives us information about objects in the world. For that
information to be useful, however, it must be combined with memory. For example,
the yellow color of a banana indicates ripeness only if it can be compared to a
memory that distinguishes the yellow of ripe bananas from the green of unripe
bananas. Everyday experience suggests that although sometimes color memory is
very good (e.g. recalling the color of stop signs and bananas), it can also be
very poor (e.g. picking out paint to match the walls at home). This everyday
experience of color memory reflects a deep division between cognitive and
perceptual scientists about the fidelity of color memory. How can these
differences be reconciled? NSF-funded research conducted by Dr. Sarah Allred at
Rutgers University aims to provide a single framework that unifies color
perception and the disparate views of color memory. Human observers will make
perceptual and memory judgments about the same colorful stimuli in progressively
more complex environments. These data will then drive the development of a
computational model that aims to describe color memory as a combination of color
perception and independent noise. This view is in contrast to a prevailing
account of cultural or linguistic relativity in color memory.

The relationship between perception and memory is important to fields as varied
as forensic psychology (e.g. the reliability of eyewitness testimony), military
reconnaissance, cognitive psychology (e.g. linguistic effects on memory) and
medical diagnosis (e.g. does a dark cloud on an MRI image match memory templates
of tumors?). The computational approach here represents an important advance to
the study of perception and memory, because it will provide a baseline
comparison for future research. This study will allow researchers to quantify
how much of what is remembered is predicted by what was perceived. If memory is
a predictable function of perception, there are two important implications:
first, basic perceptual information will allow more sensible bounds to be placed
on the reliability of memory; second, it suggests the possibility that querying
memory in the appropriate perceptual environment will increase the reliability
of memory. Although color is a relatively simple stimulus with which to probe
the relationship between perception and memory, it is a good first approximation
for more complicated stimuli like those involved in eyewitness testimony or
medical diagnosis. This is because color is simple enough that its physical
dimensions are well-characterized, thus making color amenable to computational
modeling; in addition, unlike other simple physical stimuli such as oriented
gratings, color is linked to higher order variables like emotion and language.
Thus color provides a good bridge between simple physical stimuli and more
complex stimuli with real-world applicability.