* 0954601
* CAREER: Analysis and Synthesis of Systems over Finite Alphabets: Theoretical Foundations, Analytical Methods and Algorithmic Tools
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Danielle Tarraf, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract:

Cyber-physical systems comprising hardware interacting with control and
computational units are omnipresent in our lives from high-tech cars to smart
infrastructure. The tight interaction between analog and discrete dynamics gives
rise to complex verification and synthesis problems. The challenge of
synthesizing correct-by-design controllers for these systems remains daunting.
This proposal presents an ambitious research agenda dedicated to fundamentally
and holistically addressing this challenge. Specifically, we propose to develop
a unifying framework built around the use of finite state automata as nominal
models of both physical and computing processes.

Intellectual Merit:

The proposed research addresses fundamental problems at the interface of control
theory, computer science and mathematics, potentially leading to transformative
breakthroughs. Anticipated theoretical contributions include understanding the
fundamental limitations of using finite memory models to approximate infinite
memory systems, and developing analytical methods for establishing both a priori
and a posteriori error bounds. Anticipated algorithmic contributions include
developing efficient recursive schemes for constructing the approximate models
as well as efficient techniques for solving specific combinatorial optimization
problems. Finally, it is the hope that the ubiquitous problem of scalability can
be finally overcome through the combined use of theoretical and algorithmic
developments.

Broader Impacts:

The proposed research project would result in a computer-aided approach for
systematically synthesizing cyber-physical systems in a verifiably correct
manner, a freely distributed collection of software toolboxes, and a carefully
crafted set of benchmark problems that can be used to evaluate and guide further
research progress. The proposed research will drive the development of a new
curriculum for undergraduate control education employing finite state automata
as vehicles for introducing advanced control concepts. The research results will
be incorporated in the development of a new graduate level course and manuscript
on hybrid systems.