* 0954840
* CAREER: Deterministic and stochastic transport of suspended particles in periodic systems: fundamentals and applications in  separation sciences.
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2013
* German Drazer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 06/30/2013
* USD 414,982.00

0954840&lt;br/&gt;Drazer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal is to develop an
integrated research and education program dedicated to investigate the complex
transport phenomena that arises in the motion of suspended particles in
spatially periodic systems, as well as the translation of these phenomena into
new principles for the manipulation of suspended particles in fluidic devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is to develop a unified description of the
deterministic and stochastic transport of individual particles as they move
through spatially periodic systems in both single phase and two phase
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed fundamental studies will provide the
foundations for the rational design of novel microfluidic separation devices,
that go beyond the miniaturization of macroscopic methods, and fully exploit the
dominant physical phenomena at small scales, such as Brownian motion and colloid
surface interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To harness these complex phenomena
we will take advantage of the superior control provided by current fabrication
techniques to determine the geometrical structure and surface chemistry of
planar microfluidic devices. The strategy is to create specific periodic
patterns that dictate the behavior of the suspended particles by inducing
spatial partitioning on individual species and/or controlling non linear
hydrodynamic effects, and/or by creating selective surface-particle interactions
and/or by directing their Brownian motion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
we investigate a challenging problem in the area of transport phenomena in
particulate systems. That is, understanding the deterministic and stochastic
behavior of suspended colloids in periodic systems that have anisotropic and
heterogeneous properties. Contributions to this field could impact a broad range
of disciplines, from a better understanding of colloid enhanced transport of
pollutants in underground water reservoirs, to making progress in traditional
analytical methods such as volume averaging techniques. The results will also
impact the growing area of lab on a chip devices, which promises to
revolutionize the chemical sciences, by providing novel methods to manipulate
suspended species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate research and
education with the development of web based virtual experiments on particle
transport in microfluidic devices. The labs will give the users an exciting look
into state of the art developments in engineering. At the same time, the labs
will provide a platform to understand key concepts in transport phenomena. A
second aspect of the integration between research and education is the design of
simple experiments that demonstrate the fundamental phenomena that control the
transport in microfluidic systems, but at a macroscopic scale. Specifically, we
are developing experiments on the sedimentation of steel balls in planar,
transparent, periodic porous media fabricated from LEGO pieces.