* 0954737
* CAREER: Statistical and Computational Complexities of Modern Learning Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Alexander Rakhlin, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/29/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this proposal is to develop a mathematical theory
relating statistical and computational complexities of learning from data.
Through an integrated study of these complexities, the PI aims to fill the gap
in the understanding of fundamental connections between Statistics and
Computation. The problems considered in this proposal are aligned with the
following overlapping directions: (1) effects of regularization on statistical
and computational guarantees; (2) information-theoretic limitations of
estimation and optimization; (3) trade-offs between statistical performance and
computation time, as well as the effect of budget constraints; (4) sequential
prediction methods as a link between optimization and statistical learning; and
(5) limited-feedback models and the value of feedback in sequential prediction
and optimization. Progress along these directions is of great significance from
both theoretical and practical points of view.

Statistical Learning Theory has been successful in designing and analyzing
algorithms that extract patterns from data and make intelligent decisions.
Applications of learning methods are ubiquitous: they include systems for face
detection and face recognition, prediction of stock markets and weather
patterns, learning medical treatment strategies, speech recognition, learning
user's search preferences, placement of relevant ads, and much more. As
statistical learning methods become an essential part of many computerized
systems, new challenges appear. These challenges include large amounts of data,
high dimensionality, limited feedback, and a possibility of malicious behavior.
All these challenges have a profound impact on (a) the statistical performance
and (b) the computation time required to perform the task at hand. Little work
exists on studying these two aspects simultaneously, and the goal of this
project is to fill this gap. Better understanding of the interaction between
Statistics and Computation is likely to lead to faster and more precise methods,
thus positively impacting technology and society. The project's broader impact
includes components for integration of interdisciplinary research and education
through the development of new courses, seminars, workshops, and a summer school
program.