* 0954918
* CAREER: Dynamic Structure and Function of Biofilms for Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Robert Nerenberg, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 04/30/2016
* USD 456,503.00

0954918&lt;br/&gt;Nerenberg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water and wastewater systems
currently consume 3% to 4% of all electrical energy production in the United
States, and upgrading wastewater treatment (WWT) plants to achieve nitrogen
removal may double their energy demands. Nitrogen removal also may substantially
increase emissions of nitrous oxide (N2O), a potent greenhouse gas. Biofilm
systems are increasingly popular for upgrades to nitrogen removal. A novel
biofilm approach is the Hybrid Membrane-Biofilm Process (HMBP), where cassettes
of air-filled membrane-supported biofilms (MBfs) are integrated into an
activated sludge tank. This eliminates bubbled aeration, potentially saving over
50% of the electrical energy requirements for WWT, while achieving nitrogen
removal and potentially minimizing N2O emissions. Biofilms are dynamic systems,
where physical dynamics (e.g., detachment) and chemical dynamics (e.g., varying
substrate concentrations) can have important effects on biofilm structure,
function, and overall performance. The goal of this research is to investigate
the dynamic structure and function of biofilms for WWT.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop a novel experimental approach that
allows the study of physical and chemical dynamics of biofilm system using
microsensors, bacteria tagged with a novel anaerobic fluorescent protein, and
confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). This allows near real-time analysis
of the effects of detachment and shifts in substrate concentrations on the
structure and function of biofilms. This technique will be used to study the
effect of different modes of detachment (physical dynamic), and how this affects
the structure and function of biofilms, especially as they relate to the HMBP
process. The PI also will study N2O emissions in biofilms (chemical dynamic),
and how they are affected by cycling of oxygen concentrations. Multi-
dimensional, particle-based models will be developed to capture the dynamic
effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a novel approach to
biofilm research. The results will provide a fundamental understanding of the
effect of detachment on the structure, function, and overall performance of
biofilms. It is the first systematic study of N2O formation in biofilms, and of
the dynamic structure and function of biofilms. It uses a novel combination of
bacteria tagged with anaerobic fluorescent proteins, CLSM, and microsensors.
Finally, it also develops a novel, particle-based, multidimensional model
suitable for capturing these dynamic effects on biofilms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will directly impact the understanding of
detachment and N2O formation in biofilm systems relevant to WWT, including MBf-
based applications. The proposed research platform can be used to study biofilms
of clinical, industrial, and environmental relevance, such as biofilm viability
after exposure to disinfectants, antibiotics, or heavy metals. The PI will focus
on the training and education of Hispanic students to encourage them to pursue
careers in science and engineering. High school teachers will be trained to use
simple molecular tools and to develop teaching modules with assistance from high
school students. A pilot undergraduate research exchange with Chile will be
initiated as a means to provide an international research experience to
undergraduate and graduate students. Graduate students also will be involved in
international research collaborations. REU students will be recruited from
Puerto Rico and local universities with large Hispanic populations