* 0954996
* CAREER: Creating a new class of organic-inorganic dispersion engineered RF-optical modulators
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Ronald Reano, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 01/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to create a new class of organic-inorganic
dispersion engineered RF-optical modulators for the purpose of achieving energy
efficient electrical-to-optical conversion. The approach is based on the
integration of organic materials with inorganic materials and the dispersion
engineering of anisotropic periodic structures. Intellectual merit: The research
program has two major thrusts. The first involves the engineering of electro-
optical planar waveguide technology that exhibits no reactive ion etch induced
surface roughness, thin film deposition through spin-coating, high index
contrast, and large second order susceptibility. These advantages are leveraged
in the second thrust, which is based on the emulation of finite anisotropic
periodic structures, where the internal optical field grows to the fourth power
of the number of periods. Nonlinear optical effects are tremendously
intensified, thereby enhancing modulator conversion efficiency while also
enabling component miniaturization.

Broader impacts: Combining the advantages of optics and RF in hybrid systems
addresses concurrent demands for greater bandwidth and mobility, thereby
impacting the networking, computing, and sensing industries. The integrated
educational plan responds to the challenge of preparing science and engineering
students to be successful in an increasingly interdisciplinary and global
environment. The plan is to develop a global scientists-and-engineers seminar
series at Ohio State University and an integrated optics curriculum that
engenders integrative research thinking. Additionally, the plan fosters the
involvement of undergraduates and minority students from underrepresented groups
in the research program and engages the local science museum to introduce
engineering to diverse student populations.