* 0954441
* CAREER:  Soot Oxidation in Hydrocarbon-Free Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Peter Sunderland, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 02/29/2016
* USD 405,242.00

0954441&lt;br/&gt;Sunderland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project is a study of soot oxidation in flames with an
interest in a cleaner environment. Environmental soot kills more people than any
other pollutant owing to its association with respiratory illness and cancer. It
also contributes significantly to climate change. Soot in unwanted fires
increases radiation, fire spread rates, and carbon monoxide emissions.
Ironically, soot is desired in many processes; for example soot is responsible
for the yellow color of candle flames and it is processed into the toner used in
most printers.&lt;br/&gt;Soot remains one of the least understood subjects in
combustion. There are particularly large gaps in understanding soot oxidation
processes. The leading numerical models of soot use disparate soot oxidation
submodels. These submodels are based on experiments with significant
uncertainties. Inaccuracies in these submodels are impeding not only the ability
to model soot numerically, but also the understanding of soot formation
processes in flames.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a new
double flame system with an unprecedented ability to establish soot oxidation
reaction mechanisms. A broad array of advanced diagnostics is proposed. The
system will be the first to allow mature or early soot from hydrocarbon
diffusion flames to be oxidized in H2 or CO diffusion flames. The ability to
control the species present, plus the expansive range of conditions to be
considered, hold great promise for developing accurate and robust expressions of
soot oxidation rates. &lt;br/&gt;If this promise is realized, the resulting
improvements in numerical soot models and understanding of soot formation and
oxidation processes should be substantial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The research should advance the understanding of soot
oxidation, formation, and emissions from flames. It should improve the accuracy
of numerical models of soot kinetics. It is hoped that it will significantly
benefit the environment. This project will have several educational impacts.
Graduate students and undergraduates will conduct much of the research. The
research results will be integrated into two combustion courses taught by the
PI. The PI will team with two organizations at the University of Maryland, the
Women in Engineering Program and the Center for Minorities in Science and
Engineering to foster interest in science and engineering among female and
minority secondary school students. The PI will develop a day-long flame
laboratory for secondary school students that is directly related to the
proposed research.