* 0954796
* CAREER: Interventional Microscopy for In-vivo Investigations of Brain Function
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Elizabeth Hillman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 400,000.00

0954796 Hillman

The proposed program will develop and refine a platform for in-vivo
"Interventional Microscopy". The vision is to create an in-vivo microscope that
can not just observe living cells in their natural environment, but directly
interact with them. To achieve this they will implement photo-manipulation
techniques more commonly applied to in-vitro studies, and translate them for use
in-vivo in small animals. By refining experimental paradigms and demonstrating
the efficacy of Interventional Microscopy techniques, they will introduce these
potentially transformative new tools to a broad audience of biomedical
researchers. To achieve these goals, they will start by developing a combined
two-photon microscopy and photomanipulation instrument, based around an existing
home-built in-vivo two-photon system. The design incorporates two independently
focused and shaped beams from two different pulsed lasers, and will be operated
by custom-written software. They will then begin developing and optimizing in-
vivo techniques for using photoactivable compounds, as well as exploring optical
trapping and particle-manipulation techniques in-vivo. To achieve, this they
will develop and optimize procedures for in-vivo loading of photomanipulatable
substances, as well as developing calibration techniques and controls to ensure
that lightactivation in-vivo is reliable and well controlled. They plan to apply
these techniques to their ongoing in-vivo studies of neurovascular coupling; the
interrelation between blood flow and neuronal activity in the brain.
Interventional Microscopy techniques will allow them to selectively manipulate
the cells and vessels of the living brain, allowing in depth characterization of
fundamental chemical and cellular mechanisms.