* 0954107
* CAREER: Architectural Mechanisms for Cooperative Reliability
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Mattan Erez, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 02/29/2016
* USD 430,000.00

This project explores hardware and software techniques, as well as programming
model considerations, for enabling flexible and dynamic soft error protection.
Current hardware error-tolerance mechanisms take an all-or-nothing approach: the
user either prepays for worst-case error protection or relies entirely on
software to tolerate errors. Neither option is desirable for many applications
and usage scenarios, however. Each approach results in wasted resources and
squandered performance. The goal is to enable cooperative protection schemes and
maximize efficiency by blurring the lines between the hardware and software
control of soft error protection. The PI will investigate techniques that allow
the hardware designer, software system, and programmer to make optimal decisions
for their usage model. The aim is to make error tolerance a first-class
optimization option in order to allow users to "pay for the error tolerance they
need, rather than overpay for what they might need". Applicable scenarios will
be studied and analyzed to gauge the advantages to overall system design,
effective memory capacity, and performance/power. The PI will also develop
methods for the programmer to explicitly yet abstractly and intuitively express
trade off between protection and hardware resources. The approach is based on a
new mechanism called ``limited guaranteed precision", which allows a programmer
to selectively protect costly or sensitive portions of a computation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve long-term impact, materials to train developers
to realize the benefits of treating reliability as a first-class application
property will be developed. The education plan revolves around course modules,
problems, and demonstrations at levels ranging from popular and mini-talks
suitable for high-school and middle-school, through lower and upper division
undergraduate course modules, to in-depth graduate-level study. The project will
also introduce students who are not computer scientists/engineers to scientific
computing and systems and train them, thereby increasing US high-end computing
competitiveness. The outcome of this research can impact related fields,
industry, and society at large by maintaining advances in computational tools
for science and engineering.