* 0954445
* CAREER: Multiscale modeling of collective behavior of bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2016
* Patrick Underhill, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 04/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

0954445 Underhill

The objective of the proposed activity is to develop novel coarse-grained
hydrodynamic simulation methods to model the collective swimming behavior of
bacteria and other active particles and to investigate the collective behavior
of bacteria in viscoelastic media and near surfaces. The research focuses
specifically on bacterial systems because of their importance in infections,
experimental data are becoming available, and the possibility of designing new
engineered systems. If successful, the research contributions will have a broad
range of applications, including chemical and biological engineering, materials
science, and social science. If the concentration of bacteria becomes high
enough, collective behavior emerges. The importance of chemical signaling
(quorum sensing) is such systems is established. However, the emergence can
occur even in absence of chemical signaling because of hydrodynamic
interactions. Theory and simulation of such systems is the main subject of this
project.

Intellectual Merit Mesoscopic phenomena (such as transport phenomena) play an
important role in the macroscopic outcome observed in many areas including
biology. The research has two central goals: 1) build a coarse-graining
framework that allows for tractable simulations which capture the key
hydrodynamic features, and 2) use a novel simulation method to study for the
first time the impact a non-Newtonian fluid has on the collective behavior.
These goals will potentially provide fundamental insights into natural phenomena
such as bacterial infections in mucus of the lungs and intestines and biofilm
formation, but also provide the tools to design bacterial systems. Preliminary
results show that a non-Newtonian fluid can be used to control and interrupt
collective behavior. This work will potentially change the paradigm in
engineering of bacterial communities by including hydrodynamics and mechanical
communication on equal footing with (an integrated together with) genetic
manipulation and chemical communication.

Broader Impacts The framework built in this work and the fundamental advances on
collective behavior will potentially impact many areas. This includes the
following examples: if groups of organisms can undergo chemotaxis more
efficiently than individuals, then active agents can work together as drug
delivery agents to find and destroy tumors. New active materials can be designed
with unique mechanical properties. Fluid mechanics can be used to optimize
biofuel production by bacteria. Hydrodynamic interaction is seen as an example
in which simple rules can give rise to complex emergent behavior. The research
will help us understand which aspects of the emergent behavior are universal and
which are particular to hydrodynamic interactions.

Education and Outreach: Research and education both benefit by being strongly
tied together by leveraging the curiosity that is generated by visualizing fluid
mechanics and biology. Java-based applets will be developed to teach fundamental
concepts and encourage underrepresented groups. The applets will allow a user to
interactively explore state-of-the-art research concepts. The interactive nature
gives the user a greater sense of excitement and drive to learn more. Workshops
will also be held at Rensselaer to bring together researchers studying complex
fluids from a wide range of disciplines.