* 0954130
* CAREER: Fundamentals of Nanoparticle Behavior in Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2016
* Sharon Walker, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2016
* USD 423,032.00

Sharon Walker&lt;br/&gt;University of California-Riverside&lt;br/&gt;CAREER:
Fundamentals of Nanoparticle Behavior in Water Treatment&lt;br/&gt;CBET -
0954130&lt;br/&gt;The fate, transport, and toxicity of human engineered
nanomaterials released into in the environment, especially into wastewater
treatment and surface and groundwater systems is a topic of great societal and
scientific importance. The funded project is a systematic investigation of the
physicochemical interactions between nanomaterials and the environment. Its goal
is to assess the effectiveness of conventional wastewater treatment processes in
trapping and/or removing common human-engineered nanoparticles from domestic
water supplies. The work involves extensive nanoparticle characterization and
transport experiments under environmentally relevant conditions. The behavior
and interaction of three categories of nanoparticles will be examined: metal
oxides (hematite, titanium oxide, cerium oxide, zinc oxide), metal (gold), and
carbon-based (carbon nanotubes). The impact of various coating/capping agents
such as Dextran, DMSA, and Polyamiline that are commonly used on these particles
will also be examined. Both bare and coated/capped nanoparticles will be tested.
Their stability, reactivity, and the effectiveness of removal will be evaluated
at each of the four stages of water treatment: coagulation, flocculation,
sedimentation, and filtration. Nanomaterial behavior over a wide range of water
quality parameters, from simplified electrolytes to complex solution chemistries
will be examined. Filtration mechanisms will also be investigated in microscopic
and macroscopic flow systems. The impacts of nanoparticle characteristics such
as electrophoretic mobility, hydrophobicity, crystalline structure,
concentration, and size and shape on the efficiency and effectiveness of
wastewater treatment processes will be examined using transmission electron
microscopy, UV/Vis, time-resolved dynamic light scattering, fluorescent
labeling, magnetic saturation, and other methods. Experiments will take place in
packed bed columns and micromodel systems. Broader impacts of the research
include improving our knowledge of nanoparticle transport and their trapping and
removal from drinking water. The work supports an early career PI whose gender
is underrepresented in the sciences and engineering, will engage Hispanic
undergraduates from a local community college, and will be incorporated into
undergraduate courses. The work will also partner K12 teachers and students at
the Riverside Unified School District with university students through the
preparation of materials on how to develop science faire projects on water
quality.