* 0954405
* CAREER: Climate Informed Uncertainty Analyses for Integrated Water Resources Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2017
* Sankarasubraman Arumugam, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2017
* USD 424,351.00

0954405 Arumugam

The objectives of this research are to (1) quantify the relative roles of
climate variability in modulating seasonal streamflow and water quality
variability over relatively undeveloped basins in the southeastern U.S., (2)
investigate the utility of seasonal climate forecasts in improving water supply
and water quality management and in developing adaptive water management plans
for promoting water sustainability in regions such as the Neuse river basin, NC,
(3) integrate research findings into (i) on-campus and distance education
courses at NCSU, (ii) water-related courses at HCBUs in NC, and (iii) summer
training programs for junior/senior high school students, and (4) demonstrate to
federal and state agencies, research institutes and non-profits the use of
climate forecasts in developing streamflow and water quality forecasts for
impaired water bodies, for example, in NC. Various measures will be employed to
quantify the causal chain that associates climatic variability with streamflow
and water quality variability. Multiple General Circulation Models (GCMs)
forecasts will be utilized to develop streamflow and water quality forecasts,
which are ingested into water allocation and water quality management models.
Retrospective analyses using these forecasts will be performed to develop an
integrated water management plan. This research aims to create a fundamental
body of knowledge on understanding the role of climate variability in modulating
streamflow and water quality in river basins. It is expected that findings from
this research will offer insights on the vulnerability of water quality
attributes to climatic variability. Streamflow forecasts developed using GCM
forecasts will reduce model uncertainty and improve seasonal water allocation
and water quality management plans. Generalizing the findings will help in
understanding the potential utility of climate forecasts in promoting water
resources sustainability.