* 0954990
* CAREER:  Engineering Functional Muscle-Tendon Structures using Scaffold-Free Cell-Based Directed Assembly and Theoretical Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,12/31/2016
* David Corr, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 12/31/2016
* USD 447,539.00

0954990 Corr

This integrated research and education CAREER proposal is focused to understand
the role of fiber network architecture on overall tissue function, and thus
establish the structure-function relationship. In the PI's scaffold-free
approach, the natural ability of cells to grow and create their own
extracellular matrix is harnessed, using geometric constraint, to form
functional single fibers. This bottom-up approach will be utilized to create and
tune fibers that will serve as building blocks for muscle-tendon structures, in
which the architecture can be specified to fiber-level precision. The mechanical
characterization of these muscle-tendon structures, when coupled with fiber-
based theoretical modeling, will provide insight required to establish the
structure-function relationship. The key novelties to this approach are: (1)
scaffold-free engineering and mechanical evaluation of single fibers formed by
directed cell growth, and (2) building functional muscle-tendon structures to
precise fiber-level architecture. This represents a fundamental shift in tissue
engineering approach; one necessary to create functional muscle-tendon units in
which both muscle and tendon fiber architecture dictate the physiological and
biomechanical function of the structure. This research program will utilize a
scaffold-free approach to engineer muscle and tendon fibers by directing the
growth of myoblasts and fibroblasts using geometric constraints to: (1) develop
a fundamental understanding of the influence of environmental stimuli on
cellular growth and fiber formation, in both muscle and tendon. (2) determine
set(s) of bioreactor parameters for optimal muscle and tendon fiber performance
(3) characterize the influence of fiber and crimp geometry on crimped engineered
tendon fibers viscoelastic low-load and failure properties, using theoretical
modeling and experimentation. (4) create functional muscle-tendon structures
with fiber-level architectural fidelity to achieve the desired mechanical
performance, as guided by theoretical modeling simulations. (5) establish the
structure-function relationship for engineered muscle-tendon structures;
including the contributions of each tissue, and compatibility at the muscle-
tendon interface. The research will be complemented by integrated educational
projects at the graduate, undergraduate and K-12 academic levels, both within
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and as educational outreach. The latest
research findings and methods will be incorporated into 3 graduate/undergraduate
hybrid courses currently taught or co-taught by the PI, and a related 5-week lab
experiment will be developed for the Cell & Tissue Engineering track of the
Biomedical Engineering Laboratory course. Tissue engineering knowledge gained
will be integrated into the PI's ongoing undergraduate (BIR Workshop) and K-12
(Design Your Future Day) outreach seminars. Furthermore, the PI will introduce a
week-long biomaterials module into the summer American Society of Materials
"Materials Day Camp", using an interactive series of hands-on experiments to
establish the structure-function relationship of collagen networks present in
soft tissues.