* 0954925
* CAREER: Amorphization of Aluminum and Aluminum Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Gleb Yushin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 01/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Strong industrial demand has stimulated the research and
development of nanostructured or amorphous aluminum (Al) alloys with improved
ductility, strength, fracture toughness and fatigue resistance. However, the
methods currently employed, such as rapid solidification and severe plastic
deformation, offer limited control over the possible chemistry or microstructure
of the produced Al alloys. While searching for the new electrode materials for
batteries, several research groups world-wide have recently discovered the
phenomenon of electrochemically-driven solid state grain refinement and
amorphization of semiconductors and metals, which takes place during the room
temperature electrochemical alloying and de-alloying of materials with Li. The
proposed project aims to harness this novel method to modify the morphology of
Al and Al alloys in order to enhance their mechanical properties. Replacing Li
with Mg was hypothesized to greatly enhance the amorphization efficiency. This
potentially transformative and versatile technology does not require elaborate
plastic deformation techniques. It is expected to circumvent the limitations of
state-of-the-art technology and broaden the range of the attainable properties
of Al alloys. To gain a fundamental understanding of electrochemically-driven
amorphization, the proposed project will systematically investigate the
influence of relevant physical parameters on the electrochemical alloying and
de-alloying of Al alloys. The influence of the initial metal microstructure,
orientation and composition on the electrochemical alloying/de-alloying
processes and the microstructure of the obtained Al alloys will be studied. The
project will also identify how post-annealing processing changes the
microstructure and mechanical properties of Al alloys and will include a
systematic study of the structure-property relationships for Al alloys as a
function of the grain size distribution, density and chemical composition. The
proposed study will establish guidelines for the formation of a wide range of
metallic glasses via electrochemical amorphization routes.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Aluminum (Al) and Al alloys are critically important
lightweight materials for construction and transportation. The research and
development of nanostructured or amorphous Al alloys leads to significant
improvements of their mechanical properties. The proposed project aims to
investigate a novel method of electrochemically-driven grain refinement and
amorphization of Al alloys, which takes place at room temperature. This study
may open the door to a new direction in science, where electrochemical methods
are used to overcome the limitations of traditional metallurgy. Lighter weight,
higher plasticity, fracture toughness, specific elastic modulus, corrosion
resistance, hardness and strength are some of the advantages this new
revolutionary direction in lightweight metal processing can produce. The
graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will have an
opportunity to learn and develop novel processing techniques, will enhance their
communication skills and will be well prepared to solve new challenges in their
future engineering careers. Student presentations at local, national and
international meetings will help to disseminate the important results of
structure-property relationships in lightweight metals to the general public.
The PI will involve teachers from high schools with large minority populations
in the proposed research project and will help them to develop new educational
modules and implement them in the physics and chemistry curriculum. This
activity will help to educate minority students about metallurgy and materials
science and excite their interest in engineering careers. The results of the
research will be incorporated into one undergraduate and two graduate classes.