* 0954643
* PECASE:  Using Control Systems to Quantify Limbic Dysregulation for Neurobiologically-Based Diagnoses of Psychiatric Disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Lilianne Mujica-Parodi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2016
* USD 478,035.00

PI: Mujica-Parodi, Lilianne&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0954643&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: For
this proposal, we will develop and test computational methods for quantifying
dysregulation between the excitatory and inhibitory components of the negative
feedback loops in the brain that control homeostatic regulation of emotional
arousal. This work conceptually integrates systems neuroscience with techniques
originally developed for physics and engineering (power spectrum scale
invariance, Shannon entropy) that have been successfully applied towards
characterizing autonomic regulation via heart-rate variability analysis.
Historically, neuroimaging has focused on measuring the amplitude of activation-
levels in different regions of interest for some specific task. While in the
past few years newer connectivity methods such as structural equation modeling,
Granger causality, and dynamic causal modeling are important advances in
investigating the temporal components of the time-series, these techniques are
designed to investigate the strength of connections between node pairs. In
contrast, our approach builds upon this work to answer a completely different
type of question: to what degree does the system as a whole respond efficiently
to perturbation in its maintenance of homeostasis? Our approach is explicitly
motivated by the fact that many diseases-from diabetes to cancer to Cushing's
disease-are dysregulatory in nature. As such, one technique that has enjoyed
much diagnostic success is to "perturb" the system and then measure dynamic
features of its return to baseline. In this proposal, we measure dysregulation
of the limbic circuit, with neural timeseries obtained first from functional MRI
and then near-infrared spectroscopy, in developing a neurobiologically-based
instrument for objective and quantitative diagnosis of mental illness. The three
patient groups with whom we will optimize our methods will include generalized
anxiety disorder, major depression, and their comorbidity. These diagnostic
choices provide a rational extension of our previous research on limbic
dysregulation as a marker for individual variability in trait anxiety within the
healthy population. Moreover, the symptoms associated with anxiety and
depression have clearly-defined excitatory and inhibitory components with
respect to physiological and behavioral arousal, and therefore will allow us to
test dissociation between groups. The development of engineering techniques to
assist individuals with psychiatric illness qualifies this proposal for
consideration in the RAPD category as it advances innovation beyond the
frontiers of current knowledge in disability-related research of mental illness.
Given that psychiatric illnesses are currently diagnosed solely by clinicians'
assessment of patients' self-reported moods, and therefore are highly subjective
and wholly dependent upon patient compliance, the broad societal impact of this
research lies in the potential ability to harness the functional neuroimaging
technologies for applications that could be revolutionary in the diagnosis of
mental health disorders, providing objective and quantifiable criteria for
assessing prodromal risk, treatment efficacy, and identifying clean phenotypes
for genetic research. This CAREER award would permit me, over the next five
years, to collect the necessary data and to iteratively develop and adapt the
computational engineering tools necessary to lead development in this critical
evolving area of research.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In 2007, the National
Academy of Science, National Academy of Engineering, and&lt;br/&gt;Institute of
Medicine were charged by Congress to form a committee to address the challenges
associated with maintaining scientific innovation and economic competitiveness
within an increasingly global economy. For this CAREER award, I will focus on
addressing two specific recommendations made by this committee. One action item
was to strengthen children's K-12 preparation in science and technology by
enhancing the science and engineering education of the science teachers
themselves. A second action item was to increase the total number of individuals
qualified and motivated to pursue postgraduate study in science and engineering.
This CAREER award will directly address both of these action items. The first
action item will be addressed in three parts: (1) through the development of a
fun and intellectually engaging hands-on 7th grade curriculum in "systems-based
thinking" using STELLA software; (2) through training science teachers to use
the curriculum during summer workshops; and, (3) through dissemination of the
curriculum and workshop materials by posting them on our website and follow-up
assessment to measure the curriculum's efficacy. The second action item will be
addressed by setting up a collaborative program with the Georgia Institute of
Technology Department of Biomedical Engineering to recruit minority biomedical
engineers into our Biomedical Engineering Ph.D. program: first as summer-
research undergraduates, and then as full-time students. By training students in
the lab to exploit the benefits of thinking in terms of systems in their own
research, and then training them to teach teachers and by extension junior high
school students the same conceptual tools at a more basic level, we are able to
integrate our research and educational goals to the fullest extent possible.