* 0954310
* EAGER: Autonomous Data Partitioning Using Data Mining for High End Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Sudarshan Dhall, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

Query response time and system throughput are the most important metrics when it
comes to database and file access performance. Because of data proliferation,
efficient access methods and data storage techniques have become increasingly
critical to maintain an acceptable query response time and system throughput.
One of the common ways to reduce disk I/Os and therefore improve query response
time is database clustering, which is a process that partitions the
database/file vertically (attribute clustering) and/or horizontally (record
clustering). To take advantage of parallelism to improve system throughput,
clusters can be placed on different nodes in a cluster machine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a novel algorithm, AutoClust, for
database/file clustering that dynamically and automatically generates attribute
and record clusters based on closed item sets mined from the attributes and
records sets found in the queries running against the database/files. The
algorithm is capable of re-clustering the database/file in order to continue
achieving good system performance despite changes in the data and/or query sets.
The project then develops innovative ways to implement AutoClust using the
cluster computing paradigm to reduce query response time and system throughput
even further through parallelism and data redundancy. The algorithms are
prototyped on a Dell Linux Cluster computer with 486 compute nodes available at
the University of Oklahoma. For broader impacts, performance studies are
conducted using not only the decision support system database benchmark (TPC-H)
but also real data recorded in database and file formats collected from science
and healthcare applications in collaboration with domain experts, including
scientists at the Center for Analysis and Prediction of Storms (CAPS) at the
University of Oklahoma. The project also makes important impacts on education as
it provides training for graduate and undergraduate students working on this
project in the areas of national critical needs: database and file management
systems, and high-end computing and applications. The developed algorithm and
prototype, real datasets and performance evaluation results are made available
to the public at the Website: http://www.cs.ou.edu/~database/AutoClust.html.