* 0954422
* CAREER:  Power Optimization in Autonomous Microsystems via Integrated Motion Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Kenn Oldham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 01/31/2016
* USD 400,132.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to explore novel control strategies for minimizing power consumption of
autonomous microsystems. Microsystems are engineered devices with sub-millimeter
dimensions; at this scale, many phenomena become important that are ignored in
larger devices, including many energy losses in circuitry. New control
strategies will dramatically reduce total energy usage by coordinating motion
control with active regulation of power electronics and sensor circuitry. These
strategies will be based on switching control theory, where the various
components of a microsystem are regulated through proper timing of a finite
number of commands. These switching commands can be implemented especially
efficiently in miniaturized systems. Switching control theory will be enhanced
to provide robust performance in the presence of variation in the behavior of
underlying physical components, and to adapt to changing conditions over time.
Deliverables will include comprehensive controller design and optimization
procedures, micro-scale component modeling tools, documentation of innovations
in switching control theory, experimental verification on micro-robotic
testbeds, engineering student education, and interactive on-line learning tools
for secondary students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful realization of this
research will increase understanding of fundamental trade-offs between power
consumption and performance of interconnected micro-scale dynamic systems. The
primary application is the control of insect-like terrestrial micro-robots,
where small size dramatically limits power availability. Minimal-power control
and optimization algorithms will be a major enabling step towards the creation
of micro-robotic tools for emergency, health, and maintenance workers, and will
have wider application to other microsystems such as unattended sensor nodes and
implantable medical devices, where resource or energy conservation is critical.
In the process, micro-robotics will be used as a theme for developing
interactive in-class lessons and online programs teaching concepts such as work
and energy to secondary students, with interactive online activities refined for
broad dissemination over the Internet.