* 0954292
* STTR Phase II:  Matching the Timing of Renewable Energy Production with Patterns of Electricity Demand
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2010,07/31/2012
* Peter Lilienthal, HOMER Energy LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 07/31/2012
* USD 616,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will transform
the Hybrid Optimization Model for Electric Renewables (HOMER®) software into a
tool that empowers professionals, students, and industry to design "hybrid"
electricity systems that blend renewable resources, which are unpredictably
intermittent, and fossil-fueled-based fuels, which are polluting and expensive.
As renewable resources become more prevalent due to regulatory requirements,
cost decreases, and consumer interest, the numbers and complexities of these
hybrid systems will rise. HOMER is a simple, easy-to-learn tool that simulates
the permutations of generating equipment in an electrical system to recommend
the lowest-cost configuration that satisfies consumer demand. Developed at the
National Renewable Energy Lab (NREL) from 1992 to 2007 as a free downloadable
application, the software will be converted into a web-based, e-commerce-enabled
service (proven feasible in Phase I) as the vital component of HOMER Energy®
LLC's growing business selling software, services and community to HOMER users.
In addition, as part of this Phase II project, University researchers will apply
this new version of HOMER to current, real-world issues relating to energy
policy and technology in order to validate the software and promote it as a
valuable research tool.

This project has the potential to improve the access, usability, and features of
the HOMER® software tool with the following impacts: 1) This easy-to-use
modeling tool will assist research on existing, new and conceptual types of
electricity generation and storage, as well as their implications on electricity
supply and policy. 2) By recommending systems with lower costs and providing
more accurate estimates on initial and operating investment, distributed
renewable energy will be integrated more rapidly into electrical systems,
augmenting or displacing fossil-fuel-based generation with a commensurate
reduction in carbon emissions while increasing the reliability and security of
electricity supply; 3) The accelerated electrification of rural areas,
especially in developing nations, enabled by the tool has the potential to
positively impact a region's standard of living.