* 0954421
* CAREER: Genome Regulation and Nuclear Rheology
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2015
* Kris Dahl, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 03/31/2015
* USD 449,999.00

0954421&lt;br/&gt;Dahl&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sequencing of the human genome
has provided a wealth of scientific information, but this information is limited
since mechanisms which control gene expression are poorly understood. The role
of force in regulating gene expression is an emerging and uniquely multi-
disciplinary area of study. Mechanical force is important during organism
development and for proper maintenance of cells and tissues. Specifically, shear
stress on endothelial cells alters gene expression and changes cell behavior.
There are many known mechanosensors in cells, but short-lived signaling events
are not sufficient to explain both the long-time responses and permanent changes
of cells. The DNA inside the nucleus, which is organized into the genome, has
unique mechanical properties capable of responding proportionally to both the
magnitude and duration of applied stress. Nuclear deformation may be important
since placement of genes within the nucleus is correlated with their expression.
This grant will test the hypothesis that the reorganization of the nucleus helps
regulate gene expression in cells exposed to force. Subnuclear reorganization in
endothelial cells will be monitored under dose dependent extracellular shear
stress using real time particle tracking of fluorescent proteins. Nuclear
structural proteins will be up- and down-regulated to determine the role of
nuclear mechanics on controlling gene expression and gene movement stimulated by
extracellular shear stress. The effects of chemically-stimulated angiogenesis,
blood vessel formation, on subnuclear reorganization, gene expression and
cellular phenotype will specifically be examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
correlating changes in subnuclear rearrangement, gene accessibility and gene
expression with changes in nuclear mechanics, the amount of force the DNA
experiences in a cell under stress can be determined. The changes associated
with modifications of individual nuclear structural proteins bridges the gap
between nanoscale structure and microscale mechanics of the nucleus. This
project aims to prove a new form of cellular mechanotransduction using a
combination of particle tracking, biological manipulation, and gene analysis in
cells under shear stress. While this project will answer important biological
questions using novel engineering techniques and approaches, it will also show
the power of combining biology with engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in
gene regulation associated with force, independent of or to enhance chemical
factors, will help scientists and engineers to better control cells for a
variety of technological applications including areas of tissue engineering and
stem cell therapies. Working at the interface of science, engineering and
medicine includes many unique ethical situations. Seminars and web-based
tutorials promoting ethical conduct in the classroom and good research practices
are being developed in collaboration with the Center for Applied Ethics and will
be stressed throughout graduate research, undergraduate laboratory and summer
research curricula.