* 0954977
* CAREER: Studying Flow Velocity Field in Nanofluidics with a Far-Field Nanoscopic Velocimetry
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,09/30/2016
* Guiren Wang, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Title: CAREER: Studying Flow Velocity Field in Nanofluidics with a Far-Field
Nanoscopic Velocimetry&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Guiren
Wang&lt;br/&gt;Institutuion: USC Research Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
CBET-0954977 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this proposal is to establish a new basis of far field nanoscopic velocimetry
and apply this novel method to study fundamentals of transport phenomena in
nanofluidic systems through directly measuring the transient flow velocity and
velocity distribution in nanochannels. The proposed research will (1) explore
both the science and technology necessary to realize a novel diagnostic
technology capable of measuring the transient flow velocity distribution in a
nanochannel with high temporal (~1 Ã¬s) and spatial (10-20 nm) resolution; (2)
apply this enabling farfield nanoscopic measurement system to study transport
phenomena, velocity distribution and slip length, and gain a more fundamental
understanding of different phenomena in nanofluidics. If successful, this will
be achieved through a nanoscale focused laser beam, an essential component for
achieving spatial resolution beyond the well known Abbe's diffraction resolution
limit. The combination of a nanoscale focused laser beam with a molecular tracer
based velocimetry has the potential to serve as the foundation for the proposed
nanovelocimetry capable of unprecedented velocity measurements in nanofluidics.
The success of the proposed project will be transformative in providing the
basis for in depth studies in nanofluidics related biological transport
phenomenon as well as nanofluidic devices, such as sample preconcentration and
separation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in nanofluidics is rapidly growing as
investigators begin to explore the relevant physics, chemistry and biology at
the nanoscale, and the relevant nanoscale devices. Transport phenomena and
velocity distribution play key roles in determining the performance of
nanofluidic devices. The relevant dynamics of flow in confined geometries, such
as in nano- and microfluidic devices, can be accurately described only if the
physics of the flow at the interface between the fluid and the wall is
thoroughly understood. One of the most important steps towards this
understanding lies in determining if the flow on the solid wall is a slip or
non-slip flow, and the corresponding velocity gradient at the interface. This
has been a debate over the past two centuries, but a convincing conclusion is
still lacking. In order to resolve unsolved questions in the nanofluidics, it is
crucial to be able to accurately characterize the fluid flow velocity fields in
the nanochannel. Although there has been considerable research performed in the
area of nanofluidics focused on the study of velocity fields, currently only
theoretical or simulation predictions exist. The reason for the lack of
experimental evidence is simply that no nanovelocimeter currently exists to
measure the flow velocity in nanofluidic studies. Without the capability of
directly measuring the velocity field in nanofluidics, fluid dynamics models for
nanochannel predictions cannot be validated. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel measuring capability will have broad,
cross-disciplinary impact through facilitation of efforts aimed at understanding
the fundamental physics, chemistry and biology that are crucial at the
nanoscale. In the area of nanofluidics, the addition to measurement science will
allow scientists to probe basic nanoscale issues in areas such as the
limitations and ultimate breakdown of the classical continuum description of
fluid dynamics for spatially confined fluids, slip flow conditions,
electrokinetics and transient flow in nanoscale. Successfulness of the project
will also enhance the development and application of nanofluidics based lab-on-
a-chip devices, such as electrokinetic sample preconcentration and
electrophoresis for separation in nanochannels, single molecule detection. The
project will also integrate research with education by incorporating research
findings into curriculum development and developing low cost experimental
demonstration modules, that will aid graduate, undergraduate and K-12 students
in realizing the value and impact of BioMEMS devices in life science, and help
foster their interest in science and engineering for their career. The project
will also actively solicit students from under represented groups to take part
in the research of BioMEMS.