* 0954976
* CAREER: Plasmonic Nanocavities for Single Molecule Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Qihuo Wei, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 02/29/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Plasmonic Nanocavities for Single Molecule Detection

This proposal describes an integrated research, education and outreach plan with
a focus on plasmonic nanocavities and their applications in single molecule
surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). The proposed plasmonic nanocavities,
or the tiny gaps between metal nanowires (Ag), are formed by stacking a second
layer of parallel Ag nanowires on top of a first layer of perpendicularly
oriented Ag nanowires. Preliminary studies show that when the gaps between top
and bottom nanowires are reduced to a few nanometers or ten millionth of the
diameter of a human hair, illuminating light can be focused into such tiny
nanogaps with up to 100000 times increase in light intensity. When molecules are
placed inside these plasmonic nanocavities, their Raman scattering intensity can
be largely enhanced so that even single molecule signals can be observed. The
Raman spectra represent unique vibration information of molecules which can be
used for direct detection and identification of the molecules. The proposed
research aims at developing nanofabrication processes for nanowires and
nanocavities, characterization and fundamental understanding of these plasmonic
nanocavities, and exploring their applications in SERS. The ultimate goal is to
demonstrate a robust single molecule sensing platform based on SERS. The
education plan includes implementing an educational program aimed to attract
high ability students in Northeast Ohio to majors in STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) fields and to provide those students already in
STEM fields with mentoring and research opportunities.

Intellectual merit: The Ag nanowire crossbars are unique in three aspects: (1)
nanoantennas (i.e. Ag nanowire) and nanocavities are integrated in single
platform, making it highly efficient to focus light into nanometer scale; (2)
the vertical cavity design makes it possible to fabricate nanogaps with
unprecedented accuracy by using thin film deposition techniques; (3) Molecules
within these nanocavities can be addressed electrically by applying voltages
through these nanowires, providing great flexibility to control the molecules
and nanocavities. The proposed research will answer fundamental questions about
SERS enhancement mechanisms and lead to development of reproducible single
molecule sensors.

Broader impact: The proposed research benefits society because single molecule
sensors can find myriad applications from homeland security to disease
diagnostics for healthcare. The educational and outreach components of this
career plan include developing of a guided research experience program for the
Post Secondary Enrollment Option Program (PSEOP) students at Kent State
University (KSU); mentoring undergraduates in research; creating an outreach
program called ?Parent?s Night? for high school students and their parents;
enhancing graduate education through involving graduate students in
multidisciplinary research, and developing curriculum for teaching
nano/biomaterials at the graduate level. KSU is one of three largest public
universities in the state of Ohio, over 80% KSU students are undergraduates; and
KSU primarily serves low- to middle-income undergraduates. This unusual
combination of institutional traits makes KSU ideally suited to recruit students
from under-represented groups and/or disadvantaged communities to pursue careers
in science and related fields. The proposed educational plan will have a direct
impact on improving enrollment, retention, and graduation rates of under-
represented group members and women in science and related fields at KSU.