* 0954482
* CAREER: A new Telemedicine Platform using Incoherent Lensfree Cell Holography and Microscopy On a Chip
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Aydogan Ozcan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 401,994.00

0954482&lt;br/&gt;Ozcan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent revolutionary progress
in digital technologies together with novel image reconstruction algorithms and
theories can fundamentally transform the way that we conduct cell microscopy,
cytometry and medical diagnostics. With this vision, this proposal makes a
systematic effort to highlight this timely opportunity to revolutionize cell
microscopy by making it free of any lenses, lasers or other bulky optical
components with a much simpler, compact and cost-effective imaging architecture
especially suitable for telemedicine needs and requirements. Through incoherent
lensfree cell holography &amp; on-chip microscopy platform of this proposal
(i.e., LUCAS), the PI proposes to compensate in the digital domain for the lack
of complexity of optical components by recording individual phase &amp;
amplitude holograms of various cell types. These cell holograms also yield
accurate reconstruction of microscopic images featuring sub-cellular resolution
over a very large field of view (FOV) even at cell densities reaching up to ~0.4
Million cells/Ã¬L. Merging cost-effective and compact LUCAS imagers with the
state-of-the-art cell-phone technology will create numerous opportunities for
telemedicine to improve health care especially in the developing world where
medical facilities and infrastructure are extremely limited.