* 0954938
* CAREER:  Stochastic Optimization and Coordinating Control for the Next-Generation Electric Power System with Significant Wind Penetration
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Wei Qiao, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2016
* USD 407,999.00

Objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to study the
use of stochastic optimization and coordinating control to improve the
stability, reliability, and economic efficiency of the next-generation power
system with significant wind penetration. The approach is to (1) develop novel
modeling and optimization frameworks using probability-based decision-making
approaches for security-constrained stochastic optimization of the power system;
(2) enhance steady-state and transient performance of wind plants through novel
wind-plant supervisory control; and (3) enhance overall power system dynamic
performance and stability through novel wide-area coordinating
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
the creation of new philosophies for optimization and control design, this
project will advance understanding of the critical operational issues of the
next-generation power system and will lead to smarter power grids to provide
better electric energy security, efficiency, and sustainability. In addition to
power systems, this research will create several fundamental frameworks and
methodologies applicable to optimization and control of other interconnected,
large-scale, stochastic, dynamical, complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will build a thriving and diversified power program through the
integration of graduate and undergraduate research and teaching with K-12
outreach, which will provide a unique platform of learning for young individuals
entering the power engineering profession. This project will build multiple
foreign research training and exchange programs to promote international
collaborations in power engineering education and research. The outcomes of this
project will further exploit the benefits of wind power in reaching the goal of
supplying 20% of the nation's electricity by wind and will benefit various
sectors of the nation's economy.