* 0954941
* (CAREER) Real-Time Detection, Monitoring and Characterization of Single Nanoparticle/Bioaerosol Using On-Chip Resonators
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Lan Yang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 03/31/2015
* USD 422,000.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to explore and
develop a new label free optical technique to achieve portable, inexpensive and
high resolution devices capable of real time, in situ detection of particles to
address issues faced by conventional particle counters/spectrometers.
Specifically, we will investigate and exploit mode splitting in ultra high
quality Whispering Gallery Mode optical resonators for ultrasensitive, realtime,
insitu monitoring and characterization of nanoparticles with various chemical
and physical properties at single particle
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Real time, in
situ single particle detection and characterization will lay the groundwork to
investigate the dynamics and properties of individual nanoparticles and
effectively utilize them to develop innovative products. However, most
conventional macroscale methods only allow ensemble measurement of
nanoparticles, revealing average behaviors of the nanoparticle systems. Our chip
scale microscopic sensing device provides label free, single particle
resolution, self referencing feature, and superior noise immunity for real time,
in situ measurements at ambient conditions, which constitutes a significant
advancement compared to existing schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary nature of this work encourages collaborations
with groups in environmental engineering, biology and physics to explore new
classes of spectroscopy for characterizing the interactions between particles,
molecules, and ligands. The success of this project will have significant
impacts on materials science, chemical analysis, energy, biomedicine,
communication, instrumentation, and metrology for nanotechnology. The PI will
develop education programs in which students at different levels can obtain
broad knowledge and diverse technical skills in nanoscience and technology. She
will leverage the existing outreach programs between Washington University and
surrounding communities to foster and promote understanding of nanotechnology
among the general public.