* 0954283
* CAREER: Service Distribution Equity using Spatio-Temporal Statistical Foundations
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Nicoleta Serban, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2016
* USD 403,862.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to advance and develop methodology that addresses fundamental aspects of
service distribution equity. Service distribution equity is the study of a
population's access to services that are considered fundamental in fostering
economic development, improving wellness and enhancing the general quality of
life of a population within a given geographic area. This proposal focuses on
rigorous methodology to address three important dimensions of service
distribution equity: Measurement, Association and Catalysts of Change. To meet
the needs of data modeling that scales to the dimensionality and dependencies
intrinsic to the data used in addressing service distribution inequity, the
research project includes a series of new modeling multivariate methods that
rigorously account for data dependencies in a computationally efficient way. The
statistical methods are theoretically-founded and generally apply to other
studies in service industry research. This project focuses on financial services
(deposit and lending) and healthcare services (primary, specialized and
emergency care), but generally applies to other service activities which are
distributed at multiple sites and by multiple
providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying and addressing inequities in service
distribution will create economic development opportunities as well as improve
overall wellness of citizen without bias regarding demographic characteristics.
Consequently, this research will ultimately impact population groups which
historically have been deprived of access to fundamental services and eventually
reduce the disparities associated with service distribution inequities.
Moreover, this research will contribute with rigorous methodology to the field
of service distribution equity, which will aid in the quantitative argumentation
needed to influence policy, and with general spatio-temporal methodology to the
field of statistics which can be applied to many other problems.