* 0954321
* CAREER:  Understanding and Controlling the Surface Properties of a Micromoldable Liquid Metal
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Michael Dickey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 03/31/2016
* USD 427,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to identify the fundamental surface properties of a micromoldable liquid
metal. The liquid metal is a low toxicity, gallium-based fluid with a low
viscosity (like water) at room temperature. It forms a thin, solid 'skin' of
oxide on its surface that allows the liquid to be micromolded into desirable
shapes (e.g., wires, antennas) that may be useful for flexible electronics. The
micromolded metal is stabilized mechanically by the skin, which dictates the
electrical, mechanical, and chemical properties of the surface of the metal. The
research will explore the fundamental properties of this surface and identify
means of manipulating, modifying, and tuning it to form functional electronics
with surface-dictated properties. For this project, new surface sensitive
techniques will be developed and used to thoroughly characterize the unique
properties of the skin of oxide on the liquid metal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the research will enable the fabrication of soft, flexible, and
stretchable electronic components with tunable properties. Example applications
include soft electrodes for molecular electronics, deformable antennas, and
electrical components for microfluidic devices. Devices made possible by the
research will offer the advantages of durability and flexibility, and will be
simple to fabricate. The research will be integrated into a new course at NC
State and graduate and undergraduate engineering students will benefit directly
from involvement in the research. An interactive module that discusses the
research within the context of popular movies will be presented annually to an
established program at NC State that aims to interest 11- to 14-year-old
African-American and Hispanic boys in higher education and careers in science.