* 0954113
* A Conservation Imperative: Replacement of Bird and Mammal Specimen Cases at Texas A&amp;M
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Gary Voelker, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 04/30/2014
* USD 497,660.00

An award has been made to the Texas Cooperative Wildlife Collection (TCWC) at
Texas A&amp;M University to fund the replacement of all cases in the bird and
mammal collections which were heavily damaged in a flood event over 15 years
ago. With this funding, the principal investigators will be able to ensure the
long-term safety and continued viability of these vertebrate collections, which
number over 60,000 mammals and 15,000 birds. This award will also allow the
collection to accommodate increasing numbers of specimens from active ongoing
research programs. The PIs will also update taxonomy, verify specimen
identifications, and cross-reference specimens to genetic resources, all of
which are critical aspects of collection management. Additionally, the grant
will fund graduate Curatorial Assistant positions, allowing the principal
investigators to train and educate new museum-based researchers. Approaching its
75th year, the TCWC is one of the most active vertebrate collections in the
state: the bird collection is the only active research-based collection in the
state, and the mammal collection ranks among the top 20 in the western
hemisphere. In addition to providing resources for basic research, the TCWC is a
critical element in the Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences
curriculum, for which the collections host the lab sections of all vertebrate
natural history courses. Over 200 undergraduates per year are exposed to, and
are made beneficiaries of, the biodiversity represented in the bird, mammal and
other vertebrate collections. Furthermore, the collections routinely sponsor
undergraduate interns who participate in various aspects of collections
management. The PIs anticipate providing over 12 internship opportunities
associated with this grant.