* 0955348
* CAREER: Local Charge, Polarization, and Transport of Nanocrystal Quantum Dot Solid State Structures using Scanning Probe Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Katherine Aidala, Mount Holyoke College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 01/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Semiconducting nanocrystal quantum dots
(NQDs) are tiny ?balls? of material with exciting optical and electronic
properties that can be controlled by changing the size of the NQD and other
parameters. They are relatively easy to incorporate into devices, and have
already proven their utility as fluorescent markers for biological imaging. NQDs
are being used in photovoltaics, energy efficient lighting, and photodetectors,
though the electronic properties of NQDs are sensitive to their immediate
surroundings. This Faculty Early Career Award supports a project seeking to
understand electronic properties of nanocrystal quantum dots (NQDs) in
environments relevant to functional optoelectronic devices. This will be done by
using a scanning probe microscope that can investigate individual NQDs,
measuring the charge, current, and location of the NQDs in a variety of
environments, leading to improved device design. Furthermore, this project aims
to increase general science literacy and motivate the female undergraduate
students at Mount Holyoke College to pursue careers in science, by engaging
undergraduates in hands-on research projects and developing a first year
seminar. The seminar seeks to excite the students about present-day research and
to educate both science majors and interested non-majors about how science
?happens? by reading and discussing recent popular coverage of scientific
discoveries and debates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Award supports a project
seeking to understand electronic properties of nanocrystal quantum dots (NQDs)
in solid state structures, in particular an understanding of charge transport on
and off NQDs. The research project will focus on the use of scanning probe
microscopy (SPM) to locally probe NQD arrays, as well as isolated and aggregated
NQDs deposited on a variety of materials and embedded in organic semiconductors.
Scanned gate techniques, electric force microscopy, and conductive SPM can
spatially reveal variations in electrical properties of nominally identical
areas, illuminating the role of the local environment and imperfections of
fabrication on microscopic and macroscopic properties. Furthermore, this project
aims to increase general science literacy and motivate the female students at
Mount Holyoke College to pursue careers in science, by engaging undergraduates
in hands-on research projects and developing a first year seminar. The seminar
seeks to excite the students about present-day research and to educate both
science majors and interested non-majors about how science ?happens? by reading
and discussing recent popular coverage of scientific discoveries and debates.