* 0955812
* Emerging Issues in National Energy and Environmental Security: Research Opportunities and Challenges for Chemical Engineers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Virendra Mathur, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 96,447.00

0955812&lt;br/&gt;Mathur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is a group travel
project for U.S. participants to attend a four day Workshop on Emerging Issues
in National Energy and Environmental Security: Research Opportunities and
Challenges for Chemical Engineers. The location would be: Indian Institute of
Technology, New Delhi, India on January 4-6, 2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
workshop is planned between the US and Indian chemical engineering faculty
members is proposed on the overarching topics of fundamentals of transport,
environment, and energy processes as related to science, technology and
sustainability. The phenomena of interfacial processes, thermodynamics, mass
transfer, separations, catalysis, combustion, and particle mechanics, energy and
environmental sustainability are the main focus of the workshop approaches. The
US co-PI will be Dr Daniela Mainardi, of Louisiana Technical University. The
Indian coordinator will be Dr S. Basu, Professor, IIT, New Delhi. The proposal
also includes post workshop follow-up visits by a few specially selected US
participants to visit the research laboratories of the Indian faculty to
establish in depth scientific interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of this workshop is to have an exchange of scientific information and
a dialogue between the American and Indian university faculty members on recent
advances mainly in the above mentioned areas of fundamental research. It is
planned and hoped that this contact will lead to bi-national research
collaborations. Another goal is also to inculcate a close long-term
collaboration between the faculty members particularly junior and minority
faculty of these two countries for a sustained interaction and relationship.
This effort of exploring fundamental new concepts that might lead to long-term
solutions to the global energy and pollution challenges is to continue even
after the workshop is over. This joint workshop will provide a platform to
achieve these objectives of information exchange and faculty research
collaboration that may also have a focus on these critical problems across the
world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The workshop would cover a
variety of topics relevant to fundamentals of transport, environment, and energy
processes. These include interfacial processes, thermodynamics, mass transfer,
separations, catalysis, combustion and particle mechanics, energy and
environmental sustainability. U.S. researchers in these areas will be invited
who will match the interests of Indian researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The major impact of this workshop would be
to sustain our endeavor towards collaborative R&amp;D effort between faculty
members of the USA and India to undertake fundamental research towards energy
production and achieving pollution prevention and control in industries involved
in energy conversion and chemical production. For example, new joint discoveries
in the field of carbon dioxide sequestration and fuel cells for vehicular
transportation could limit global warming faced by both nations as well as the
entire World. Participation of young and under represented faculty will be
especially encouraged.