* 0955980
* Simulations of Strongly Correlated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Mark Jarrell, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2011
* USD 248,739.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research and education involving massively parallel numerical
simulations with an aim to understand materials where strong electronic
correlations play an important role. Courseware will be developed and research
related codes will be disseminated and documented. The PI will continue
developing cluster mean field techniques with a focus on inhomogeneity and
phonons in strongly correlated systems, the effect of spin-orbit coupling,
disorder and non-local correlations in spintronic materials, and the effect of
non-local correlations in heavy Fermion materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key
objectives of the project include:&lt;br/&gt;. Developing a better understanding
of the role of inhomogeneity and phonons in the cuprates.&lt;br/&gt;. Studying
the effect of frustration and non-local correlations in dilute ferromagnetic
semiconductors such as GaMnAs.&lt;br/&gt;. Developing a better understanding of
the role of non-local correlations for the problem of exhaustion and pairing in
some heavy Fermion systems.&lt;br/&gt;. Enhance the impact of the research
through the dissemination of example codes.&lt;br/&gt;. Continue the development
of courseware emphasizing computational techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will involve international collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;The products of
this project including papers, courseware, and example codes, will be available
through the web. The impact of this research is further enhanced through the
development of new computational algorithms with broad applications, and more
directly through the distribution of examples of these codes on the PI's web
site and on public repositories of Scientific software such as the MCC Software
Archive. Distributed codes include Maximum Entropy codes for analytic
continuation, and dynamical mean field and dynamical cluster codes. Education is
heavily integrated into this project, both through the support of graduate
students and through the continued development of NSF sponsored courseware
distributed through the PI's web site. Additional outreach is accomplished
through the local "Physics by Inquiry" program which includes 6 weeks of
professional development for in-service K-12 science teachers during the summer.
Each graduate student supported by NSF funds spends two months during the summer
working on these projects. This program is very successful, since it not only
improves the teaching skills and marketability of our students, but also has a
large impact on science teaching in local schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports advanced computational and theoretical research engaging challenging
problems inspired by materials with unusual properties that are believed to
arise because of the interaction of electrons with each other is enhanced in
comparison to electrons in other materials. The PI will use computers with
parallel architectures and develop new algorithms with aim to understand how
superconductivity, an electronic state of matter in which charge can flow
without resistance, arises in high temperature superconductors; how the highest
temperature at which magnetism appears on dilute magnetic semiconductors can be
increased; and how strong electron-electron interactions lead to competing
electronic states of matter in heavy Fermion materials. These problems lie at
the intersection of fundamental understanding of the role of electron-electron
interaction in the properties of complex materials and potential technological
applications, diagnostic medicine and future spintronic devices that exploit not
only the charge of the electron, but also another fundamental quantum mechanical
property of the electron, its spin. The potential applications may have high
impact from information technology and cyberinfrastructure to consumer
electronics to defense and lie in the future. This research contributes to the
intellectual foundations that will enable their realization and so contributes
to keeping America competitive. This research also contributes to the
cyberinfrastructure of the broader materials research community through the
distribution of codes that result from the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education is heavily integrated into this project, both
through the support of graduate students and through the continued development
of NSF sponsored courseware distributed through the PI's web site. Additional
outreach is accomplished through the local "Physics by Inquiry" program which
includes 6 weeks of professional development for in-service K-12 science
teachers during the summer. Each graduate student supported by NSF funds spends
two months during the summer working on these projects. This program is very
successful, since it not only improves the teaching skills and marketability of
our students, but also has a large impact on science teaching in local schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;