* 0955878
* CAREER: Biosensors Based on Electrogenerated Chemiluminescence
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Wujian Miao, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2016
* USD 660,000.00

In this Career award, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of
the Division of Chemistry and the EPSCoR office, Professor Miao from the
University of Southern Mississippi and his students will conduct research on
biosensors based on electrogenerated chemiluminescence (ECL). The focus will be
on simultaneous multiplexing ECL detection and quantification of biomolecules in
a sample matrix with nanomaterials. The proposed detection scheme may allow for
simultaneous measurements of 3-5 analytes without the need for target
amplification or the use of enzymes. By using different types of ECL labels
(hydrophobic, hydrophilic, and quantum dots), ECL detection can be performed in
either organic or aqueous solutions, or in a solid-state format. Tools such as
cyclic voltammetry, ECL coupled with scanning electrochemical microscopy,
electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, and electrochemical and ECL
digital simulations will be used to achieve these objectives. Furthermore,
investigation and preparation of nano-thickness Au film or Au nanoparticles
(NPs) coatings for transparent electrodes for high performance ECL detection
will be carried out. Finally, investigations of the photochemical,
electrochemical, and ECL behavior as well as an exploration of sensing
applications of templated micro- to nano-scale semiconductive metal chalcogenide
films and NPs will be conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ECL biosensors may find
applications in clinical diagnostics, forensic chemistry, environmental
investigations, pharmaceutical studies, and even in sensitive detection of high
explosives and biological warfare agents - which is a pertinent issue in global
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Miao's research will be integrated with
undergraduate and graduate education. In this context, an analytical ECL lab
that is inexpensive, easy to operate, and adaptable to various levels of
teaching and learning environments will be developed with an electrochemical
instrument manufacture. In addition, in collaboration with colleagues from USM,
Professor Miao will integrate instrumental analysis and inorganic as well as
physical chemistry experiments into one senior undergraduate chemistry lab. The
implementation of an integrative lab will serve as a model for other chemistry
departments in the region and provide the opportunity to forge more robust
relationships between USM and regional community colleges.