* 0955037
* CAREER: Brain Network Activity During Perceptual Decision-Making
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Mukesh Dhamala, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2016
* USD 539,737.00

Based on incoming sensory signal, the brain makes many different moment-to-
moment perceptual decisions, ranging from the identity of single objects to the
relative timing of multiple external events. How exactly does the brain
integrate sensory information to arrive at these decisions? What are the brain
mechanisms for making decisions when incoming sensory signals are weak, variable
or ambiguous? With funding from the National Science Foundation, Mukesh Dhamala
of the Georgia State University is providing new insights into these questions
by analyzing the brain activity and networks during easy and difficult
perceptual decision-making. Previous research has identified the prefrontal
cerebral cortex as a decision-making hub that gauges the strength of competing
signals from lower-order sensory areas and plays a key role in the
implementation of perceptual decisions. But the way the prefrontal cortex
interacts with these lower-order regions forming a dynamic network for
information flow remains largely unknown. Using perceptual categorization tasks
during simultaneous electroencephalography (EEG) functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) experiments, this project has the goal to provide a more
comprehensive understanding of the neural information flow patterns and the
hierarchy of brain structures associated with perceptual decision-making
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will advance our
understanding of the interactions between bottom-up visual sensory signals and
top-down control signals with varying perceptual task difficulty and will have a
broad impact in the field of cognitive neuroscience. This research and
integrated education plan will promote undergraduate and graduate biophysics and
neuroscience education in the Atlanta, Georgia area. The research provides
participating students with advanced multidisciplinary skills from EEG-fMRI data
recordings, and multivariate data analysis, using analytical tools in tackling
challenging neurobiological questions. Neuroimaging coursework and neuroscience
workshops aim to train a diverse group of students with necessary skills for
research and educational opportunities in the fields of neuroscience and
biomedical science. The course materials and computer software developed during
this project are intended to be freely available to the community.