* 0955969
* CAREER: The Role of Sulfur in Regulating the Marine Carbon Cycle: Implications for Understanding Oceanic Anoxic Events
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,10/31/2016
* Matthew Hurtgen, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 10/31/2016
* USD 511,882.00

Intellectual Merit: Oceanic anoxic events (OAE) record significant increases in
organic carbon burial and are marked by positive excursions in both marine
carbonate and organic carbon (C). While it is widely held that these events were
driven by enhanced primary production within surface waters, the details
underpinning the initiation, maintenance and termination of OAEs remain
equivocal. This work will reveal the potential of sulfur (S) isotope studies to
illuminate the role of changing sulfate concentrations on phosphate (PO4)
regeneration in marine sediments and will have far-reaching implications for
understanding the behavior of the C cycle, and therefore climate, especially in
the deep time record. This is because marine sulfate levels have been low for
much of Earth history. The objective of this proposal is to investigate the role
sulfur plays in regulating the marine carbon cycle in low sulfate oceans. The
following hypothesis will be tested: given an average background of low marine
sulfate concentrations, an increase in seawater sulfate levels may trigger
widespread oceanic anoxia by facilitating enhanced phosphorus (P) recycling and
thus higher primary production within marine surface waters. Because seawater
sulfate concentrations have been low for most of Earth?s history, substantial
fluctuations in sulfate levels in the past may have played a key role in
regulating C cycling in ancient oceans. In order to test this hypothesis, this
proposal details a study with three fundamental themes, each of which will be
integrated with an educational outreach effort developed through the Office of
STEM Education Partnerships (OSEP) in the School of Education and Social Policy
at Northwestern University. The themes include: (1) S isotope systematics and
the link between fluctuating sulfate levels and P recycling in a low sulfate,
permanently anoxic lake (Lake McCarrons, MN), (2) the S isotope composition of
seawater sulfate, sedimentary pyrite and difference between the two phases
(Ä34S) before, during and after two oceanic anoxic events?OAE1a in the Early
Cretaceous and the Frasnian-Famennian event in the Late Devonian, and (3)
reservoir dependent mass balance modeling using S isotopes. The results from
this project will improve the community?s understanding of S and P cycling in
low sulfate systems, establish Ä34Ssulfate-pyrite for two time periods marked by
widespread anoxia (the Early Cretaceous and the Late Devonian), and help to
ascertain the complex set of feedbacks that link ocean redox and the geochemical
cycles of C, S, P, and Fe in the low sulfate oceans of Earth?s
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will provide training
to two graduate students in field research techniques and analytical isotope
geochemistry and make contributions to understanding controls on biogeochemical
cycles of C, S, P and Fe and their relationship to the redox state of the Earth
system. Impacts of this project extend beyond the scientific community via an
outreach effort to public high schools. The overall goal of the outreach effort
is to bring the excitement and challenge of doing real science to high school
students. This proposal requests funds to recruit a local high school science
teacher to participate in research each summer. This teacher will collaborate to
develop laboratory activities to provide high school students with research
experiences through the NSF-funded iLab Network (ilabcentral.org), which allows
students and educators to use remote experimental apparatus to carry out
experiments via the Web. Once the iLab experiments have been tested, through
development with the initial high school and then with OSEP partner schools in
the area, they will be made available to any high school teacher with a web
browser. To address the problem of underrepresented groups in Earth Science, a
partnership has been initiated with Project EXCITE, a program that links
Northwestern?s Center for Talent Development with local schools to identify
scientifically inclined minority students and support their acquisition of math
and science skills through high school. Saturday enrichment sessions with
Project EXCITE students and their parents are ongoing, focusing on key Earth
science concepts (earthquakes, tsunamis, climate change) and career options in
Earth and Planetary Sciences. This proposal seeks funds to support high school
students from EXCITE as lab assistants to increase awareness of opportunities in
Earth science for local students and their families.