* 0955674
* CAREER: Chemical Sentinel--A Mass Spectrometer Payload for AUV Gliders
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2017
* Richard Camilli, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2017
* USD 798,869.00

The PI requests funding to develop an ultra-compact mass for high-endurance
operation onboard an AUV glider. The mass spectrometer will be optimized for
operation aboard an AUV glider and will be capable of identifying and
quantifying atmospheric, geologic, and biologically derived gases (methane,
nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide, sulfides, etc.) as well as many anthropogenic
pollutants at levels down to parts-per-billion. It will fit within a glider
payload volume and operate at low. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In-situ operation of
these mass spectrometers onboard multiple AUV gliders will enable synoptic
assessment of transient chemical phenomena such as deep-water upwelling,
greenhouse gas cycling, red tides, and pulsed releases of chemicals caused by
seismic events, storms, or human activity. As proof-of-concept the PI will
integrate this mass spectrometer aboard a Slocum electric glider to characterize
and persistently monitor water column chemistry in Massachusetts coastal waters
and near the New England Shelf Break. This work will leverage the PI?s ongoing
research in instrumentation development, autonomous robotics, and real-time
environmental monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this proposal
are to: 1) Develop a cost-effective MS-glider technology for measuring dissolved
gas variability relating to biogeochemical cycling of nitrogen, oxygen, and
carbon in the subsurface marine water column; 2) Demonstrate this technology via
deployments in coastal New England environments, then in long-range transects
off the Atlantic shelf break, thereby validating a new means of observation for
NSF?s OOI and other ocean observation programs; and 3) Integrate this research
program into broad-based student curricula to promote engineering and science
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed education program will provide exciting learning experiences for
students from Middle school ages to graduate school. Today's students are often
turned on by hands-on engineering projects and opportunities to analyze near-
realtime data streams. This project offers both, plus avenues to introduce
students to field work and sea expeditions. The PI is well situated to integrate
his research into broad-based educational programs. The PI intends to provide
broad-based exposure to STEM curricula and active learning experiences for
students ranging from 8th graders, to high school, undergraduate and graduate
levels. One of the most notable aspects of the proposal, in terms of the broader
impacts, is Camilli's plan to work closely with schools that serve economically
disadvantaged and underrepresented students at the middle or high school level.
By supporting the 'teach the teacher' approach for the high school program, the
PI will extend his reach to bring high quality STEM education to more students
more consistently than he can do on his own. The PI will also provide education
and training activities for undergraduate and graduate students.