* 0955160
* CAREER: Terahertz Micro-Nanoscopy: A Pathway to the Integration of Terahertz Photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2017
* Seongsin Kim, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 01/31/2017
* USD 431,760.00

Objective: The objective of this research project is to design and establish the
device foundations for a Terahertz Micro-Nanoscope capable of submicron
resolutions. The proposed approach is based on the demonstration of compact THz
photonic devices and the integration to achieve a near-field imaging system that
can successfully image submicron-scale individual structures such as a single
cell, while probing their spectral and spatial characteristics. More compact and
user-friendly components are key to enabling the envisioned THz micro-nanoscope
and ensuring it can be widely used or adopted in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the proposed
CAREER program stems from the investigation of a new paradigm of interaction
between light and matter to attain combined spectroscopic sensing and near-field
imaging capabilities by utilizing THz waves, which originate from a portion of
the electromagnetic spectrum that has not been fully utilized to date. The new,
transformative device foundation is based on the use of nitride semiconductor
materials and nanostructures that can enable more compact THz photonics systems,
and thus push the limits of imaging currently available in a wide range of
fields.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The broader impact of the research will be in
facilitating the development of THz-based diagnostic tools to fight against
diseases. This work will be integrated with education and outreach activities
(including K-12) aimed at increasing the participation of women and students
from underrepresented groups in science and engineering. Planned collaborations
with industry will ensure the proposed research can more easily lead to
commercial applications.