* 0955612
* CAREER: Interfacial Assembly of Soft Layered Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2017
* Jiaxing Huang, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 01/31/2017
* USD 664,500.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Driven by both the scientific curiosity
and the technical importance of soft layered materials such as graphene oxide
(GO) a single atomic layered, oxygenated carbon sheet, this CAREER proposal, co-
funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC)/Division of Materials
Research (DMR) and Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI)/Chemistry (CHE)
programs aims to explore the soft material characteristics of GO-based materials
with a focus on their assembly behaviors. GO can be viewed as an unconventional
type of soft material possessing characteristics of polymer, colloid, membrane
and amphiphile. Assembly should be a critical component in the structure-
property relationship of such materials. Studying their interaction and assembly
can reveal interesting fundamental material behaviors and help to design better
synthesis and processing strategies. The overall goals of this proposal are to
advance the fundamental understanding of this unconventional type of soft
material, develop new structural modification methodologies, design advantageous
material processing strategies, invent new characterization techniques, and
create new functional material systems by controlled assembly of the single
sheets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If
successful, discoveries from this proposal could lead to new materials and
technologies for electronics, cleaner energy and better environment, all are
central to the national interest. To maximize and expedite the societal impact,
the PI will establish partnership with small businesses to transfer discoveries
to industry. Results will be broadly disseminated, especially to teachers of
younger students through educational journals, and to the general public using
the Web2.0 communication and information sharing techniques. By integrating
science and art or popular culture, research results will be interpreted in
formats understandable and useful for nonscientists. Participation of
underrepresented minority groups in research will be motivated through the
success of the PI's current minority students, and will be broadened beyond
Northwestern through the Summer Research Opportunity Program (SROP). New courses
in the areas of soft materials and chemistry will be developed to enrich the
department's curricula.