* 0955547
* CAREER: Increasing the use of imaging geodesy for studies of tectonics, volcanoes, and glaciers
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Matthew Pritchard, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 516,601.00

For centuries, measurement of the shape of the Earth (called the science of
geodesy) was necessarily time consuming. Even with new technologies like the
Global Positioning System (GPS), vast portions of the Earth remain infrequently
monitored for movement. Over the past 17 years, a new form of geodesy has
rapidly developed whereby satellite images can be compared to infer movements of
the Earth's surface. Called imaging geodesy, the synoptic aircraft or satellite
views allow large regions to be surveyed densely without any human setting foot
in the area. Imaging geodesy encompasses several different types of methods
including Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) as well as the
automated comparison of SAR and optical images via the techniques of pixel or
feature tracking. These techniques have allowed vast areas of the Earth's
surface to be monitored frequently for deformation for the first time and led to
discoveries in a variety of fields (including signals caused by earthquakes,
volcanoes, landslides, glaciers, groundwater, and human-induced ground
deformation). Imaging geodesy has the potential to become as ubiquitous a tool
as seismology, but there have been several limitations. The problem of data
access is diminishing thanks to the NSF-funded GeoEarthscope archive and other
data access initiatives. A key current limitation to the widespread use of
imaging geodesy is access to easy-to-use, but flexible software to process the
data and knowledge for interpreting the results. While there are commercial and
open source packages for imaging geodesy, none of them is yet fully functional
and well documented for all applications. We will undertake an integrated
program of research and education, focused on making new observations of ground
deformation with imaging geodesy and expanding the community of users through
improved software and documentation including a textbook geared towards
undergraduates and a set of lectures and activities aligned with the textbook
content. These research questions have intrinsic scientific merit for
understanding geophysical processes, as well as practical applications like
finding geothermal resources, and the causes of sea level rise. We will use
newly available InSAR datasets (especially from the GeoEarthscope archive) to
address two research questions: 1) What is the nature and distribution of
magmatic fluids beneath the U.S. and Mexican Basin &amp; Range Province, and how
are they related to surface tectonics? 2) Have glacier velocities in Alaska
increased in the last 2 decades, resulting in thinning of the ice and
deformation of the solid Earth?