* 0955935
* INTEROP: Building Information Sharing Networks to Support Consumer Choice ( I-Choose)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Giri Kumar Tayi, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 08/31/2015
* USD 710,000.00

Award: 0955935 PI: Theresa A. Pardo Title: INTEROP: Building Information Sharing
Networks to Support Consumer Choice (I-Choose)

Most products consumed within the North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA) are
produced and distributed through low cost supply chains that typically do not
reveal certain types of information to end consumers. Without this information
it is difficult for consumers to assess the quality of the products they buy or
exercise their preferences for safe, environmentally sustainable, and
economically just products and services. Producers also have much less of an
incentive to provide such goods without an effective, trustworthy way to inform
consumers. In order to provide full information about how, when, and by whom
manufactured goods were produced, the producers, supply chain operators, and
third party certifiers will need to agree on a data architecture that can
facilitate exchange and sharing of information that comes from production
systems, supply chain distribution systems, and systems used to determine
compliance with voluntary and government-mandated product standards.

This project will create I-Choose; a data interoperability framework to support
the provision of a wide range of information about how, where, and by whom
commodities are manufactured and brought to market. This includes information
about ?green? supply chains, production methods, wages paid to producers or
workers in the supply chain, working conditions, environmental impact, and a
wide range of other information about the products can be delivered to
consumers. A data architecture designed to enable interoperability will be
generated through a multi-stage iterative process of sequential consensus
building activities. These activities will include the stakeholders involved in
Mexican coffee production for distribution in Canada and the US, along with
researchers from the fields of information science, computer science, economics,
and political science. We will explore interoperability with three types of
specific information systems: (1) Those designed and maintained by government
regulators, (2) Those designed and maintained by consumer advocates using social
networking technologies, and (3) proprietary data systems from individual firms
in the producer, supply chain, or retail systems.

The I-Choose data interoperability network will be unprecedented in nature as it
will involve consumers, producers, government regulatory agencies and supply
chain/distribution across multiple domains and countries. It will allow more
information into market transactions allowing consumers more informed decision-
making that maximize their specific utility preferences and align the strategies
of these stakeholder groups through market mechanisms rather than through
cumbersome regulation. These diverse stakeholders will collaborate to create a
series of technical products of the increasing granularity and specificity
(ontology, taxonomy, data architecture) necessary for supporting
interoperability while gradually expanding their network. The result of this
process will be a fully-formed research and practice network and a high quality
set of deliverables produced through the consensus of all relevant stakeholder
groups, thus ensuring maximum interoperability of information systems. The
knowledge gained through constructing and expanding I-Choose will inform a wide
range of future collaborations in terms of how to create a trusted environment
where incentives for collaboration and competition are complementary, not
mutually exclusive. The study is relevant for a wide range of actors who are
already experimenting with new forms of collaboration such as labor,
environment, and agriculture departments and agencies in the NAFTA region,
interested legislators, businesses, trade unions, environmental NGOs, consumer
groups, and agricultural associations.