* 0955338
* CAREER: Exploring Nanoscale Growth Twins for the Development of Grain Boundary Engineering at the Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,01/31/2017
* Andrea Hodge, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 499,991.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The field of grain boundary engineering (GBE) has
demonstrated the many advantages of having low Sigma; (Sigma less than or equal
to 29) grain boundaries for enhanced physical and chemical performance of
materials. The study of nanoscale twin boundaries allows for the next stage of
microstructural material design by the control and manipulation of both grains
and boundaries at the nanoscale. Therefore, the research objective of this
proposal is twofold: a) to understand the evolution of nanoscale growth twins by
studying the defects formed under various processing conditions and their
relationship to twin formation and b) to relate how growth twins interact with
boundaries to generate low Sigma grain boundaries. In order to accomplish the
set objectives this project will focus on some key aspects such as the evolution
of growth twins to provide a framework for the introduction of nanoscale growth
twins in many different systems by using a controlled synthesis method:
magnetron sputtering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This study
presents a new direction for materials development by introducing engineered
structures using traditional materials science and nanotechnology. Even though
nanoscale materials have shown tremendous potential there are typically two
limiting factors to their application: thermal stability and low ductility. This
research proposal aims to provide fundamental research on an area that promises
further improvement of nanostructured materials. This ability can further aid in
the design of new thermal resistant coatings and micro- and nano-scale MEMS
systems. In addition, this projects focuses on Science, Technology, Engineering
and Math (STEM) learning since the PI will work with Iridescent, a non-profit,
educational organization, to provide high quality, exciting, real-world science
education that targets low-income Hispanic and African-American children in the
Los Angeles area. A ten-session workshop on green materials processing will be
developed for the Iridescent program by the PI's Engineering Freshman Academy
class at USC. Thus, research, teaching and outreach are seamlessly combined as
part of the PI's broader impacts.