* 0955825
* CAREER: Using Numerical Relativity as a Tool for Discovery: Astrophysics, Gravity and Education
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Deirdre Shoemaker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 451,441.00

Gravitational wave physics is on the verge of becoming an observation-driven
science thanks to the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO)
and its partners. In addition, numerical relativity has already demonstrated its
great potential as a tool of discovery for the strongest sources of
gravitational radiation. This award will support an integrated program of
research and education built upon these two pillars: gravitational wave
observations and numerical relativity. The research will focus on (1) coupling
data analysis methods to gravitational wave source models drawn from numerical
relativity simulations, (2) developing the next generation of source simulations
that will interpret future events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this award include two components. (1) Graduate students will be trained to use
numerical relativity as an astrophysical tool to prepare them to be leaders in
the new field of gravitational wave astronomy. (2) The PI will collaborate with
the LIGO Livingston Laboratory and Professor Brigg Ullmer of Louisiana State
University to use video from numerical relativity simulations in an interactive
kiosk designed by Dr. Ullmer. The kiosks allow for a hands-on approach to
learning about gravitational waves and are planned to be located in Louisiana
and Atlanta.