* 0955845
* CAREER:  Towards a Better Understanding of Ambient Semi-volatile Organic Aerosol: Investigation of Thermodynamic Properties of Multi-component Organic Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Andrey Khlystov, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2013
* USD 167,896.00

The goal of this project is to obtain empirical parameterizations of
thermodynamic properties of multi-component organic aerosol to be used in
chemical transport models. The main hypothesis is that volatility of an organic
compound in a mixture is a function of the carbon number and the polarity of
this compound, as well as those of the mixture; and that volatility of the total
mixture can be predicted using a simplified matrix containing binned data on the
carbon number and polarity of each of the compounds in the mixture. Prediction
of ambient semi-volatile organic aerosol remains highly problematic and air
quality models often do not agree with observations. The lack of understanding
of the partitioning of semi-volatile compounds between the gas and the complex
aerosol matrix is one of the main reasons for this
discrepancy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study the equilibrium thermodynamic
properties of multi-component aerosols will be investigated under controlled
laboratory conditions as well as in the field. In the laboratory experiments
model mixtures of organic compounds as well as modified ambient aerosols will be
tested. The ambient aerosols will be modified in a controlled way by adding
known amounts of different organic substances of known thermodynamic properties
and variable molecular weight and polarity. The equilibrium gas/aerosol
partitioning in a temperature range relevant to ambient conditions will be
investigated using the Integrated Volume Method (IVM), developed in the
principal investigator's (PI) laboratory. The results will be used to derive
equilibrium vapor pressures and activity coefficients of test compounds as a
function of their carbon number and polarity and to determine the minimum number
of bins along these dimensions that will adequately represent ambient aerosol
volatility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve the understanding,
predictions and control of the major fraction of ambient aerosol, which is
relevant for public health and global climate change. The educational and
outreach component will be directed at a wide audience in order to help educate
the public about the current environmental problems related to air pollution and
help attract students to environmental science and engineering. Special
attention will be given to attracting and retaining under-represented groups,
such as women and minorities. The project will include an educational outreach
component with hands-on experience for middle school students; summer research
projects will be offered to students from the North Carolina School of Science
and Math, for graduate and undergraduate students at Duke University and North
Carolina Central University (NCCU), an Historically Black University. The
research results will be disseminated via conferences and peer-reviewed
publications. To reach a wider audience the PI plans to utilize the power of
social media tools, such as Facebook groups, to share the research results and
engage the community directly.