* 0955776
* CAREER: Hierarchical Self-Assembly of Biopolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Zvonimir Dogic, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0955776 PI: Dogic, Zvonimir ORG: Brandeis
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Hierarchial Self-Assembly of
Biopolymers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Biopolymer-based materials
are frequently organized into complex hierarchical structures that span multiple
length scales ranging from nanometers to millimeters. The goal of this research
is to elucidate pathways by which biopolymers self-assemble into macroscopic
materials and relate the structure, mechanical and optical properties of these
macroscopic materials to the underlying mesoscopic interactions and microscopic
architecture of the constituent biopolymers. The proposal has two specific aims.
The first aim is to determine how the continuum mesoscopic properties of
individual biopolymers are affected by the mutations of the constituent proteins
at the microscopic level. The second aim is focused on understanding the
structure and interactions of macroscopic colloidal membranes. Here, attractive
depletion interactions are used to assemble thousands of rods into an
equilibrium membrane-like structure composed of a monolayer of aligned rods.
These two experimental aims are related to each other in several important ways:
They both require use of the same biopolymer model systems. They also involve
similar experimental techniques and technologies. Finally, they explore the
central theme of hierarchical assembly, with each aim focusing on a different
level of hierarchy ranging from single filaments to assemblages containing
thousands of filaments. Understanding biopolymer assemblages at any one level of
hierarchy represents a significant advance in the field. However, only the
combined understanding of structure and dynamics at all relevant length scales
will result in general design principles required for a ?bottom up? engineering
of novel nanostructured materials with predefined structural and mechanical
properties. From a techniques perspective special emphasis is being placed on
directly visualizing biopolymer assemblages at all levels of hierarchy. Using
electron microscopy the PI will determine 3D conformations of biopolymers with
nanometer resolution. With optical microscopy he will simultaneously visualize
dynamics of individual filaments within an assemblages as well as the structure
and dynamics of entire assemblages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The
research and education plans are seamlessly joined together through their mutual
emphasis on visualization techniques and interdisciplinary approach to science.
The proposed educational plan contains four related aims. Specifically, (1) the
PI and collaborators will continue development of an interdisciplinary
laboratory course focused on optical microscopy. Since microscopy is used in
numerous disciplines; they will ensure that the course is accessible to students
from all scientific backgrounds. (2) They will integrate students at all levels
of education, ranging from high school students to advanced graduate students,
into the ongoing vigorous research program. (3) They will develop a virtual
online laboratory focused on the quantitative analysis of microscopy images.
Students anywhere will be able to remotely download actual experimental data and
perform all the subsequent image analysis and data reduction steps using custom
written software. (4) Finally, they will develop a permanent exhibit at The
Discovery Museum in Acton, Massachusetts, which will use optical microscopy to
provide a glimpse into a highly dynamic world at microscopic length scales.
Successful implementation of these four aims will result in a new generation of
students who are better trained in the fundamentals of microscopy. It will also
motivate young minds to pursue science related careers and increases awareness
of the importance of scientific research and optical microscopy amongst the
general audience. &lt;br/&gt;