* 0955771
* RCN: MSM: ETBC: Integrated Network for Terrestrial Ecosystem Research on Feedbacks to the Atmosphere and ClimatE: Linking experimentalists, ecosystem and Earth system modelers
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2017
* Peter Thornton, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

As human actions increase the concentrations of heat-trapping gases in the
atmosphere, climatic patterns are changing. Climate is projected to change
dramatically over the course of this century, with average global temperature
increases of 1.1-6.4 °C and widespread changes in precipitation patterns. These
changes in climate will affect the functioning of human society, the functioning
of ecosystems, and the status of biodiversity. The best available projections of
future climate change come from complex computer programs that simulate
interactions of energy and matter among the atmosphere, oceans, and land. Until
very recently, the effects of the land surface on the atmosphere were only
incorporated into these models in a limited way. However, recent research
suggests that the way in which ecosystems on land respond to changes in
atmosphere and climate will itself strongly affect the rate of climate change,
and so the responses of these ecosystems must be considered. Historically, the
community of scientists examining these issues has consisted of separate,
traditionally non-interactive research groups. The INTERFACE network will
facilitate interactions by bringing them together in a series of international
meetings and workshops that are designed to make progress on a set of important,
tractable challenges in Earth system modeling and experimentation.

INTERFACE will focus on training and forging collaborations among researchers at
different early career stages, from senior undergraduates to post-docs. Students
and post-docs will be recruited for active roles at all INTERFACE meetings, as
authors of meeting reports and co-authors of resultant papers. INTERFACE will
also broaden students' toolkits by sponsoring a series of workshops and lab
exchanges that bring students together with the modeling and experimental
communities. By providing cross-disciplinary training for the next generation of
scientists at the beginning of their careers, INTERFACE can strongly influence
the trajectory of future research.