* 0955885
* CAREER: Iron mediated catalytic C-H bond functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Theodore Betley, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 02/28/2015
* USD 600,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Theodore Betley
of Harvard University on iron-mediated, catalytic carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bond
functionalization. Professor Betley's group synthesizes electrophilic complexes
featuring transiently-formed metal-ligand multiple bonds. These metal catalysts
contain hard donor, weak-field dipyrromethane and tris(pyrrolyl)ethane ligand
scaffolds that were selected for their ability to confer a wide range of steric
and electronic environments to the first row-transition metal ion. Catalytic C-H
bond amination reactions are being explored to determine the scope, activity,
and mechanisms of the reaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award examines the
activation of carbon-hydrogen bonds as a way of converting inexpensive chemical
feedstocks (hydrocarbons) to valuable functional molecules with minimal waste
generation. Importantly, Professor Betley and his group are using non-toxic and
earth-abundant elements, such as iron, to perform these important
transformations. The targeted products are useful in many fields, ranging from
pharmaceutical production to value-added commodity chemicals for buildings and
automobiles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort is well-integrated into
the classroom. Professor Betley organizes the Experience the Elements Firsthand,
an interactive demonstration for students at the K-12 level from Boston's local
grade schools and high schools. In this program, the students are invited to
participate in a series of experiments and observe chemical phenomena in the
laboratory. Professor Betley also co-directs an academic outreach program aimed
at attracting traditionally underrepresented minority students in the chemical
sciences and is active in Hawaii's federally-funded Upward-Bound program to
promote interest in the sciences in first-generation students.