* 0955944
* CAREER: Quantum Optical Measurements of Exciton Fluids in Confined Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Chih-Wei Lai, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 01/31/2016
* USD 550,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Light is now an essential tool that can be used
to manipulate matter and also to create new states of matter. This Faculty Early
Career Award supports a program that will merge quantum measurements and
ultrafast spectroscopies to investigate light-matter hybrid excitations such as
excitons in semiconductor nanostructures. Excitons, the solid-state analog of a
positronium atom, play a central role in the optical properties and electronic
structure of solids. They exhibit strong radiation-matter coupling and are thus
ideal for exploration of light-matter collective phenomena in quantum-confined
structures. This project is expected to contribute to the fundamental
understanding and control of light-matter interactions in nanostructures, which
are important for developing new quantum materials and optoelectronic devices
for computation and communication. Graduate and undergraduate students in this
program will learn advanced ultrafast spectroscopies and low temperature
techniques used to investigate nanostructures and quantum materials. The
education component includes the development of a summer workshop to introduce
graduate students to the research environment and to learn optical methods for
studying condensed matter systems. Experiments in quantum optics and laser
spectroscopy will be incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum. Outreach
activities include public lectures, demonstrations, and hands-on experiments
about optics in daily life for high school teachers, K-12 students, and
underrepresented pre-college students.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This Faculty Early Career Award supports a project
that will merge quantum optical measurements with ultrafast spectroscopic
techniques to investigate collective phenomena in cold exciton fluids in quantum
confined semiconductor structures. In order to clarify the nature of these
apparently ordered, but actually non-equilibrium exciton fluids, the project
will attempt to determine: (a) how the statistical properties of light fields
are transformed through the formation of excitons or electron-hole carriers, and
(b) how the characteristics of self-luminescent photons reflect the
interactions, correlations, and collective excitations. Spatio-temporal
correlations and fluctuations of excitonic fluids in confined low-dimensional
semiconductor systems will be probed. After creating dense cold excitons, the
self-luminescence or spontaneous order will be characterized with precise
control of the amplitude, phase, polarization, coherence, and fluctuations of
the light fields. The education component includes the development of a summer
workshop to introduce graduate students to the research environment and to learn
optical methods for studying condensed matter systems. Experiments in quantum
optics and laser spectroscopy will be incorporated into the undergraduate
curriculum. Outreach activities include public lectures, demonstrations, and
hands-on experiments about optics in daily life for high school teachers, K-12
students, and underrepresented pre-college students.