* 0955000
* CAREER: Merging Adjacent Areas of Lanthanide Chemistry to Study Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Matthew Allen, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Matthew J. Allen of the Chemistry Department at Wayne State University
will focus on the testing of hypotheses regarding the influence of anion
dissociation and water coordination on catalysis and the synthesis of a new
series of precatalysts modeled after lanthanide-based contrast agents for MRI.
Additionally, the methods available to study dynamic structure-activity
relationships of lanthanide-based precatalysts in aqueous systems will be
greatly expanded through adaptation of luminescence-decay measurements and
Oxygen-17 NMR spectroscopy. Furthermore, the data obtained using these
techniques will be used to aid in the testing of hypotheses regarding the
mechanistic influence of water coordination on asymmetric bond formation in the
Mukaiyama aldol reaction using a series of new chiral
precatalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a broader impact of the proposed research,
Professor Allen will study the Mukaiyama aldol reaction because it is one of the
most significant carbon-carbon bond-forming reactions, which are of paramount
importance to synthetic chemistry. In addition to probing important problems in
lanthanide-based catalysis, this proposal describes plans to improve education
by mentoring early scientists and incorporating communication skills into
scientific curricula. Specifically, year-round research experiences directly
related to the scientific portion of this proposal will be provided for high
school students from diverse educational and socioeconomic backgrounds, which
are expected to have great impact on the propensity of students to pursue
careers in science. Additionally, because communication skills are critical to a
successful scientific career but are often underemphasized in science education,
plans are outlined describing the integration of communication instruction into
mentoring experiences and formal science courses at the university and high
school levels. These programs will greatly enhance the otherwise standard
science education of those who participate by more thoroughly preparing students
for careers in science.