* 0955124
* CAREER: Electromicrobiological Studies Using Microbial Electrochemical Systems Capable of Sustainable Energy Production and Waste Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Hong Liu, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

0955124 Liu

The conversion of biomass, especially organic wastes, to energy is considered an
essential part of a sustainable global energy portfolio. Novel microbial
electrochemical systems, such as microbial fuel cell for electricity generation
and microbial electrolysis cell for hydrogen production, have emerged as
potential clean technologies for renewable energy production and waste
treatment. The key feature and common process shared by these systems is the
microbe-catalyzed electron transfer from organic matter to anodes. Enhancing
current output from the anode is critical for the successful application of all
these processes, which requires a fundamental understanding of the biofilm that
develops on the anode. The applicants aim, through this project, is to advance
the emerging area of electromicrobiological engineering by systematically
investigating the high current-producing biofilm of a microbial electrochemical
system capable of sustainable energy production and waste treatment. This
project will build on the recent studies of a mixed bacterial culture in the
applicant?s lab that exhibits many of the desirable features for electricity and
hydrogen production. The microbial community is simple enough, however, to
remain manageable for analysis of complex interactions between the constituent
species, thereby providing an ideal case study for investigation of a current-
producing anodic community. The main activities of the proposed research program
include: (1) isolation and identification of the dominant bacterial strains in
the microbial consortium; (2) characterization of the isolated strains in terms
of their morphological, physiological, and electrochemical properties; (3)
elucidation of the electron transfer mechanisms of the isolated exoelectrogens;
and (4) investigation of the interactive relationships between different
bacterial species in the anodic consortium.

This is the first systematic investigation of its kind, wherein a mixed culture
with high current-generating capability is studied comprehensively to determine
the identities of the predominant bacteria, the mechanisms by which the bacteria
transfer electrons to the electrode, and the ways in which the bacteria interact
in the community. The proposed research, when successfully accomplished, not
only will address the unanswered question of why the current generated by mixed
cultures is often much greater and more stable than that generated by most pure
cultures, but also will result in the discovery of highly efficient new model
species for electromicrobiological studies. Furthermore, the conclusions from
this research will enrich our understanding of two critical and poorly-
understood aspects of microbial electrochemical systems: the mechanisms of
extracellular electron transfer, including biogenic mediators, outer membrane
cytochromes, and bacterial nanowires and the metabolic interactions within
anodic consortia, involving quorum sensing chemicals, mediators, and exchange of
electron donors between species. Understanding the fundamental metabolic and
electrochemical mechanisms within the anode biofilm not only will enable the
design of stable and efficient systems for energy generation, but also will
accelerate the development of microbial electrochemical systems for diverse
other applications such as bioremediation and biosensing. The applicant has a
solid track record of performance and publication in this research field, and
has the resources for executing the proposed program successfully.

The broader impacts of this project are educational, environmental, and
economic, and range from local to global in scale. The microbial electrochemical
systems that relate to both energy and environmental sustainability can serve as
a powerful platform for motivating students to study and understand complex
concepts of microbial ecology, electrochemistry, and material science and
engineering and resolve energy and environmental issues in the future. This
project will significantly improve the scientific reasoning skills of graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 students through the development of hands-on microbial
fuel cell teaching modules. This project also presents a unique opportunity for
blending the educational experience of the local students involved in the
project with cutting edge scientific research in an area of national and global
concern. Efforts will be made to recruit and mentor underrepresented minority
students through OSUs SESEY program. The concomitant treatment of waste during
the energy generation process performs a double-duty of sustainability,
providing energy from a renewable source while benefiting human health
worldwide. Finally, generating energy from agricultural and industrial waste
biomass offers a novel source of economic benefit to farmers and industries,
especially those in remote areas and in developing countries. The results of
this work will be disseminated through publications in refereed journals and
conference presentations and also will be made available on the applicants
webpage.