* 0955822
* CAREER: Interplay Between Superconductivity, Quantum Liquid Crystals and Topological Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Eun-Ah Kim, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research on the interplay between
superconductivity, quantum liquid crystals, and topological phases. The PI aims
to understand the interplay among multiple instabilities, seeing it as a key
challenge to unlock the mysteries of strongly correlated quantum materials. The
research is motivated by and based on experiments. It will involve computational
and analytical approaches.

To address the interplay between superconductivity and quantum liquid crystal
order, the PI will develop and use new theoretical measures for quantifying
different broken spatial symmetry in nanoscale electronic patterns observed in
disordered correlated systems. Experimental resolution is increasing and
experiments reveal more patterns of this sort in many correlated materials. The
PI's theoretical framework will provide a way to interpret new experiments. With
the new measure, the PI will address the significance of local quantum liquid
crystal physics in high Tc superconductors. She will develop tools to test
signatures of quantum criticality inside the superconducting phase. To address
the interplay between topological phases and the other two orders, the PI will
develop new measures to distinguish different topological phases, that are
applicable at finite temperatures. In parallel, the PI will continue the effort
to identify signatures of abelian and nonabelian fractional statistics which are
the best presently known indicators of toplogical phases. Finally, the PI will
investigate two cases of the interplay among all three kinds of order: the
ruthenate family and even-denominator-filling quantum Hall devices.

The educational component of this award will impact three relevant groups:
undergraduate and graduate students in Physics and Applied Physics Departments
at Cornell University, K-12 students nation-wide, and middle school girls in New
York state. For Cornell students, the PI will develop "Scientific Science
Communication" module to equip students with scientific writing and presentation
skills. The module will become a permanent component of a traditional laboratory
course for undergraduate and graduate students. With assistance from the Cornell
Center for Materials Research, the PI will develop an educational kit "amazing
liquid crystals", in order to demonstrate the diversity of emergent phenomena
underlying everyday technology to K-12 students. The PI will partner with the
Cornell chapter of the "Expand Your Horizons" program and introduce a cyber
community aspect to the program to encourage interest in science among female
students.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research on materials with emergent
states of matter that arise from electrons that interact strongly with each
other. Electrons are governed by the rules of quantum mechanics. Materials
composed of many strongly interacting electrons display new states of matter,
such as superconductivity. At sufficiently low temperature, electrons can
collectively join together in the same quantum mechanical state, a
superconducting state that can conduct electricity without dissipation. Other
states of matter are possible. It is possible that a material is close to
exhibiting more than one state of matter. These states may compete with each
other leading to unusual properties in materials that lie outside the textbooks.
This research project will use theory and computation to explore the interplay
among three states of matter, superconductivity, quantum liquid crystal order in
which electrons organize themselves in such a way that they have properties that
have both liquid-like and crystal-like attributes, and topological order.
Topological order is an emerging concept that connects the structure of a
quantum mechanical state of many particles to more familiar concepts of the
distinct ways particles organize themselves into states of matter. The interplay
among these states may be carried out in materials like the high temperature
superconductors and electrons in a high magnetic field that are confined to a
plane in artificial structures made of semiconductor materials. The PI will seek
to discover principles and concepts to describe the interplay among these states
based on experimental findings. The goal is to develop a comprehensive
theoretical framework combining analytical and computational approaches.

The educational component of this award will impact three relevant groups:
undergraduate and graduate students in Physics and Applied Physics Departments
at Cornell University, K-12 students nation-wide, and middle school girls in New
York state. For Cornell students, the PI will develop "Scientific Science
Communication" module to equip students with scientific writing and presentation
skills. The module will become a permanent component of a traditional laboratory
course for undergraduate and graduate students. With assistance from the Cornell
Center for Materials Research, the PI will develop an educational kit "amazing
liquid crystals", in order to demonstrate the diversity of emergent phenomena
underlying everyday technology to K-12 students. The PI will partner with the
Cornell chapter of the "Expand Your Horizons" program and introduce a cyber
community aspect to the program to encourage interest in science among female
students.