* 0955078
* CAREER: Optimization and continuation methods in fluid mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Jon Wilkening, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2015
* USD 404,941.00

Shape optimization in fluid mechanics is the study of how to design a body, such
as a wing or propeller, to maximize lift or thrust while minimizing drag. Tools
developed for shape optimization can also be used to dramatically improve the
performance of shooting methods for two-point boundary value problems governed
by nonlinear partial differential equations. This project concerns the
development and implementation of new algorithms for shape optimization of
Newtonian and viscoelastic fluids in nearly singular geometries, and for the
computation of time-periodic solutions in fluid mechanics. New adjoint-based
optimal control methods will be developed to compute gradients of objective
functions and constraints governed by partial differential equations featuring
singular integrals, non-local operators, or hysteresis. The solutions of these
optimization and boundary value problems occur in multi-parameter families that
will be studied using numerical continuation algorithms capable of identifying
bifurcations and following folds in the manifold of
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape optimization is fundamental in the design
of a wide range of engineering systems such as fuel-efficient vehicles and
aircraft or micro-fluidic "lab on a chip" devices used in chemistry and
molecular biology. One of the goals of this research is to develop shape
optimization techniques for materials that behave partly as viscous fluids and
partly as elastic solids. Applications include designing inkjet printers,
recycling and manufacturing plastics, and understanding bio-locomotion in
invertebrates. Another goal of this research is to develop numerical methods for
computing solutions of the equations of fluid mechanics that evolve to an exact
copy of their initial state at a later time and then repeat themselves forever.
These solutions are helpful in understanding complex phenomena such as ocean
waves or the onset of turbulence in a pipe. They should also prove useful in
dynamic shape optimization problems, where the goal might be to optimize the
average speed over one cycle of a swimming stroke. Broader impacts of this
project include course and curriculum development, organization of seminars and
minisymposia, community outreach, advising of students and postdocs, and hosting
of DOE Computational Science Graduate Fellows who wish to do a summer practicum
at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.