* 0955167
* RCN:  MicroMORPH:  Microevolutionary Molecular and Organismic Research in Plant History
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Pamela Diggle, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing grant
* Samuel M. Scheiner
* 08/31/2014
* USD 481,736.00

Plants are responsible for over two-thirds of human caloric intake worldwide,
and for the production of most of the oxygen that we consume with every breath.
Yet despite the centrality of plants to human life and most ecosystems on Earth,
much remains unknown about the developmental basis of how populations of plants
within a single species diverge to become two separate species. For the first
time since Charles Darwin opened up the evolutionary paradigm of descent with
modification through natural selection, we have the opportunity to understand
the developmental underpinnings of evolutionary change within populations and
species at the level of the genome (DNA). This is especially true in light of
the recent explosive growth in genetic and genomic information now available for
a wide diversity of plant species. This award will facilitate networking and
research coordination among scientists investigating these issues.

Major planned networking activities include 1) a series of intergenerational and
interdisciplinary workshops involving graduate students and faculty, 2) support
for cross-disciplinary training opportunities for students (undergraduate summer
internships and graduate rotations away from the home institution), postdoctoral
scholars, and junior faculty, 3) outreach activities to underrepresented groups
in the sciences (through mini-symposia to be held at institutions with
substantial minority student populations), and 4) development of a website for
the microMORPH Reasearch Coordination Network (RCN). The broadly inclusive and
cross-disciplinary interactions of this RCN will provide a unique opportunity
for students, postdoctoral scholars, and faculty to combine historically diverse
fields and in turn to develop research programs at the interface of
microevolutionary and developmental plant biology. The overarching goal of the
microMORPH RCN is to integrate contrasting approaches to the study of speciation
and diversification of plants by linking genes (DNA) through development to
morphology, and ultimately to adaptation and fitness, within the dynamic context
of natural populations and closely related species.