* 0955626
* CAREER: Applying New Tools to the Discovery and Measurement of the New Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Kyle Cranmer, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Experimental studies of proton collisions at the LHC are likely to reveal the
answers to some of the most fundamental questions in physics. Already,
experiments like Fermi GST and PAMELA are producing very exciting - though
puzzling - results that may be major hints to an unexpectedly rich dark matter
sector. There are many possibilities for dramatic discoveries, which will usher
in a new era for dark matter and fundamental particle physics. How one combines
the complementary information from these disparate measurements into a cohesive
picture is not readily apparent. Initially, it is unlikely that an obvious
picture will emerge that is more compelling than conventional explanations, such
as poorly understood modeling or experimental systematics. Thus, one must be
prepared to pose serious questions about the data, the theoretical
interpretation, the experimental systematics, and additional modeling
assumptions that are not limited by avoidable technical limitations. This award
supports a program of physics research built around a unifying approach to
large-scale scientific data analysis, initially dealing with data from LHC
experiments, in a way that is scalable with respect to complexity of data,
experimental apparatuses, and theoretical models. The approach could have
profound impact on early standard model physics measurements and the extension
to Higgs physics and beyond as well as facilitate communication and cooperation
between ATLAS and CMS, between theorists and experimentalists, and among
researchers from different disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impact
the key development in this award that enables the scalable approach to large-
scale data analysis is applicable beyond the field of particle physics.
Experiments as diverse as Fermi GST, HESS, and the IceCube neutrino telescope
are already exploring the use of this technology, which is a concrete indication
of the broader impacts of the proposed research. Additional impacts follow from
a well-integrated educational and outreach component. A portable and
professionally-designed exhibit will be constructed for use at the popular New
York City World Science Festival street fair, area science fairs, career fairs,
and the like. The booth will utilize existing material from the ATLAS outreach
group. Additionally, the exhibit will be the basis for a project integrated into
a teaching methods course in the Department of Teaching and Learning at NYU. The
project will be to design activities for the exhibit itself and to develop and
assess physics teaching methods. Thus, the exhibit, the activities, and the
assessment of the exhibit will be the culmination of a semester-long project,
and those teachers can bring the developed activities to their own schools.
Finally, the PI will mentor high-school students from the Harlem Children's
Society so that they can understand and operate the demonstrations, thus serving
as peer-group liaisons, and role models for under-represented groups in the
sciences.