* 0955330
* CAREER: Digital Signal Conditioning Techniques to Improve Integrated Circuit Design Performance
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Sudhakar Pamarti, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 01/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop high performance analog/mixed-
signal integrated circuits that are crucial to the advancement of wireless
communication, sensor network, health, and biotech applications. The approach is
to use signal processing algorithms implemented in digital logic to subtly
modify the statistical properties of the analog signals such that inevitable
transistor nonlinearity and manufacturing process variability do not degrade
circuit performance.

The intellectual merit is that it is a promising, fundamentally different
approach that does not depend on brute circuit optimization but instead applies
elegant signal processing principles to improve circuit performance. It trades
off algorithmic complexity for relaxed analog circuit design thereby reducing
power consumption, die area, design time, and offering higher performance and
fabrication yields.

The broader impacts of the project are three fold. It will help perpetuate
California's position as a technology leader in the wireless communication,
sensor network, and consumer electronics industries. Second, it will encourage
students from underrepresented groups to take up advanced engineering careers by
providing graduate students and summer interns recruited specifically from such
groups to work on the proposed project. Third, the educational activity
addresses the need for a change in the philosophy of circuit design education.
By training future circuit designers in the fundamental interplay between
circuit design practice and signal processing theory, it will better prepare
them to face the immediate challenges of integrated circuit design, and to adapt
to its impending evolution from microelectronics into newer technologies.