* 0955908
* CAREER: Synthesis and Characterization of Novel Rare-Earth-Activated One-Dimensional Luminescent Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Zhengwei Pan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 01/31/2016
* USD 592,870.00

Technical: The research objective of this CAREER award is to synthesize and
investigate a new class of novel, rare-earth-activated, one-dimensional
luminescent nanomaterials and to tune their optical properties through
controlled synthesis. While previous research on one-dimensional nanostructures
has focused mainly on elemental and binary materials systems, recent studies
have demonstrated incorporation of additional components such as rare-earth ions
into one-dimensional nanostructures, forming luminescent nanobelts that exhibit
new compositions, new crystal structures, and new luminescence properties and
mechanisms. To maximize the potential of using these new luminescent nanobelts
as building blocks in nanophotonics, fundamental understanding of the
interrelationships between synthesis conditions, materials properties, and
optical properties is essential. This project 1) systematically investigates the
luminescent nanobelts growth behaviors by studying the growth parameters, 2)
performs morphological, compositional, and structural characterizations of the
nanomaterials using a wide range of advanced analytical tools including electron
microscopes and synchrotron x-ray microanalysis techniques, and 3) studies the
optical properties of the luminescent nanomaterials using a broad excitation
sources (including UV light, x-ray beam and electron beam) and explores their
applications in nanophotonics. Non-technical: The project addresses basic
research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
relevance. The success of the project is expected to have impacts on the further
advancement of nanophotonics and, in general, nanoscience and nanotechnology.
The research and education activities of the project are integrated. The
education activities include 1) incorporation of research themes into lecture
and laboratory classes to engage students as active participants in the
scientific process, 2) training and enrichment of graduate and undergraduate
students participating in the proposed research by development of experimental
and analytical skills, presentations at conferences and seminars, and authorship
of research articles, 3) increase of minority undergraduate and K-12 students
participation in science and engineering through the programs on campus, and 4)
increase of general public awareness on nanotechnology by holding NanoArt shows
on campus, local schools, and galleries.