* 0955463
* CAREER:  Topics in Optimal Stopping and Control
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Erhan Bayraktar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The first part of the project will consider optimal stopping problems in which
the well-known results of the optimal stopping theory do not apply. An example
is the American option pricing problem when there are weak arbitrage
opportunities or a stock price bubble. The problems in this part are related to
determining necessary and sufficient conditions for the uniqueness of solutions
of the so-called Cauchy problems. Quantile hedging (hedging with high
probability of success) problems, solutions of which are characterized by non-
linear partial differential equations, will also be investigated in the above
context. In the second part, I will develop a new theory for optimal stopping
problems when the statistical expectation operator is replaced by alternative
ways of measuring future rewards, for example by the so-called risk measures.
These problems are related to stochastic differential games of control and
stopping. Saddle points of such games will be determined. In some special cases,
these are related free boundaries with quasi-linear (integro) partial
differential equations. Regularity of the value function and the free boundary
curve will be investigated. The relationship between the risk aversion and the
shape of the free boundary will also be analyzed. In the third part, pathwise
comparison and convex duality methods will be used to solve optimization
problems with objectives of maximizing the probability of reaching certain
goals. Utility maximization problems with risk constraints that will be
considered in this part are quite relevant given the current economic
environment in which large investors face regulatory risk
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to several
methodological/theoretical developments in the theory of optimal stopping and
stochastic control. As a by-product, these developments will help us understand
the existence, uniqueness, and regularity questions in linear/non-linear partial
differential equations. Our results will resolve important pricing and hedging
questions in Mathematical Finance. This project complements the recent
developments in the theory of risk measures by addressing decision making
problems using these measures as optimization criteria, which is an important
step in managing financial risk.