* 0955750
* CAREER: Multiphysics research and education for understanding coupled mechanical-biogeochemical surface-subsurface processes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2017
* Meinhard Cardenas, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 569,390.00

CAREER: Multiphysics research and education for understanding&lt;br/&gt;coupled
mechanical-biogeochemical surface-subsurface
processes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rivers are connected to aquifers, to riparian
zones, and to floodplains, and this coupling is an integral component of aquatic
systems. The connection is mediated by fluid flow between the channel and its
bed and bank; this exchange is also referred to as hyporheic flow. Processes
occurring along the river-sediment interface or the hyporheic zone (HZ)
significantly impact nutrient and metal chemistry, ecology, and thermal energy
budgets. The study is integrating research and education to advance the
application of coupled mechanical-biogeochemical modeling and emerging
observational technology. The scientific hypotheses include: 1) riverbed
topography exerts first order control on nutrient cycling within the sediment by
affecting hyporheic-flow-inducing turbulent flow in a river; 2) heat transfer
from the channel to the sediment due to hyporheic flow leads to variable
riverbed temperatures which in turn leads to changes in biogeochemical reaction
rates; 3) temporal thermal variability in the riverbed causes reversal in
sorption of metals which causes transient surface water chemistry; and 4)
heterogeneity in sediment hydraulic properties leads to broader fluid residence
time distributions resulting in sharper and patchier biogeochemical gradients
which may favor reaction hotspots. While the scientific hypotheses apply to a
variety of nutrients and metals, this study will focus on denitrification, as an
example of nutrient cycling, and zinc and copper mobility, as examples for
temperature-dependent metal transport. The hypotheses are being tested using
tandem flume and column experiments supported by numerical models that consider
turbulent flow in the flume channel and non-isothermal flow and reactive
transport in the flume hyporheic zone. Temperature and dissolved oxygen are
being mapped in 2D within the HZ down to the millimeter scale. The educational
effort is integrating inquiry-based multiphysics modeling exercises into
teaching to enhance learning and student motivation. The impact of developing
and disseminating biogeochemical coupled models for interactive inquiry-based
learning exercises is being qualitatively and quantitatively assessed.
&lt;br/&gt;