* 0955763
* HCC: Small: Conversational Agents in Web-Based Consumer Environments Designed for Older Users
* CSE,IIS
* 08/07/2009,07/31/2013
* Juan Gilbert, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2013
* USD 583,814.00

Only 35% of seniors (over 65 years of age) in the U.S. use the Internet,
reflecting an age-based digital divide when compared with the fact that 90%
adults in the ages of 19-29 use the Internet. This project will address this
divide through a novel approach that employs conversational agent technology to
reduce the critical cognitive and social-psychological barriers hindering older
users in web-based consumer environments. The goal of this project is to broaden
the engagement of the growing yet underrepresented senior population in Internet
technology, a medium that can dramatically improve their quality of life. This
goal closely aligns with the human-centered computing objective of transforming
the human-computer interaction experience through the development of systems
that are aware of the abilities and special needs of people that use them.
Research on animated pedagogical agents has revealed promising results on the
effectiveness of agents in learning and motivation. However, no previous
research program has investigated how agent technology can be designed to
promote autonomy and empowerment in the older population, particularly in web-
based consumer environments, involving multi-dimensional information processing
and complex decision-making. To address this critical gap in the research, this
project will systematically investigate, three aspects of agent interactions
with older users: 1) locus of control (agent vs. user), 2) interactional style
(functional vs. relational), and 3) modality of exchange (unimodal-voice vs.
unimodal-text vs. dualmodal-voice + text). This research program will apply a
multi-phase, mixed-methods approach involving qualitative studies in the first
phase, and a series of controlled experiments with over 400 older users in
subsequent phases. The purpose is to examine the effectiveness of the three
aspects of agent-user interaction in: 1) reducing cognitive barriers (reducing
information load, increasing navigation convenience, enhancing information
search and retrieval ease), 2) reducing social-psychological barriers (enhancing
control and efficacy, increasing trust, enhancing perception of social support),
and 3) increasing Internet technology use intent. The experimental studies will
further determine whether users' gender, visual or hearing impairments, and
prior Internet competency interact with the three aspects of agent-user
interaction to affect the desired outcomes. The findings from this project will
generate new knowledge on how multimodal systems employing conversational agents
can be designed for the abilities and special needs of older users leading to a
potentially transformative and empowering experience for this underrepresented
population in information technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seniors are
increasingly finding the necessity to engage in web-based consumer environments
(e.g., online banking, shopping, trading, travel reservations). While the
functionality of agents in these domains merits examination, the broader
significance of this project lies in its ability to inform the development of
agent-mediated interfaces for other applications such as websites that provide
important health and medical information to seniors. Anecdotal evidence gathered
by the project team from a prototype system has revealed the transformative
potential of this technology for older users. This pilot research funded by the
Office of Outreach at Auburn University, has extended the impact of this project
to constituents in the state of Alabama. In addition to research, outreach will
also serve as an important mission in the dissemination of future findings from
this project to stakeholders at local and national levels. With the goal of
enhancing diversity in research and education, this project will also involve a
greater representation of African-American (AA) study participants from
surrounding counties in Alabama, and actively engage AA graduate students, who
are already part of the PI's lab in the educational goal of this project. This
project will further enhance the infrastructure for research and education
across two disciplines through an interdisciplinary seminar course will be
offered to graduate students in computer science and consumer affairs to enhance
the understanding of the future researchers on how humans perceive and use
computing artifacts such as conversational agents.