* 0955603
* Stimulus-responsive Chelates for Light-triggered Release of Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Michael Baldwin, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 03/31/2014
* USD 374,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports the research of
Professor Michael J. Baldwin of the University of Cincinnati (UC) Main Campus to
develop stimulus-responsive chelates for light-triggered release of metal ions.
Several families of metal chelators based on alpha-hyrdoxyacids (AHAs) are under
investigation. This research program evaluates the extent to which modifications
of the ancillary functional groups in AHA-containing chelates control the
photochemical properties of their corresponding Fe(III) complexes. The
researchers also determine the effect of the structural position of the AHA
chelates (internal or external) on the photochemical properties of their Fe(III)
complexes and identify other metal ions that form photoreactive complexes with
the AHA-containing chelates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron has been recognized as
an essential element in biological systems for centuries. Despite the
recognition of this metal's importance, iron deficiency remains a problem for at
least a third of the world's population and iron overload/toxicity caused by
hemochromatosis is the most common genetic disease. This resesarch effort plays
a role in understanding the mechanisms of iron uptake and release in bacterial
pathogens, antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains, and human iron deficiency and
genetic diseases. On demand iron release can also be envisioned to be useful in
many materials science applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also
enhances the scientific workforce. Professor Baldwin and his group have strong,
synergistic collaborations with faculty at two primarily undergraduate research
institutions (PUIs) - Professor Michael Goldcamp at Wilmington College and
Professor Richard Holtz at the College of Mount St. Joseph. The undergraduate
students at these PUIs conduct experiments and share instrumentation at the UC.
The graduate students in Professor Baldwin's research group are inspired by this
interaction and often seek teaching positions at small colleges. Professor
Baldwin also mentors Project SEED students - high school students from
economically disadvantaged backgrounds - giving them relevant research
experiences in a laboratory setting.