* 0955431
* Collaborative Proposal: RCN on Integrative Pollen Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Ann Loraine, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2016
* USD 46,907.00

Pollen tubes are specialized plant cells whose function is to transport sperm to
fertilize the egg, thus they are crucial for plant reproduction, agricultural
productivity and species preservation. The vegetative cell that extends a tube
from the pollen grain is widely recognized as an excellent model system with
which to study cell growth. Interactions between pollen and pistil (the female
reproductive organ) govern tube growth, direction, and sperm discharge and are
excellent models for cell-cell communication studies. In recent years, research
on pollen has entered a new phase of exciting, transformational advances
stimulated by adoption of new tools in molecular genetics, functional genomics
and live-cell imaging. This model cell system has also attracted increasing
numbers of new and established investigators with backgrounds in different
biological areas. The Research Coordination Network (RCN) on Integrative Pollen
Biology will aim to provide a coordinated forum for the expanding pollen
community to work together synergistically, exchange information, share tools
and resources and discuss working models. The Network will focus on activities
to nucleate and broaden the research community and facilitate collaborative
experimental and computational approaches to achieving a systems understanding
of pollen. A short course on basic pollen research methods will provide a head
start to establish a variety of research methods specialized for pollen study,
thus lowering the barriers newcomers face when considering initiating research
with pollen. There is a proliferation of information stored in multiple public
and private databases, and one of the major goals of the RCN will be to extract
this information, share it and work in collaborative groups in order to expedite
and facilitate research advances in the next decade. The RCN will establish a
?Wiki pollen? site to facilitate integration of biochemical, physiological and
cellular data obtained from different laboratories towards a pilot effort in
modeling pollen tube growth, from which further hypotheses may be generated to
obtain a deeper understanding of this cell growth process. The RCN will also
sponsor Summer Internships for graduate students to bridge training at the
interface of biology and computer science. The RCN sponsored interns will
develop data mining, analysis and integration projects, and the outcomes of
these projects will be accessible on the RCN website. Since few laboratories
have the expertise to take advantage of the ever increasing spectrum of research
tools available for biological research, the RCN will subsidize traveling
expenses to facilitate collaborations between groups with complementing interest
and expertise. In facilitating research effectiveness among the pollen
community, the RCN?s ultimate goal is to promote pollen research at the cutting
edge of science and technology for years to come.

Broader Impact. The RCN will sponsor mutual visits of faculty and students
between primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) or minority-serving
institutions and research universities within the network laboratories. These
two-way visits, especially with scientists from research universities visiting
PUIs, will effectively reach more undergraduates, and the impact on research
activities in these PUIs will be more sustainable after these visits. To broaden
the pipeline for future biologists from an early stage, the RCN will also
sponsor Summer Internships and Workshops for high school teachers, who will in
turn bring the exciting developments in plant reproduction to students in high
schools.