* 0955625
* CAREER: Intrinsic Transport Properties of Graphene: Approaching the Elusive Ground State on Crystalline Substrates
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,07/31/2018
* Masahiro Ishigami, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2018
* USD 562,825.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Graphene, a single layer of graphite,
possesses unique electronic properties important for both fundamental and
applied nanoscale materials physics research. Charge carriers in graphene behave
much like light. This unusual property of intrinsic disorder-free graphene can
be exploited to explore the consequences of relativistic Quantum Electrodynamics
on a chip, making graphene important for increasing our understanding of
fundamental physics. The utility of graphene for electronic applications is
demonstrated by the observed response of the charge carriers to an applied
electric field (the field effect). Yet, because graphene is composed of only
surface atoms, its intrinsic properties are sensitive to adsorbates and
substrate-induced disorder. Adsorbate-induced disorder can now be eliminated,
but so far substrate-induced disorder has not been controlled. Thus, the
intrinsic properties of graphene remain unknown. This Faculty Early Career Award
supports projects seeking to uncover the intrinsic properties of graphene and
pave a way for the exploration of Quantum Electrodynamics by utilizing
crystalline substrates. Such substrates are expected to eliminate substrate-
induced disorder, and create ?perfect? graphene. The studies will also elucidate
the intrinsic limitation of graphene-based devices. Thus, they have the
potential to have a broad impact on electronic applications of graphene. The
graduate and undergraduate students participating in, and supported by, this
project will receive training in cutting-edge-interdisciplinary-nanoscience
research. A course will be developed for upper-level undergraduates to bring the
frontiers of nanoscience, particularly as exhibited by carbon nanostructures, to
the classroom. The research program will also be integrated with development of
extensive educational outreach activities for the general public. The outreach
program will be tailored for students in grades 6-12, K-12 educators, and the
local community with emphasis on underrepresented minorities from a diverse
population represented in the Central Florida region. The outreach efforts will
be designed to recruit, educate and train the next generation scientists and to
increase the overall scientific literacy of the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Graphene, a
single layer of graphite, is a perfect two-dimensional semi-metallic electronic
material, which possesses a linear dispersion and electron-hole symmetry with a
vanishing density of electronic states at the Fermi level. This unusual band
structure, akin to the light dispersion in free space, has inspired many
theoretical proposals for testing the consequences of relativistic Quantum
Electrodynamics using graphene. Yet, the extreme sensitivity of graphene to
adsorbates and substrates has made made it impossible to perform experiments on
intrinsic disorder-free graphene. While adsorbate-induced disorder can now be
eliminated, substrate-induced disorder remains an issue. This Faculty Early
Career Award supports projects that will pave the way for series of
groundbreaking experiments, by enabling investigations of flat, atomically-clean
graphene with minimal disorder using crystalline substrates. Intrinsic transport
properties will be elucidated. The ability to access disorder-free graphene will
be utilized as a broad foundation for exploring consequences of Quantum
Electrodynamics with a high fine structure constant. The graduate and
undergraduate students participating in this research will receive hands-on
training in cutting-edge nanoscience techniques. A course will be developed for
upper-level undergraduates to bring the frontiers of nanoscience to the
classroom. The research program will be integrated with the development of
extensive educational outreach activities for the general public. The outreach
efforts will be designed to recruit, educate and train the next generation of
scientists and to increase the overall scientific literacy of the community.