* 0955516
* The CU Denver Tracks Collection:   physical transfer, curatorial upgrades, and internet access
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Martin Lockley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 441,165.00

The University of Colorado Denver Fossil Tracks Collection includes thousands of
fossil tracks and track replicas from dinosaurs, crocodilians, turtles, birds,
hominids and other ancient animals from 21 countries on five continents. Fossil
footprints are fundamentally important for interpreting past ecosystems: they
shed light on animal behavior, patterns of movement, posture, and ancient
habitats. The National Science Foundation award will be used to transfer this
exceptional collection to an accredited, permanent home at the University of
Colorado Museum of Natural History (Boulder). It will also fund curatorial
improvements to the collection, enhancing the physical care of specimens,
upgrading associated data, and providing on-line access to specimen information.

This project will benefit a broad spectrum of people. Development of an
educational website on fossil footprints will teach students, educators, and the
lay public about the informative value of these fossils, and the scientific
analysis and conservation of field sites. Professional paleontologists will be
able to utilize the on-line catalog of tracks, as well as an interactive map
showing the global distribution of fossil track sites. In addition, K-12
curricular activities on dinosaur tracks will be created to teach children about
how science works, through web-based activities and public education
collaborations with nearby Dinosaur Ridge National Natural Landmark.