* 0955778
* CAREER:Topological and Strongly Correlated Electronic Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Gregory Fiete, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 425,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an integrated
program of research and education in the theory of topological and strongly
correlated electronic phases of matter. Topological phases constitute a new and
rapidly broadening frontier in condensed matter physics. Their robustness
against imperfections and disorder make them especially promising for certain
applications. The PI proposes to use a combination of analytical and numerical
methods, with an emphasis on the former, to study three classes of correlated
electronic states of matter:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Strongly interacting one-
dimensional systems at zero and non-zero temperature. Particular emphasis will
be placed on the regime of highly thermalized spin degrees of freedom. Various
aspects of the so-called spin-incoherent Luttinger liquid will be studied.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Finite size effects in single and multi-layer fractional quantum
Hall systems. Phases that realize non-Abelian quasi-particle statistics will
receive the most attention and effort will be placed on developing proposals to
experimentally identify their existence. &lt;br/&gt;3. Quantum liquids and
topological insulators. The PI proposes to study the role of spin-orbit coupling
in the realization and stabilization of different types of matter exhibiting
topological order.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The educational focus of this proposal
seeks to advance discovery, promote teaching in the sciences, broaden
participation of under represented groups, and inform the broader public about
the central role science plays in the well being of our society. These goals
will be accomplished in a number of ways. Among them are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;+
Outreach to high school students, particularly those from historically
underrepresented groups. The PI will visit local Austin-area high schools with
large Hispanic/Latino populations to interact with students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;+ Mentoring of female scientists. The PI will participate in
the University of Texas "Alice in Wonderland" summer program for talented female
high school students interested in physics.&lt;br/&gt;+ Increasing the number of
K-12 science teachers in Texas. The PI is actively involved in recruiting
undergraduate students to a science education major.&lt;br/&gt;+ Undergraduate
participation in research. The PI will supervise undergraduate students as they
pursue research to provide them with a meaningful taste of life as a
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;+ Partnership with local Austin high-tech industry. The PI
will enhance contact with the private sector through collaborations with their
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;+ Outreach to the broader public at Texas Natural Science
Center. The PI plans public lectures to present research results in an exciting
and informative way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an integrated program of
research and education in the theory of new states of matter. Atoms organize
themselves in distinctly different ways in different materials. The carbon atoms
in diamond are self-arranged differently than those in graphite giving rise to
distinctly different properties. The precise mathematical concept of symmetry
based on the how the crystal can be flipped, rotated, or moved in such a way
that the crystal looks the same enables the classification of phases. This
classification is sufficiently general to encompass crystals composed of atoms,
as well as the phases of electrons in materials, for example magnetism or
quantum mechanical states where electrons themselves organize into a crystal.
The study of phases of electrons trapped in a plane and exposed to a strong
magnetic field, concisely known as the quantum Hall effects, has expanded the
concept of order. This classification is related to a branch of mathematics
known as topology and the phases are said to exhibit topological order.
Topological phases are robust against imperfections, deformations, and
impurities. The PI will use advanced theoretical methods to study topological
phases and how they arise. The PI will also study materials and systems which
contain electrons that interact strongly with each other leading to complex
correlations in their motions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The manipulation of
topological phases may form the basis of new paradigms in computation and may
contribute to future information technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational focus of this proposal seeks to
advance discovery, promote teaching in the sciences, broaden participation of
under represented groups, and inform the broader public about the central role
science plays in the well being of our society. These goals will be accomplished
in a number of ways. A few of them are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;+ Outreach to high
school students, particularly those from historically underrepresented groups.
The PI will visit local Austin-area high schools with large Hispanic/Latino
populations to interact with students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;+ Mentoring of
female scientists. The PI will participate in the University of Texas "Alice in
Wonderland" summer program for talented female high school students interested
in physics.&lt;br/&gt;+ Increasing the number of K-12 science teachers in Texas.
The PI is actively involved in recruiting undergraduate students to a science
education major.&lt;br/&gt;+ Undergraduate participation in research. The PI
will supervise undergraduate students as they pursue research to provide them
with a meaningful taste of life as a scientist.&lt;br/&gt;+ Partnership with
local Austin high-tech industry. The PI will enhance contact with the private
sector through collaborations with their scientists.&lt;br/&gt;+ Outreach to the
broader public at Texas Natural Science Center. The PI plans public lectures to
present research results in an exciting and informative way.