* 0955316
* CAREER: High Dimensional Variable Selection and Risk Properties
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Jinchi Lv, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

High dimensional variable selection plays a pivotal role in contemporary
statistical modeling, learning and scientific discoveries. Long-standing
theoretical questions in the literature include how high dimensionality
regularization methods with general penalties can handle, what the role of
penalty functions is, and how to characterize the optimality of variable
selection procedures. The investigator proposes to study four interrelated
research topics. First, the investigator studies penalized likelihood methods
with general penalties, which are widely applied for simultaneously selecting
important variables and estimating their effects in high dimensional statistical
inference, where the dimensionality can be much larger than sample size. Second,
various contexts of high dimensional variable selection beyond penalized
likelihood methods including penalized empirical risk and hunting for
interactions are investigated. Third, the investigator proposes new principles
for model selection when models are possibly misspecified and studies the
robustness of various regularization methods for high dimensional variable
selection under model misspecification. Fourth, the risk properties and
optimality of various high dimensional regularization methods in the contexts of
penalized least squares and penalized likelihood are further
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of vast data sets now commonly
arises in diverse fields of sciences, engineering and humanities ranging from
genomics and health sciences to economics, finance and machine learning. High
dimensional data analysis poses numerous challenges to statistical theory,
methods and implementations that are not present in smaller scale studies. A
major goal of this proposal is to make theoretical and methodological
contributions to the important and challenging topic of high dimensional
variable selection and statistical inference. These new developments provide
unified and systematic understandings of various regularization methods in high
dimensions, and allow scientists to analyze high dimensional data with increased
efficiency, expediency and interpretability. The proposed work is incorporated
into new courses on the state-of-the-art high dimensional statistical learning,
and will benefit the training and learning of undergraduates, graduate students,
and underrepresented minorities. The proposed work on variable selection in high
dimensions will not only help better identify factors that are important to, for
example, public health and market risk, but also benefit a broad range of
scientists and researchers in various fields.&lt;br/&gt;