* 0955638
* CAREER: Dewetting Atom-by-Atom: Identification of Driving Forces for Interfacial Debonding using In Situ Electron Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Klaus van Benthem, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 03/31/2016
* USD 535,056.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The research objective of this project is to identify atomic-
scale mechanisms and driving forces that cause dewetting of thin metal films on
silicon substrates. In situ aberration-corrected electron microscopy techniques
applied in concert with theoretical investigations to study such interfacial
debonding. The interface structure between as-deposited thin films and silicon
and silicon oxide substrates is systematically investigated in cross-section
with atomic resolution and single atom sensitivity while dewetting is enforced
by simultaneous annealing inside the microscope. Wetting-dewetting transitions
have so far mostly been studied by morphological changes on the micron length-
scale. Dewetting dynamics and mechanisms for ultra-thin wetting layers and the
subsequent formation of nanoparticles on the substrate surface is mostly
unexplored territory and is therefore in the focus of the research activities.
The in situ atomic-scale characterization of interface structures, local bonding
configurations and morphologies of the wetting layer are used to identify
driving forces and local debonding mechanisms that lead to nano-scale dewetting.
The combination of experimental studies with molecular dynamics and density
functional theory investigations provides a fundamental understanding of the
corresponding atomic-scale processes that can be applied to a wide range of
other possible applications of dewetting, such as crack-tip propagation.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Dewetting is a fundamental effect frequently observed in
nature. Any splitting apart of two materials after gluing or soldering is based
on wetting-dewetting transitions, which also occur during sintering and
subsequent grain growth in the evolution of microstructures of metals and
ceramics. Dewetting is technologically relevant for generating catalytic nano-
crystals formed by the disintegration, i.e. dewetting of continuous thin metal
films. Such applications are often the prerequisite to catalyst-activated growth
of nanostructures, such as semiconductor nanowires, carbon nanotubes and
nanofibers, etc. In situ aberration-corrected electron microscopy techniques are
used to characterize the dynamics of interfacial de-bonding with the goal to
achieve a fundamental understanding of the atomic-scale driving forces and
mechanisms for wetting-dewetting transitions. The anticipated results will
foster new insights to, e.g., the controlled fabrication of more efficient
catalyst particles, the atomic-scale description of mechanical behaviors (crack-
tip propagation), etc. Outreach and educational activities cover special
lectures to underrepresented minority students in local farming communities,
mentoring programs for 4th through 8th grade pupils, and the generation of a
graduate student newsletter for the College of Engineering at UC Davis. The
newsletter will serve as a communication and presentation platform for graduate
students, as well as a showcase and recruitment tool to and for future
undergraduate and graduate students.