* 0955635
* CAREER: Poly(hydrosilyl) rare earth compounds for new organosilane transformations and catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Aaron Sadow, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Aaron Sadow of the Chemistry Department at Iowa State University will
provide insight into the unique structural and electronic properties of
poly(hydrosilyl)lanthanide compounds using detailed NMR and infrared
spectroscopic and X-ray diffraction studies and to further explore possible Ln-
SiH interactions and electronic delocalization. This proposal by Professor Sadow
aims to better understand the reactivity of lanthanide-silicon bonds. The
chemistry of f-element silyl complexes is still in its infancy, so exploration
of its potential is of great importance. The proposed studies will be further
enhanced by using ligands with Si-H groups which can participate and provide
interesting reactivity pathways of the resulting lanthanide silyl. The proposal
seeks various routes to the synthesis of Ln-Si complexes. The new
poly(hydrosilyl) anions that will be developed during the course of this project
may find application in other areas of silicon, main group or organometallic
chemistry beyond the scope of this proposal. The reactivity of the resulting
materials will also be studied and compared to their carbon
analogs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program
in the Chemistry Division, Professor Sadow will explore an area of chemistry
where relatively few rare earth silyl compounds are known and even fewer contain
SiH groups. Much of the chemistry of rare earth metal-silicon ([Ln]-SiR3)
compounds is unexplored. The most favorable reaction pathways of
poly(hydrosilyl) rare earth compounds, particularly elimination and abstraction
reactions involving the SiH moieties on the ligands, will be discovered and
their mechanisms will be investigated. Clarification of these structural,
bonding, and reactivity issues will facilitate new catalytic chemistry. Broader
Impacts and the Educational Plan are built on a solid rationale to increase the
number of undergraduate majors at Iowa State, combined with outreach activities,
which are commendable. The PI proposes to develop a course for undergraduates to
explore career issues and to generate interest in chemistry. The PI has a
chemical education colleague, Dr. Burnett on board. For the graduate students
engaged in this research project, collaboration with Professor Marschner's group
at the University of Graz in Graz, Austria will provide an international
exchange of scientific expertise.&lt;br/&gt;