* 0955687
* CAREER:  Mathematics of Vorticity in Ginzburg-Landau Theory and Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2016
* Daniel Spirn, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2016
* USD 470,001.00

This project aims to establish rigorous qualitative behavior of problems arising
in nonlinear partial differential equations and comprises three parts. The first
part consists of a family of problems arising in the study of phase transition
equations, including those that model superconductivity and superfluidity. When
a certain parameter becomes asymptotically large, these materials form vortices,
which are regions of high energy and spin. This part of the project studies the
dynamical behavior of asymptotically large numbers of vortices, each of which
contain an asymptotically large amount of energy. The second part of the project
analyzes the nucleation and dynamical behavior of vortices in models for thin
micromagnetic materials. Such problems arise in magnetic information storage
devices. The analytical methods used in the first and second part of the project
come from geometric measure theory and the calculus of variations. The third
part of the research project entails an analysis of water waves over variable
topographies. The analytical methods employed will include bifurcation theory,
harmonic analysis, and spectral theory, along with numerical experiments. Tied
to the three research areas are several educational projects that aim to train
undergraduate and graduate students in analysis, along with the goal of raising
interest in applied mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In fluid dynamics and
materials science, vorticity roughly measures the local rotation of either a
fluid or a phase function. In many important physical contexts, vorticity is a
crucial component, and in many cases understanding the vorticity leads to
understanding of the entire physical problem. The first two parts of the project
study the qualitative behavior of vorticity in two physics problems of
importance to materials science, superconductors and thin micromagnetic films.
These materials are of increasing use in applications, such as in powerful
magnets and information storage devices. The third part of the proposal centers
on understanding the behavior of ideal fluids with free boundaries, which arise
in the study of waves on the surface of the ocean or fast-moving streams. The
equations that model these problems are complicated; however, since these
problems arise with great frequency, their analysis is important. Educational
and training objectives are clearly and closely tied to the research projects.