* 0955567
* Catalogue of legume specimens in The New York Botanical Garden Herbarium, Part 2: The Barneby Digital Monograph and Specimen Catalogue
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Jacquelyn Kallunki, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 07/31/2013
* USD 415,755.00

This project will produce a searchable on-line compendium of information about
the 2000+ species of the Leguminosae (Bean and Pea family) that were the subject
of a half-century of study by Rupert C. Barneby, world-renowned expert on
legumes. It will comprise a digital monograph of identification keys, species
descriptions, and illustrations excerpted from Barneby's scholarly publications
and a database of plant specimens upon which the publications were based.
Information in the Catalogue will be particularly valuable because it derives
from Barneby's scholarly studies and from accurately identified
specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leguminosae are ubiquitous and the second most
economically significant plant family. Many of the species studied by Barneby
are abundant in the United States and in Latin America. Many are of conservation
or regulatory concern because they are rare and endangered, toxic to livestock,
or aggressive weeds. Some have commercial uses in medicine or soil stabilization
or as forage, ornamentals, or timber. The Catalogue will be useful in scientific
studies of species' evolutionary relationships and geographic distributions, the
spread of exotic species, species' responses to environmental changes,
conservation of rare or endangered species, and management of toxic species. In
addition, however, it will provide a useful identification tool for
conservationists, policy makers, resource managers, regulators, educators,
students, and the interested public who wish to identify specimens of
"Barneby's" legumes. Furthermore, the Catalogue will contribute data to
initiatives to compile and share biodiversity information (e.g., National
Digital Biological Collections Resource and Global Biodiversity Information
Facility).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The images and digitized data from this project
will be integrated into the online national resource as outlined in the
community strategic plan available at
http://digbiocol.files.wordpress.com/2010/05/digistratplanfinaldraft.pdf.