* 0955475
* Collaborative Research: The Online Consortium of Pacific Northwest Herbaria Expanded to Include Taxonomically Diverse Specimens from Large and Small Regional Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* David Tank, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 05/31/2013
* USD 301,351.00

The purpose of our project is to digitize (i.e., image and database) botanical
research specimens at nearly twenty university, college, and federal agency
herbaria in Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and Washington. Vascular plant, moss,
lichen, and fungal specimens will be included in the project. Once digitized, we
will place these records online for the public through an existing Web portal
(http://www.pnwherbaria.org). We are leveraging the cyberinfrastructure (e.g.,
Ethernet, servers, technical staff) available at several large universities to
build partnerships with smaller institutions that otherwise would not have the
resources to undertake this activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project provides
tangible benefits to the general public, undergraduate students, and the
research community. Digitizing specimens and making them available online
creates public access to collections that have been assembled in part through
prior federal funding. The specimen data will be downloadable from the Web site,
so anyone can use the information to pursue unique interests and questions.
Undergraduate students will be involved extensively with imaging and data basing
activities, providing them with skills and training applicable to future
professional pursuits. Online availability of nearly 2 million Pacific Northwest
herbarium specimens will increase access and efficiency for the research
community using these collections.