* 0955701
* CAREER: Neural Circuit Mechanisms of Coordinated Eye and Hand Movements
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2015
* Bijan Pesaran, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 05/31/2015
* USD 719,688.00

We move our eyes not only to see the world better but also to guide our
movements in the world more accurately. Often we are unaware of how we use our
eyes to help us see and move better, because the way we coordinate our eye and
hand movements is so dynamic and flexible. During coordination, many areas of
the brain become active, and models predict that different areas in the brain
must communicate with each other in order to coordinate our eye and hand
movements. With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Bijan Pesaran
is pursuing two major research goals that develop eye-hand coordination as a
model for understanding how brain areas work together during cognition. Flexible
communication between different brain areas is fundamentally important to a wide
range of cognitive processes but very little is known about how brain areas talk
to each other to guide our behavior. The experiments carried out under this
project investigate how the coupling between coordinated eye-hand behaviors
depends on cooperation and inhibition between visual saccade and reach
representations. In one set of experiments, Dr. Pesaran is examining how
cooperation between reaches and saccades leads to a common stage of target
selection before coordinated movements. In a second set of experiments, Dr.
Pesaran is examining how during reaching, the selection of new eye movements is
inhibited by reaching. Inhibition slows down new eye movements, so that they
occur after the reach movement is finished.

Eye-hand coordination involves high-level cognitive processes, and understanding
coordination can serve as an important model for understanding how brain systems
interact to carry out cognitive processes in general. The interdisciplinary
research program also inspires an integrated educational plan to increase
awareness of neuroscience amongst students and increase the use of quantitative
tools in neuroscience research. An increase in the level of quantitative and
statistical sophistication is a hallmark of the next generation of brain
scientists. This increase is needed to successfully tackle challenging research
questions about how brain areas cooperate to guide behavior. Outreach to
increase awareness of neuroscience is extending beyond the university curriculum
into K-12 programs. Dr. Pesaran is demonstrating neuroscience concepts in a
school outreach program in public schools. The educational outreach program aims
to improve awareness of neuroscience amongst school children and encourage them
to explore neuroscience educational opportunities in the future.