* 0955096
* CAREER: Multiscale Thermomechanical Analysis of Nanomaterials and Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2016
* Gang Li, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 03/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

0955096 Li

This CAREER project seeks to develop a theory and methodology for analysis of
multiscale thermomechanical nanomaterials and structures. The operation of many
ultrasmall devices involves strong thermomechanical interactions. However, a gap
exists between the existing continuum and atomistic models. Accurate and
efficient computational tools are not available for systematic analysis of such
systems. This research aims to fill this gap by introducing novel
thermomechanical models to bridge the continuum and atomistic theories.
Computational tools will be developed for analysis and optimization of nano
-thermomechanical systems.

Intellectual Merit: A mathematical model describing the thermomechanical
interactions on the atomistic level and a quasi-continuum theory with a higher
level of abstraction will be established. A multiscale computational approach,
combining the thermomechanical models will be developed. Computational analysis
of nanoscale resonators, atomic force microscope heaters and composite materials
will be conducted to address a set of technologically important issues such as
thermal dissipation, thermal management and surface effects in these devices and
materials. In addition, a concept of mechanical design of thermal transport in
materials is to be explored.

Broader Impacts: The proposed research will provide theoretical and
computational models that bridge the gap between pure atomistic and continuum
models. Research results will address the fundamental issues of nanoscale
thermomechanical interactions. Project outcomes will be disseminated through
technical publications. Software tools developed in conjunction with this
project will be made available to the thermal transport and mechanics
communities. In addition, the PI will establish a web portal and engage in
outreach with K-12, undergraduate and graduate students through simulation-based
learning and discovery.