* 0955309
* CAREER: The Detrital Record of Focused Rock Uplift and Exhumation, Northeast Indian Himalaya
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2016
* Katharine Huntington, University of Washington
* Continuing grant
* David Fountain
* 04/30/2016
* USD 487,197.00

This CAREER project integrates research and education to investigate Himalayan
tectonics using bedrock cooling ages and the sedimentary record downstream of
the Eastern Himalayan Syntaxis. At the margins of the India-Asia collision zone,
Himalayan topography curves around the corners of the Indian plate defining
great bends or syntaxes that represent roughly a third of the highest active
mountain range on Earth. At the Eastern Syntaxis, rock exhumation has been
extremely rapid and localized for at least the last 3 million years,
contributing disproportionately to the sediment flux of the great Brahmaputra
river system and Bengal Fan downstream. Determining when rapid exhumation
initiated and how focused it has been through time are key to understanding this
localization of deformation in Earth?s crust. However, constraints based on
bedrock data are limited to the last few million years and do not extend south
of the syntaxis, precisely where some structural models predict rapid
exhumation. This project will document the regional exhumation pattern, relating
cooling ages of bedrock and modern river sediments to the area?s structural
evolution, and extend the exhumation record through time by targeting sediments
shed from the mountains in the past 50 million years that are now preserved in
basins of northeast India and the Bengal Fan. The results will represent a
fundamental new step towards addressing two broad Earth Science questions: 1)
Over what time and spatial scales do processes linking erosion and the
structural evolution of mountain belts operate? and 2) How does variability in
sediments reflect these processes?

Research and education will be integrated through inquiry-based teaching,
professional development for high school teachers, and outreach in primarily
minority-serving schools. Active learning methodologies and web resources will
engage university students in a series of courses grounded in educational
research, which challenge participants to develop original research proposals
pertaining to Himalayan tectonics. Targeting high-achieving high school students
has been demonstrated as an effective means to improve participation of
underrepresented minorities in science. To implement this strategy, the
principal investigator will mentor and train 10 high school teachers to offer
introductory Earth Science for college credit in socio-economically
disadvantaged minority serving high schools. Research findings will be
integrated into high school laboratory activities taught by undergraduate
students, in total involving 40 undergraduates in outreach and 600 high school
students over 5 years. The university courses mutually reinforce research and
teaching, training students to formulate and communicate meaningful new research
questions. By permanently raising the caliber of science offerings in minority-
serving schools, this project will showcase how collaboration between K-12 and
higher education can motivate a diverse population of students, promote college
readiness, and encourage academic interest in the physical sciences.