* 0955127
* PECASE: Complex Polarization Gratings - Extreme Fresnel Zone Plates, Agile Vortex Beam Tools, and Enhanced Distributed-Feedback
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Michael Escuti, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 01/31/2016
* USD 406,000.00

The overall objective of this research program is to develop liquid crystal (LC)
polarization gratings (PGs) for novel photonic elements (Fresnel optics, vortex
beam tools, and polymer lasers) with exceptional control over the intensity,
direction, orbital angular momentum, and polarization of light. These
anisotropic diffractive elements are composed of bulk nematic LCs, can be made
in switchable or polymer materials, and are highly efficient. The first goal is
to develop PG-based Fresnel zone plate optics, with potential for remarkably
small f-numbers, unique polarization behavior, and compelling switchable lens
devices. The second goal is to investigate efficient and scalable helical
(vortex) beam tools, based on forked PGs, with unprecedented ability to generate
and measure orbital angular momentum. The third goal is to employ small-period
gratings (sub-micron) to investigate distributed feedback effects, using nematic
semiconducting polymers to build organic light-emitting-diodes, and using
reactive mesogens doped with fluorescent dyes to build surface-emitting polymer
lasers.

Intellectual Merit: The PGs with complex 2D profiles proposed represent a new
class of efficient and flexible Fresnel optics with potential for extremely
small f-numbers, would lead to novel vortex beam tools that could dramatically
impact quantum communication and cryptography, laser-tweezers, lithography
microscopy, and could lead to optically pumped polymer lasers with lower
thresholds and higher efficiencies.

Broader Impact: This program includes graduate/undergraduate course innovation
and multidisciplinary training in experiment and theory. In collaboration with
AventWest Children's Mentoring program and NCSU Science House, the PI will host
after-school and summer sessions for middle/high-school students involving
hands-on engineering projects.