* 0955076
* SilverLining:   A highly scalable cloud-based platform for data distribution and user collaboration
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2011
* Eileen Lacey, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2011
* USD 99,930.00

The University of Kansas Center for Research, Inc. is awarded a grant to
evaluate the potential for leveraging a cloud-based Platform as a Service (PaaS)
for data publication to address myriad challenges currently faced by existing
distributed data service architectures such as Distributed Generic Information
Retrieval (DiGIR) and TDWG Access Protocol for Information Retrieval (TAPIR).
Specific goals are to 1) simplify and reduce the ongoing cost of publishing
data, 2) improve data quality at the source, 3) provide scalable, effective
access to published data, 4) stimulate innovation by creating a simple, highly
scalable platform for new applications for data interaction, and 5) develop a
suite of reference applications demonstrating capacities of the new
architecture. Metrics comparing the cloud-based solution with the existing,
distributed infrastructure currently utilized by the biodiversity informatics
community will quantify the relative merits of the two fundamentally different
approaches.

Low-cost data publishing is the preliminary step to enable applications that
promote discovery, analysis, and ultimately new knowledge and education. The
approach taken in this project supports all levels of this progression by
providing a proof of concept that will demonstrate the viability of the cloud-
based solution to current impediments in data publishing, paving the way to
deploying these solutions broadly. The solutions will be especially beneficial
to researchers or institutions with few resources and/or little technical
expertise. The scope of data in the test bed for this project will be based on
biodiversity occurrence information, a community with a high priority, well
demonstrated and understood need. However, the solutions will be applicable
generally to any dynamic data publishing federation, providing a scalable,
standards based platform for research, collaboration, training, mentoring, and
education.