* 0955902
* CAREER: Novel Quantum Ordered States from Strong or Long-Range Interaction in Multicomponent Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2015
* Egor Babaev, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2015
* USD 340,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education on new states of
matter that may arise in condensed matter. The research focuses broadly on two
areas.

Novel quantum order states of matter. A quantum ordered state restores its
broken symmetries via a proliferation of topological defects. In conventional
quantum fluids and gases only the simplest topological defects are important.
The PI will investigate different possibilities which might arise in
multicomponent quantum fluids and gases with strong or long-range intercomponent
interaction. In such systems there can be phase transitions associated with
proliferation of complex bound states of topological defects which do not
produce a complete restoration of symmetry. It can lead to formation of new
types of the aggregate "super" states of matter with partially broken symmetries
such as metallic and superconducting superfluids which may arise at ultrahigh
pressures in hydrogen isotopes and hydrogen-rich alloys. The PI plans to develop
a theory and to predict experimental manifestations and possible probes of these
projected new states of matter. The PI will investigate the properties of paired
superfluids and super-counter-fluids in mixtures of Bose-Einstein condensates of
cold atoms in optical lattices

Magnetic response of multicomponent superconductors beyond the Meissner effect.
The Meissner effect is the quintessential property of a single-component
superconductor. The PI will investigate whether in some multicomponent systems
gauge field fluctuations render the effective description mappable to Faddeev-
Skyrme-like effective models at certain length scales. The magnetic response of
these systems might differ fundamentally from the Meissner effect. The PI will
investigate whether this results in topological defects in which energy is a
non-monotonic function of the defect size. Existence of such defects in
multicomponent systems may result in entirely novel physics. The PI will also
investigate the properties of "type-1.5" superconductivity and the conditions
under which it appears. This is a superconducting state with non-monotonic
vortex interaction potential which can arise in multicomponent, for example two-
band, superconductors. The magnetic response of this state is different from
that of traditional type-I and type-II superconductors.

The educational activities are aimed at bridging classroom education with
independent research training through an original implementation of the Problem
Based Learning concept used in medical schools and other areas for teaching
Natural Sciences. The educational and research part will be integrated also by
creating a broad course which will cover in a unified way concepts from
condensed matter physics, high energy physics, and cosmology.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education seeking to predict
the existence of new states of matter that may occur in materials under a wide
range of conditions. The research focuses on states of matter where a
macroscopically large number of electrons or atoms can act in a lock-step
fashion according to the laws of quantum mechanics. This leads to phenomena that
are a reflection of the counterintuitive laws of the quantum world, the world of
the smallest particles like electrons and atoms, but on the macroscopic human
scale. Superconductivity, a state of electrons that can conduct electricity
without dissipation, is an example which occurs in some materials at low
temperature.

The PI will study new kinds of quantum fluids that may arise in the electrons in
complex materials, the element hydrogen under very high pressures which lies at
the frontiers of experiments, and atoms that are cooled close to the absolute
zero of temperature and trapped by laser beams.

The educational activities are aimed at bridging classroom education with
independent research training through an original implementation of the Problem
Based Learning concept used in medical schools and other areas for teaching
Natural Sciences. The educational and research part will be integrated also by
creating a broad course which will cover in a unified way concepts from
condensed matter physics, high energy physics, and cosmology.