* 0955517
* RCN: EDEN (Evo-Devo-Eco Network): A research coordination network to promote technique and community development across the Evo-Devo-Eco field
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2017
* Antonia Monteiro, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 05/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Over the last several decades, the traditional fields of evolutionary biology,
developmental biology and ecology have moved closer together both conceptually
and technically. The newly synthetic field of modern Evolutionary and Ecological
Developmental Biology, or Evo-Devo-Eco, is the result. Advances in Evo-Devo-Eco
rely heavily on transferring and adapting technologies originally developed for
use with traditional laboratory model organisms, in order to apply them to new
and emerging model organisms. Presently, insufficient networking often leads
laboratories working on non-traditional, yet promising, model organisms, to
inefficiently and inadvertently duplicate effort when developing new protocols
for use in their systems. Moreover, there is enormous untapped potential for the
exchange of techniques, ideas, and knowledge to flow not just from established
models to lesser-known systems, but also from the unique biology exposed by
lesser-known systems to traditional models. This project will create a new
research coordination network called EDEN (Evo-Devo-Eco Network). EDEN will
facilitate new support networks and collaborations among laboratories that do
not currently enjoy the large community resources of traditional model species.
The four major activities of EDEN will be: (1) fostering active interchange of
tools and techniques among labs working on emerging model systems; (2) training
undergraduates in the field of Evo-Devo-Eco with a focus on emerging model
systems; (3) documenting the tools and techniques used and developed in these
organisms, and making them publicly available online for future users; and (4)
promoting interactions across the Evo-Devo-Eco community through conference
funding and the sponsoring of workshops. The advertising strategies and funding
priorities of the network are designed to maximize accessibility by participants
of underrepresented groups. The gender, ethnic, and career stage diversity of
the EDEN core network group will serve as a visibly positive starting point for
further increasing the diversity of the next generation of researchers.