* 0955975
* CAREER: Field-free Transmission Geometry Atmospheric Pressure Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2010,12/31/2015
* Sarah Trimpin, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2015
* USD 680,000.00

With this CAREER award from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program,
Professor Sarah Trimpin at Wayne State University (WSU) seeks to develop, study,
and employ new ionization mechanisms for mass spectrometry (MS). Co-funding from
the Office of International Science and Engineering enables extension of the
work to pair powerful mass spectrometric tools with separations expertise in the
group of Dr. Steffen Weidner in the Federal Institute for Materials Research and
Testing (BAM) - Berlin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in MS have made it
a critically important tool for characterization of a wide range of systems
including bio- and synthetic polymers. Dr. Trimpin's work is expanding the range
of problems approachable by enhancing capabilities for characterizing biological
and physical processes in systems (e.g. cell membranes) where limited solubility
impedes study with existing technology. The long-term goal is to develop MS
methods that operate without the use of solvents, providing for molecular
sampling at the cellular level and enabling complete tissue analyses. Dr.
Trimpin's innovative modifications to matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization (MALDI) offer the first coupling of hybrid ion mobility
spectrometry (IMS) MS with high spatial resolution analysis of high-mass
analytes (e.g. proteins). The approach produces ions with multiple charges,
enabling exploitation of electron transfer dissociation (ETD) fragmentation, a
powerful characterization method previously usable only with electrospray
ionization (ESI). Dr. Trimpin's group seeks improved understanding of this new
MS ionization method, which in turn should enhance understanding of MALDI and
ESI ionization processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will have broad impact
in research areas throughout chemistry and biology. It can provide information
that will help us understand the functioning of cells and the materials
properties of plastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact of this work is enhanced by
Prof. Trimpin's dedication to interdisciplinary teaching and training in
promotion of scientific learning for preparation of the ethnic- and gender-
diverse student body at WSU for the technology-driven 21st century workplace. In
concert with her research and teaching activities, Prof. Trimpin pursues her
strong interest in encouraging women to follow scientific careers by interacting
with high school and university female students. She is also developing a "Women
and Science" support group at WSU.