* 0955922
* CAREER: Electrochemical Nanofabrication - Transformative Concept towards Synthesis of Novel Materials, Functional Surfaces and Metallic Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2010,11/30/2016
* Stanko Brankovic, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 11/30/2016
* USD 543,216.00

This project is supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry and the Metals and Metallic Nanostructures
Program of the Division of Materials Research. Professor Stanko Brankovic and
his research group at the University of Houston will investigate the governing
thermodynamics and kinetics processes controlling the morphology of the metal
nanodeposit obtained via surface limited galvanic displacement reaction. In this
novel deposition method, a single monolayer of less noble metal is oxidized-
displaced by more noble metal cations which are simultaneously reduced-deposited
on a substrate surface. The obtained metallic deposit has just a single atom in
thickness as nanoclusters uniformly distributed over the substrate surface. Such
nanodeposit will be used as model system to study structure-property relation of
catalyst monolayers, their stability in different chemical reactions and their
self-organization. In addition, a nanoscale three dimensional metallic
structures produced by this method or by dealloying will be evaluated as a
potential path for the fabrication of more complex nanostructures, including
those that can be used for ultrasound sensing
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental concepts that will be
developed in this work will have an impact in many other scientific and
technological disciplines. Perhaps the most immediate one is the application to
microelectronics fabrication, where precise, uniform deposition (i.e.,
"conformal deposition") on complex substrates remains a daunting challenge.
Self-organized 2D metallic architectures, design of active catalyst monolayers
or organized growth of carbon nanotubes are some other examples. This program
integrates an educational component which spans over the range from high school
to graduate students, and addresses the development of cutting edge research in
the physical sciences, with an over-reaching theme of long term sustainable
technology development. The long term goal of this program is to produce the
highly qualified scientist and engineers able to carry out the technical
challenges of the modern world.