* 0955291
* CAREER:  Cellular Mechanotransduction: An Integrated Research and Education Program
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Mohammad Mofrad, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 03/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

0955291 Mofrad

Living cells sense and actively respond to mechanical stimuli. This process,
termed cellular mechanotransduction, is an essential function of the cell,
controlling its growth, proliferation, protein synthesis, and gene expression.
Extensive data exist documenting the cell's interaction with the extracellular
environment, but less is known about how force affects biological signaling.
More generally, the question of how the mechanical and biochemical pathways
interact remains largely unanswered. Focal adhesions are a critical component of
the cell's interaction with its environment. The key molecular events underlying
the formation of focal adhesions are the activation of molecular mechanosensors
such as talin and alpha-actinin, the activation of key linker proteins such as
vinculin, and the subsequent recruitment of focal adhesion forming molecules.
This study investigates the specific molecular events and biophysical mechanisms
involved in focal adhesion mechanotransduction. In addition, this project aims
to advance a culture of educational collaboration and sharing of knowledge in
the field of cellular mechanotransduction via developing a Web-based global tool
with the following features: (1) introductory interactive media to captivate a
general audience and gather interest, (2) in-depth resources for education about
mechanotransduction and sharing of knowledge, (3) social-networking center for
collaboration and sharing of ideas between researchers across the globe. A
combination of computational techniques accompanied with state-of-the-art
experimental validations will be used to study the critical molecular mechanisms
underlying focal adhesion formation. Experiments alone are currently challenged
by a lack of both temporal and spatial resolution preventing their use for
investigating the structural mechanisms underlying molecular activation and
focal adhesion formation. The temporal and spatial resolution of computational
modeling and simulation can be used to design experiments for validation
resulting in impactful conclusions. Two complementary computational techniques,
in conjunction with molecular biophysical experiments, are used to address the
focal adhesion formation events. Molecular dynamics techniques investigate the
force-induced activation of talin and รก-actinin, and the activation of vinculin
in recruitment of actin filaments to focal adhesions, while agent-based
biochemical models investigate the recruitment of various other molecules to
focal adhesions.

Intellectual Merit. This study will investigate the molecular interactions among
the complex protein machinery of focal adhesions with the hope to shed light on
the exquisite structural and biophysical mechanisms involved in focal adhesion
formation. The combined use of the state-of-the-art computational techniques,
ranging from molecular dynamics to agent-based modeling, to investigate
molecular and cellular mechanotransduction phenomena is innovative and
groundbreaking. In addition, this project will produce novel resources for the
sharing of knowledge and collaboration of researchers in cellular
mechanotransduction and mechanobiology.

Broader and Transformative Impacts. This project is important both in terms of
its immediate goals with respect to molecular biomechanics of the focal
adhesions, but also in the broader context of cellular mechanotransduction
research and education. This project aims to propose a fundamental basis for
understanding how cells sense and actively respond to mechanical stimuli. This
process has been hypothesized to play a role in the initiation and progression
of many diseases, ranging from cardiovascular diseases to cancer. Understanding
the basis of mechanotransduction, therefore, can have a profound impact on our
approaches to preventing and tackling of these diseases. It can also lead to
novel cell-based nanobiotechnologies that may one day be able to harvest better
understanding of the molecular details of cellular mechanotransduction toward
innovative applications. In addition, these research efforts will be
complemented with the production of a resource for education and research
collaboration. The development of a knowledgebase is under way,
Mechanotransduction.org, as a center for using effective Web-based tools such as
interactive media and social networking resources to connect and bring together
both people with general interest in biology and experts in biomechanics. In
this way, these tools will capture new interest in mechanotransduction, share
knowledge and expertise, and link great minds together.