* 0955199
* CAREER: High Speed, Low Power Nanoelectromechanical Field Effect Transistor (NEMFET) Logic and Memory based on Semiconductor Nanowires
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Jie Xiang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: High Speed, Low Power Nanoelectromechanical Field Effect Transistor
(NEMFET) Logic and Memory based on Semiconductor Nanowires Jie
Xiang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objectives of this project are to study a novel nanoscale transistor structure
that is based on both electrical transport and mechanical deformation in
semiconductor nanowire materials and operates under a physically new mechanism
of coupled nanoelectromechanical motion in order to achieve high switching speed
as well as low standby power. This device will provide a building block for
future computation. The project employs multiphysics device simulation, material
preparation, fabrication and electrical characterization of prototype devices
and aims to enhance understanding of both the physical principle and practical
limits of these nanodevices as well as to integrate these results into rigorous
educational activities in the broad community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed program is motivated by Gordon Moore?s iconic
prediction and will focus on continuing building computer logic and memory
elements with even more speed and low power. Conventional silicon-based
transistors already face limitations in continued reduced dimensions in order to
make electrons move faster. Meanwhile thermodynamics are dictating the amount of
power consumed at the off state - by limiting the subthreshold slope of
conventional transistors to be at least 60 mV/dec. This program will explore
high mobility one dimensional nanowire platform as potential to achieve a
subthreshold slope of zero. This is only made possible with the recent
development of nanoscale electromechanical systems, particularly in nanowires
where the frequency of mechanical motion has become comparable to modern radio
frequency electronics. The focus of the research activities in this program will
be transformative in terms of shifting from traditional electronic circuits and
models into utilizing the mechanical degree of freedom in conjunction with
nanoelectronics components. The project will consist of the following research
activities: (1) 3-D modeling of coupled nanomechanics-electrostatics-carrier
transport to understand device design space and performance; (2) Controlled
nanomaterial preparation via chemical vapor deposition and wet chemical etching
methods; (3) Fabrication of suspended nanowire transistor structures and (4) DC
and RF characterization of the device arrays to verify their performance metrics
as logic and novel non-volatile elements for future nanoelectronics. The
knowledge acquired through this program will have substantial technological
impact in a broad range of application areas of computation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;A strong educational component is
envisioned, including the enhancement of graduate and undergraduate courses
aimed at a diverse student audience, interaction with high school students as
well as designing an online portal for the general public. The objective is to
incorporate results of the fundamental device physics and nanotechnology
research into 21st century Engineering education in order to expose people of
diverse ages and backgrounds to the state-of-the-art in nanoscience and to raise
their awareness about nanoelectronics as tomorrow's technology.