* 0955189
* CAREER:  Comprehensive Research on Cold-Formed Steel Sheathed Shear Walls: Special Detailing, Design, and Innovation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Cheng Yu, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 410,010.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to close the knowledge gaps about the behavior of cold-formed steel lateral
force resisting systems that use shear walls sheathed with steel or wood panels.
The study includes three major tasks: 1) Configuring a unique testing method
designed to investigate the performance of cold-formed steel shear walls under
realistic loading conditions to provide reliable experimental data to evaluate
the current code prescribed shear wall strengths. 2) Based on the experimental
data, establish accurate analytical models to predict the shear strength of
cold-formed steel shear walls made with different sheathing materials and to
provide design equations based on the principles of mechanics and mathematical
models. 3) Develop advanced designs of high-performance shear wall systems with
enhanced ductility and strength for low cost building constructions in seismic
and strong wind zones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
provide simplified and improved methodologies for safe and more economical
design of building structures using the cold-formed steel shear walls which are
known to be recyclable and provide better fire resistance compared to wood
construction. This research will also make it feasible to use the cold-formed
steel walls in taller buildings than what has been possible now in seismic and
high wind regions. The educational activities of the project with the
developments of hands-on experiments and teaching aids and a comprehensive text
book will lead to improvements in teaching about the cold-formed steel
structures to both graduate and undergraduate students. This will also promote
professional interest in the use of this economical and sustainable method of
building construction. Graduate students will receive advanced training in
research methods through their direct involvement in the project research. The
research results will be disseminated through publications in professional
journals and conference proceeding as well as through a project website.