* 0955765
* CAREER: Understanding Particle Masses through Studying Higgs Produced in Association with Top Quarks at CMS
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Kevin Lannon, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2016
* USD 500,000.00

With this award, Professor Lannon will pursue a five-year plan to study the
production of the Higgs boson in association with top quark pairs. Initial
efforts will be directed toward the measurement of top pair production cross
sections using the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) detector at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland, followed by studies on top pair
plus jets production. Ultimately, he hopes to progress to a study of Higgs
produced with a top pair. To further this long-term research goal, this award
includes support for research and development activities aimed at upgrading the
CMS trigger to add information from the tracking system that is not currently
used in the trigger. Finally, this award allows Professor Lannon to take
advantage of a unique educational activity related to his research. The CMS
collaboration has agreed to make a small fraction of the data it collects
available to QuarkNet, an outreach program in high energy physics research
involving high school students and teachers. Along with a colleague at Notre
Dame, Lannon plans to create the necessary infrastructure for data collected by
the QuarkNet trigger to be used by QuarkNet participants. Achieving this goal
would create a long-term infrastructure that would allow high school students
and teachers to share in the experience of doing cutting-edge high energy
physics research. This infrastructure can be built upon by future efforts to
bring this experience to students of all backgrounds, economic situations, and
geographical locations through the use of web-based learning and collaboration
tools.