* 0955916
* CAREER: Metamorphic Wide-Bandgap Semiconductors: Materials Fundamentals for High-Efficiency Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Minjoo Lee, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 04/30/2016
* USD 556,837.00

Technical: This project addresses fundamental relationships between epitaxial
crystal growth conditions, microstructure, and properties in wide-bandgap (Eg
=2.2 to 2.3eV) metamorphic InGaP, to create high-efficiency, multi-junction
solar cells. The approach involves epitaxial growth studies, structural
characterization, optical/electrical/interfacial properties determination, solar
cell fabrication, and modeling the impact of materials properties on solar cell
performance. &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: This project addresses basic research
issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance.
If successful, this project could lead to the realization of 60% efficient
multijunction solar cells, transforming the economics of photovoltaic
electricity for terrestrial use and leading to reduced greenhouse gas emissions.
The educational component includes creation of new interdisciplinary learning
opportunities at the undergraduate, graduate, and K-12 levels, and aims for
increasing the participation of under-represented groups in science and
engineering. Long term educational goals are: to increase the diversity of
tomorrow's materials scientists and electrical engineers by providing
interdisciplinary training and mentoring to both women and under-represented
minorities, and to place the current generation's passion for energy issues onto
a firm, physics-based foundation. The PI has recruited a diverse research group
at Yale and created a new course, 'Photovoltaic Energy.' The course is enhanced
through the implementation of a novel set of homework problems and the creation
of an intensive laboratory component where students learn to fabricate, test,
and design solar cells. In addition, the PI proposes a new K-12 teacher
mentoring program focused around the annual New Haven science fair.