* 0955439
* CAREER: Ligand-induced Folding in Peptides for Biosensing Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Rebecca Lai, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2016
* USD 455,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Division of Chemistry and the EPSCoR office, Professor Lai from University of
Nebraska at Lincoln proposes to develop a potentially generalizable peptide-
based electrochemical biosensing platform for detection of clinically relevant
proteins. Professor Lai's work will address the question of how ligand-induced
folding in peptides can be utilized in the design of folding-based
electrochemical biosensors. A proof-of-concept study will focus on the detection
of anti-HIV antibodies using peptide epitopes from HIV-related antigens. The
sensor constructs to be investigated include both stem-loop and linear designs.
In both sensor constructs, the distal end of the peptide is attached to an
electrochemically active reporter, whereas the proximal end is selectively
immobilized to an electrode surface. The analyte-induced change in the location
of electrochemically active reporter will then determine the current observed in
the system.

The proposed study has the potential to impact the field of biosensor
development and facilitate the use of peptides as recognition components in a
wide range of chemical and biological applications. Integrating concepts of
electrochemistry and molecular biology, the project will provide training
opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students. To support this training,
an undergraduate course in general electrochemistry and a graduate course in
advanced biosensing techniques will be developed. Professor Lai will also host
an annual summer workshop on biosensor technology for Nebraska high school
teachers, with the goal of preparing them with the knowledge of easy-to-
demonstrate experiments for high school classes to spur students' interests in
chemistry and biosensor technology.