* 0955967
* CAREER: The Influence of Distributed River Inputs and Coastal Embayments on Dynamics in Large Estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2018
* Michael Whitney, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 599,786.00

The project is designed to transform the understanding of the effects of
distributed rivers and coastal embayments on dynamics in large estuaries like
the Long Island Sound (LIS). The hypotheses to be tested are: 1) Wind-driven and
tidal straining of across-estuary density gradients is quantitatively as large
as straining of along-estuary gradients; 2) Distributed river inputs create
focused areas of increased straining and areas of reversed straining conditions;
3) During storm response, smaller river inputs from coastal watersheds
collectively have a first-order influence on circulation and density structure;
4) River waters follow regular transport pathways that shift during wind events;
5) Coastal embayments transition from areas of net mixing to increased
stratification as tidal currents decrease along the estuary. The hydrodynamic
simulations for the LIS will be coupled to a surface-runoff model for coastal
watersheds. Straining conditions and the combined influence of the smaller river
inflows will be studied to determine the transport pathways for fresh water from
the distributed river inputs and quantify the effects of coastal embayments on
estuarine circulation and density structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The proposed modeling research will transform the understanding of
dynamics in large estuaries. The study will advance the understanding of how
fresh water from multiple sources combines to determine estuary density fields;
tracking these separate inputs also informs the study of riverine nutrient,
contaminant, and carbon inputs to estuaries. The research will extend the study
of estuarine density straining to large estuaries where a 3D approach is
necessary and spatial variations in straining conditions are pronounced. Inputs
from distributed smaller rivers from coastal watersheds will be accurately
represented using a coupled surface-runoff model and an input method consistent
with potential energy considerations. This study will quantify the effects of
these smaller distributed rivers and coastal embayments on large-scale estuarine
dynamics. The new coupled modeling approach and analysis techniques will
increase the ability to model present and future estuarine conditions. The
integrated multi-faceted education and outreach effort each year will inform
several hundred K-12 students, undergraduates, graduate students, and the
general public on estuarine dynamics, storm response, and research results. The
main message that nearby rivers and embayments have far-reaching effects should
foster interest in and encourage stewardship of the coastal watersheds and
estuaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will train a post-
doctoral researcher and undergraduate student for careers in scientific research
and education. Undergraduate and graduate students will be educated by the new
'Freshwater Transport and Mixing' course. Summer undergraduate interns will gain
vital research experience. Several hundred students reached by the K-12
education and outreach efforts, through the Project Oceanology field education
program and the annual 'Meet Your Estuary Day' for lower-income and minority
students, will gain an understanding of the interconnectedness of watersheds and
estuaries and a new interest in studying and protecting coastal waters. The new
college course and the new Project Oceanology learning module developed will
continue beyond the project span; adding to the project?s educational legacy.
Research findings will inform research for large estuaries and compliment
research on environmental issues facing LIS and other estuaries. This project
will inform biogeochemical research on multiple riverine inputs of nutrients,
pollutants, and carbon to estuarine systems. The coupling techniques combining
the surface-runoff and hydrodynamic models will be shared with the coastal
modeling community. Results will be published in scientific journals and
presented at conferences. The program will improve the scientific infrastructure
at the University of Connecticut and will improve partnerships between the
university, Project Oceanology, Connecticut Sea Grant and other organizations.