* 0955904
* Pathogen mediated diversity and response to climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Rytas Vilgalys, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2014
* USD 593,331.00

Fungal pathogens are thought to control biodiversity of forest trees through
selective mortality of competitively dominant species that would otherwise
threaten less competitive species. Climate warming may thus increase the extent
and severity of disease. As pathogens increasingly survive mild winters,
reproductive rates increase and plant defenses suffer from drought and
temperature stress. This research will assess the extent to which pathogens
regulate tree seedling health, identify the fungi involved and their effects on
tree growth and survival, and determine how those interactions are affected by
the temperature changes predicted for mid-century. The study will determine how
temperatures affect their hosts when temperatures increase, within the context
of simultaneous competition from other tree species, using a warming experiment
where tree seedlings are exposed to soil and air temperature increases of 3°C to
5°C in North Carolina and Massachusetts. Once seedlings emerge, germination,
survival, disease symptoms, and growth will be monitored. Pathogenic fungi and
oomycetes residing on both seeds and seedlings will be identified using a
combination of culture and DNA sequence-based methods. The effects of warming on
pathogen incidence, infection, and seedling demography will be assessed using
models that account for the combination of temperature, pathogens, and
competition with other trees. By incorporating different sources of data into
the analyses, this research will provide insight into the basic biology of
forest risk as the natural capacity of trees to defend themselves changes under
a warmer climate. The proposed research will provide insight into spatial and
temporal dynamics of plant pathogens in natural systems, and how these dynamics
might change under a warmer climate. An improved understanding of the diversity
and composition of populations of plant pathogens and environmental factors can
both enhance current management practices and inform models of future tree
distributions. Teaching, training, and learning will be an integral part of this
study, as it will require the assistance of undergraduate and high school
students as work-study assistants and summer research technicians. In addition,
a survey-based data collection component will be initiated to engage K-12 and
the interested public, which combines this diversity research with outreach
activities supported by Duke Forest. The results of this study will be
disseminated to high school students during the annual Duke Forest Research
Days, and to the general public in a series of forest pathology hikes in the
Duke Forest.