* 0955205
* CAREER: Parallel Nonlinear Programming Techniques for Optimization in Rapid Therapeutics Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Carl Laird, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2014
* USD 400,000.00

0955205&lt;br/&gt;Laird&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the potential consequences of recurring drug
shortages within the U.S., there is a need for reconfigurable facilities that
are capable of rapid product changeover. In a rapid therapeutics manufacturing
(RTM) facility, one is concerned with the ability to perform scale-up and
optimization of the batch process for the rapid production of a given product.
These problems can be represented as large-scale dynamic optimization problems
with uncertainty. This project seeks to develop novel optimization strategies
that can solve these batch optimization problems using efficient parallel
computation on emerging scientific computing
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has the following research
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Parallel Solution of Structured Nonlinear Programming
Problems on Clusters and&lt;br/&gt;Multicore Machines -- focus on the
development of an internal decomposition approach for block structured nonlinear
programming (NLP) problems, enabling efficient parallel solution of previously
intractable problems in a rigorous nonlinear framework.&lt;br/&gt;2. Parallel
Solution of Structured NLP Problems on Emerging Massively
Parallel&lt;br/&gt;Architectures -- focus on extending these NLP algorithms to
effectively exploit the capabilities of these affordable, massively parallel
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;3. Batch Process Optimization in Reconfigurable Systems
for Rapid Therapeutics&lt;br/&gt;Manufacturing -- integrate the parallel
algorithms with a modular modeling framework and develop rigorous dynamic models
to support scale-up and batch optimization in reconfigurable therapeutics
manufacturing facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an integrated plan to meet the following education
goals:&lt;br/&gt;1. Increasing Scientific Research Awareness Among
Undergraduates -- the PI has pursued the career development of several promising
undergraduates, and two undergraduates per year will be trained for a career in
research.&lt;br/&gt;2. Encouraging Lifelong Learning Through Active
Participation in Online Technical&lt;br/&gt;Communities -- to encourage lifelong
learning and active participation in an online technical community, the PI will
integrate the use of wiki and forum software with the undergraduate course on
numerical methods. Student teams will be required to contribute content and will
be graded on the level of involvement and peer rating of their posted
material.&lt;br/&gt;3. Preparation of Graduate Students and Professionals for
Effective Use and Development of the Next Generation of PSE Tools -- the PI will
develop a new graduate level course designed to demonstrate the potential of
modern computing architectures for scientific computing. In addition, a short
course will be developed to be taught at Lund University (Sweden) and within the
National Center for Therapeutics Manufacturing at Texas A&amp;M
University.&lt;br/&gt;4. Promoting Research Careers Among Underrepresented
Groups -- the PI will work&lt;br/&gt;actively with the Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) at Texas A&amp;M University as a research mentor
to encourage minority undergraduates and Masters students to pursue doctoral
studies and a career in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the
potential to significantly improve resiliency in the therapeutics manufacturing
industry through its impact on rapid manufacturing. In addition, the novel
parallel algorithms are general in nature and will be made available through the
COIN-OR open-source foundation to be used by other researchers to tackle
previously intractable nonlinear optimization problems. Research results will be
disseminated in refereed journals and at national conferences.