* 0955023
* CAREER: Distributed estimation and control for energy efficient buildings
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Prabir Barooah, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2015
* USD 422,000.00

Intellectual Merit:

The goal of the proposed research is to achieve significant improvement in
energy efficiency of large buildings by real-time estimation and control of
their the heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems The key
intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in the novel formulation of the
HVAC energy optimization problem, which relies on uncertainty reduction through
estimation (of thermal loads and occupancies) to make the control design problem
tractable. Past and current research in energy optimal control of HVAC systems
has assumed that the thermal loads and occupancies are known. This assumption
has limited their applicability in practice. The technical research plan
utilizes several components from diverse areas ? graphical models, iterative
methods, distributed MPC framework ? to produce an integrated framework that
shows promising preliminary results. In addition to design of estimation and
control algorithms, research is planned on establishing algorithm-independent
performance limits, which will increase our understanding of fundamental limits
in distributed estimation and control. Finally, extensive experimental
validation in real buildings is planned to demonstrate the practical
applicability of the methods.

Broader Impact:

Successful completion of the proposed research will lead to a substantial
reduction in CO2 emissions in the United States, and improvement in the nation?s
energy security. The research will impact the building-energy business sector in
the U.S. via the industrial collaboration and technology demonstration that are
planned with United Technologies, a key player in building-energy business. The
educational component that targets community college students has the potential
to directly provide employment-relevant training to America?s workforce,
especially those without four-year college degrees. The timeliness of the
research topic will help bring about greater engagement of undergraduate
students in engineering research. Furthermore, the technical research will
impact a broad spectrum of applications that involve estimation and control of
spatio-temporal processes with complex dynamics with spatially distributed
sensors and actuators. Operation of the electric power grid, monitoring and
control of traffic in air, highways, and communication networks are a few
examples where this research can be useful.