* 0955555
* CAREER: Emergent reactive properties of far-from-equilibrium electrochemical systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Istvan Kiss, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2016
* USD 618,248.00

In this CAREER award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Chemistry Division Professor Istvan Kiss of Saint Louis
University, will study the effects of self-organization, such as oscillations
and pattern formation, on the reactive properties of complex electrochemical
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current-generating chemical reactions of
practical importance (e.g., in batteries and fuel cells) are often far from
their thermodynamic equilibrium state. Such systems are capable of exhibiting
large temporal and spatial variations of chemical concentrations, which, in
turn, can significantly alter reactive properties of the system. Professor Kiss
and his students will explore cathode-anode interactions, dynamical features of
spatially organized reactive electrochemical media, and complex kinetic
responses of bioelectrocatalytic reactions. This will be accomplished with a
multidisciplinary, methodological approach in which the mathematical and
experimental toolkits of nonlinear science are combined with recent technical
developments of on-chip electrode fabrication, microfluidics, and
bioelectrocatalyis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Identification of underlying
organizing principles and experimental characterization of far-from-equilibrium
systems have broad applications in physical, chemical, and biological systems.
The investigation of coupled cathode-anode multi-electrode flow cells fills in
the gap between the existing knowledge on complex behavior of electrochemical
systems and the modeling needs of industrial applications of galvanic and
electrolytic cells. Oscillatory electrochemical media allow for testing recent
theories on synchronization and network dynamics that have importance in
generation of circadian rhythms and hypersynchronous neural discharges in
epileptic seizures. Characterization of emergent reactive properties of
bioelectrocatalytic systems has broader impact in clean technology: features of
spatial and temporal enzyme activities affect power curves of
bioelectrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this context, Professor Kiss will develop
and demonstrate a set of experiments about self-organizing systems. These
experiments (e.g., on chaotic corrosion) will show how to connect notions from
different disciplines to interpret emergent phenomena. They will be used as an
outreach tool to convey the importance multidisciplinary science, to distribute
recent theories and notions in Nonlinear Science to current and future
biologists, chemists, and physicists, and to educate the public about the
emergence of complex, 'intelligent' behavior of abiotic systems.