* 0955419
* CAREER: Novel QM/MM algorithms for understanding efficient energy harvesting in photosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Lyudmila Slipchenko, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2014
* USD 559,140.00

Lyudmila Slipchenko of Purdue University is supported by an award from the
Theory, Models and Computational Method program to develop computational methods
that enable accurate and predictive modeling of energy transfer in natural and
artificial photosynthetic complexes, including explicit solvent effects of the
protein environment. The methods are based on the quantum mechanics/molecular
mechanics (QM/MM) approach in which accurate excited state methods are used for
the QM part and the ab initio-based effective fragment potential (EFP) method is
used for the MM part. The EFP method overcomes the most significant limitation
of existing QM/MM techniques by replacing empirical interactions by parameter-
free first principles based terms, without a sacrifice in computational
efficiency.

The PI and her research group are developing computational tools that enable
accurate and predictive modeling of energy transfer in natural and artificial
photosynthetic complexes, including the explicit effect of the protein
environment. This research increases our understanding of energy harvesting and
contributes to the engineering of efficient photovoltaic devices and
photosynthetic systems. This research has a strong component of computer code
design. The resulting software is integrated into widely used quantum chemistry
codes and made available to the broad community of scientists and engineers.

This research is supported in a co-funding arrangement with the Office of
Cyberinfrastruture.