* 0955057
* Understanding Cross-Boundary Knowledge Networks in the Context of Information-Intensive Transnational Problems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Anthony Cresswell, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

The governments of the world are evolving toward a more complex global network
of political, societal, and economic dependencies, driven in large part by the
expanding capabilities of information and communication technologies (ICT). ICT
has become so ubiquitous and integrated with social behavior that the
distinction between social and technical interactions becomes arbitrary at best.
A street protester who snaps a camera phone picture and emails it instantly
across the world may not be thinking about computers, but is using an enormous
computing system nonetheless. The potential of these social and technical
interactions and relationships has the potential to transform political (witness
Iran), economic (witness eBay) and organizational behavior (witness AirNow).
These new capabilities support highly computing-based social systems that must
work within the evolving global network of dependencies. Governments strive to
combat terrorism, manage air quality, and promote international commerce by
jointly constructing new knowledge sharing systems. The transnational effects of
these new forms of computing based social systems remain poorly understood, as
do the related threats and opportunities. The US and others must produce
scholars trained in methodological tools to work effectively on research
questions associated directly with international computing-based social systems.
International engagement demands deep understanding of how these new systems
affect the way nations and cultures respond to public needs and engage one
another in response to transnational problems, like air pollution. This grant
will begin to develop new social ICT models and tools for computing-based
knowledge sharing across geographic and political boundaries focused on air
pollution. This will be based on study of current and proposed international
efforts at collaboration on air quality monitoring and reporting systems. It
encompasses both comparative and transnational work in the domain of air quality
monitoring and reporting systems in the US, Mexico, and China.

The following research questions will guide the work: o How do participants in
different countries perceive the dimensions, stakeholders, benefits, and risks
of engaging in intergovernmental systems for information and knowledge sharing?
o What are the similarities and differences in these perceptions? What cultural,
political, economic, and social factors might account for them? o How do the
participants attempt to create shared understanding of technologies, context,
terms, processes, and contingencies that generate capabilities for effective
action? o Which strategies, tools, and behaviors are more likely to lead to
successful international knowledge networks that benefit individuals,
organizations, and communities? o What preparation, methods and tools are best
suited for research on these questions?

Intellectual merit This proposal begins to build a knowledge base of cross-
cultural investigations and empirical case studies of how new social ICT systems
can be used on information-intensive international problems. The case studies
and cross-case analyses will provide new comparative material and contribute to
improved methodologies for cross-cultural research. The case analyses will lead
to new testable models of information flow that accompany interactions and
dependencies that cross national boundaries and cultures, as well as a future
research agenda to refine both models and the methodologies.

Broader Impacts This work extends information sharing and integration research
to cross-national settings in which two or more countries share responsibility
for a common problem, need, or initiative. In addition, the program will enlarge
a collegial network and equip faculty and students to conduct research on
problems of international or global import with deeper understanding of cultural
factors and with the application of rigorous methodologies. This capacity-
building feature will have long-lasting effects in the form of international
science partnerships. Links to government officials as research hosts and
advisors will provide not only research context and venues, but also
opportunities to share findings that inform more culturally-aware public
policies and government practices. The project will also lay the groundwork for
teaching cases, course modules, and other curricular material.