* 0955929
* CAREER: Gravitational Wave Astronomy and Training a New Generation of Gravitational Wave Astronomers
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2010,10/31/2015
* Xavier Siemens, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 10/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

This CAREER award supports the following projects in LIGO and pulsar timing
research: Calibration of the output of the LIGO instruments---a fundamental
first step in the search for gravitational waves, searches for gravitational
waves from neutron stars, searches for pulsars in radio data, searches for
gravitational waves from cosmic strings, and searches for gravitational waves in
pulsar timing data. The existence of gravitational waves, ripples in space-time
itself, is one of Einstein's most extraordinary predictions. The direct
detection of gravitational waves will usher in a new era in astronomy and
dramatically expand our knowledge of the universe. LIGO, a gravitational wave
detector of unprecedented sensitivity, and pulsar timing experiments to monitor
space-time through nature's most accurate "clocks" are expected to make a
detection in the next five to ten years. The research under this award will make
important contributions to the success of LIGO and pulsar timing experiments,
and may ultimately lead to the discovery of gravitational waves. A major
component of the research activities involves the use of Einstein@Home which the
PI helped to develop and maintains at the University of Wisconsin--Milwaukee.
Einstein@Home is a distributed computing effort that harnesses spare CPU cycles
from computers around the world to search for gravitational waves in LIGO data
and for undiscovered pulsars in radio data. Einstein@Home is an extremely
powerful gravitational wave search tool and also an outstanding outreach success
that has brought gravitational wave astronomy to the personal computers of
250,000 people around the globe. This project will include an outreach program
to partner a diverse group of high school students with undergraduates, graduate
students, and senior personnel to participate in the collection and analysis of
LIGO and radio data, searches for pulsars, and searches for gravitational waves
in LIGO and pulsar timing data. Students will contribute meaningfully to
cutting-edge interdisciplinary research, enhance their academic credentials,
develop portfolios documenting their achievements, and become better prepared to
pursue careers in astronomy, physics, and other STEM disciplines.