* 0955773
* CAREER: Probing Astrophysics Frontiers With Gravitational Wave Bursts
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Laura Cadonati, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 12/31/2015
* USD 700,000.00

This CAREER award will focus on methods for detecting gravitational waves in
LIGO data especially gravitational wave bursts (GWBs), transient signals with a
broad range of possible astrophysical sources. GWB detection is pursued with
minimal assumptions on the source and the signal morphology: this offers the
intriguing possibility of serendipitous discoveries, but also the challenges of
interpreting an unmodeled result and extracting its science. The PI will build
on past experience to establish a robust program in GWB science, with two
components, both timely for LIGO. 1) GWB Science in Enhanced LIGO. The PI's
group will have a lead role in the prompt analysis of Enhanced LIGO data
(collected during 2009-2010) and in the achievement of high confidence in a
potential GWB detection, understanding and suppressing the rate of noise
transients that constitute the ultimate sensitivity limit for LIGO. This effort
will provide input from the analysis to detector experts and devise software
remedies when noise sources cannot be found or fixed. 2) Preparing for Advanced
LIGO and gravitational wave astronomy with GWBs. In the longer term, the group
will implement techniques of parameter estimation and interpretation of GWB
detections, in collaboration with numerical relativity and source modeling
experts, to maximize the science output from the start of Advanced LIGO (in
approximately 2014). In addition, the group will participate in multi-messenger
observations with electromagnetic and neutrino counterparts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational waves are a new science frontier. These tiny
ripples in the fabric of spacetime, predicted by the Theory of General
Relativity, carry information from the most catastrophic and mysterious events
in our universe: the birth and death of a star, the collision of black holes and
the Big Bang. As LIGO makes steady progress towards its Advanced configuration,
and in the anticipation of detection, gravitational wave scientists, numerical
relativists and astrophysicists are joining forces and preparing for a new era
of gravitational wave astronomy: a multi-disciplinary approach is crucial for
the success of the gravitational wave program. Graduate student training is
integrant part of this proposal, on three fronts. In the next five years the PI
will: (1) supervise graduate students, active in LIGO core science, in her group
and as task leader in the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC); (2) establish a
mentoring program to support scientific and professional development of graduate
students across the LSC, with the support of the LIGO Academic Advisory Council,
of which she is member; (3) design a new course on introductory data analysis
techniques for UMass graduate students and advanced undergraduates in
astrophysics and particle physics. For a broader outreach, this outreach will
also support the deployment of a program on supernovae, black holes and
gravitational waves, with lectures and hands-on activities. This will add an
astrophysics component to UMass STEM activities like the after-school STEM-RAY
and the Saturday Seminar series for teachers. The program will be brought to
K-12 classrooms and girl scout troops in Western Massachusetts, to encourage the
interest of girls in science. Students and postdocs will be engaged in the
preparation and delivery of this outreach, for a mutual learning experience.