* 0955368
* CAREER: Galaxy Evolution in the Cosmic Web: RESOLVEing the Missing and Invisible
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Sheila Kannappan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* joan wrobel
* 07/31/2016
* USD 825,885.00

Dr. Kannappan proposes to lead and carry out a project that will advance our
understanding of cosmology by investigating the 'missing baryons' problem, so
named since most of the normal baryonic matter predicted from early-universe
cosmology is not seen at the present epoch. She will investigate this problem by
conducting the RESOLVE (Resolved Spectroscopy Of a Local VolumE) survey. RESOLVE
will produce 2-D optical and radio spectroscopy of a carefully selected sample
of approximately 1500 galaxies in the nearby cosmic web. When the survey is
completed it will be the first to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Directly determine the
fundamental distribution of internal velocities within the sample, i.e. the
'velocity function' of the sample&lt;br/&gt;- Perform an analysis of disk growth
and survival in relation to merging and cosmic structure&lt;br/&gt;- Put a new
type of constraint on the distribution of missing baryons through a self-
consistent mass census which will be analyzed in conjunction with star formation
patterns and numerical simulations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kannappan will use
the data from RESOLVE to train a new generation of scientists in multiple areas
of astronomy including: spectroscopy, radio astronomy, and survey data handling.
RESOLVE data will be made available on the web where it will be used in data-
driven activities that are geared toward projects for high school and
undergraduate students. Additionally, Dr. Kannappan will develop an astronomy
curriculum that is aligned to the North Carolina science standards. This work is
in collaboration with current teachers and is based on her experience in the
Teach for America program, a program that typically targets minority and/or low-
income communities.