* 0955707
* CAREER: Transport and Non-Equilibrium Physics in Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Adrian Feiguin, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2013
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Office of
Cyberinfrastructure contribute funding to this CAREER award. This award supports
theoretical and computational research, and education on developing new
computational methods to study non-equilibrium behavior of strongly correlated
materials and nanostructures. In particular new algorithms will be developed to
further enhance and expand the applicability of a recently developed time-
dependent density matrix renormalization group method and to enable its use to
attack fundamental problems in nonequilibrium strongly correlated materials and
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will use the time-dependent density
matrix renormalization group method to advance timely open problems, that will
address fundamental questions, including: What are the universal scaling laws
governing far from equilibrium transport? What are the fundamental processes in
the coherent dynamics and decoherence of many-body systems? How does
integrability affect thermalization and equilibration of systems out of
equilibrium? The PI will focus on the specific problems: &lt;br/&gt;+
understanding the correlations, transients, and time-scales involved in the
operation of quantum gates, for quantum information processing;&lt;br/&gt;+
understanding the equilibrium and non-equilibrium behavior of one-dimensional
and quasi one-dimensional strongly correlated systems in the presence of spin-
charge separation and Kondo correlations at zero temperature and at finite
temperatures - the spin-incoherent regime; &lt;br/&gt;+ understanding time-
dependent phenomena in ultracold atomic gases, with an eye to probe and realize
novel quantum phases of matter;&lt;br/&gt;+ understanding time-dependent
correlations in momentum space using the time-dependent density matrix
renormalization group, and its application to calculate spectral properties of
strongly correlated systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
computationally intensive and involves developing new numerical techniques.
Students will learn valuable analytical and computational skills that will
better prepare them to join the technologically savvy modern workforce. The PI
will proactively recruit students from underrepresented groups. Computational
tools developed in the course of the award will be made freely available and
open-source through the Algorithms and Libraries for Physics Simulations
project, which has already provided enormous benefits to the scientific
community. These tools include the development of an educational software
toolkit that contains visualization, data analysis, provenance, and simulation
packages. These activities will contribute to the formation of new generations
of computational condensed matter physicists. Through the ALPS project, the PI
will contribute to a book on computational condensed matter, the organization of
workshops, and teleteaching. A series of public lectures is also planned, to
complement and enhance department outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of
Materials Research and the Office of Cyberinfrastructure contribute funding to
this CAREER award. This award supports research and education with a strong
computational flavor to advance fundamental understanding in important areas
that involve quantum mechanical states that change in time. The PI will develop
new computational methods and use them to make progress on fundamental problems
that involve materials and structures of atoms which have dimensions some
100,000 times smaller than a human hair. The materials and structures of
interest contain electrons that interact strongly with each other leading to
highly correlated motion. The research is focused on electrons that are driven
far away from the placid stable state of equilibrium to a new nonequilibrium
state. Among the questions that the PI will explore are how such a state relaxes
back to the tranquility of equilibrium, and how fundamental signatures of a
quantum mechanical system degrade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is fundamental
research that may have impact on efforts to develop ever smaller electronic
devices with higher performance. It may also have impact on the discovery of new
phenomena and is focused in part on how to prepare and manipulate quantum
mechanical states to perform quantum computation and novel electronic device
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is computationally intensive and
involves developing new numerical techniques. Students will learn valuable
analytical and computational skills that will better prepare them to join the
technologically savvy modern workforce. The PI will proactively recruit students
from underrepresented groups. Computational tools developed in the course of the
award will be made freely available and open-source through the Algorithms and
Libraries for Physics Simulations project, which has already provided enormous
benefits to the scientific community. These tools include the development of an
educational software toolkit that contains visualization, data analysis,
provenance, and simulation packages. These activities will contribute to the
formation of new generations of computational condensed matter physicists.
Through the ALPS project, the PI will contribute to a book on computational
condensed matter, the organization of workshops, and teleteaching. A series of
public lectures is also planned, to complement and enhance department outreach
activities.