* 0955274
* CAREER: Investigation of Attosecond and Femtosecond Dynamics in Atoms and Molecules using XUV+IR Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Arvinder Sandhu, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 596,335.00

This award will allow for the establishment of a strong research and educational
development program in the field of ultrafast atomic, molecular, and optical
sciences in the Department of Physics at the University of Arizona. The program
will study atomic and molecular response to strong transient electric fields
with simultaneous use of IR and XUV pulses in attosecond precision experiments.
This will involve measurement and control of electronic and nuclear dynamics in
highly-excited molecules using attosecond/femtosecond resolved pump-probe
experiments. Ultrashort XUV excitation provides direct access to an interesting
and challenging regime, where atoms and molecules are energetically far from
their ground-state configuration. Using attosecond time-resolved XUV+IR
experiments, we can measure the effect of strong electric fields on excited
bound-state wavepackets in atomic systems. These measurements will offer new
opportunities for the control of electron dynamics on attosecond time-scales. In
molecules, the XUV excitation is associated with fast inner-valence electron
phenomenon, correlated two-electron processes, and strongly interdependent
electronic and nuclear dynamics. The understanding of time-resolved dynamics in
this regime has been very limited due to the spectroscopic difficulties in
probing inherently low cross-section photo-fragmentation channels; the
complexity of the potential energy surface manifold in highly-excited systems;
and the paucity of efficient, tunable, femtosecond/attosecond XUV photon
sources. This project aims at investigating this regime by utilizing cutting-
edge research tools, such as, tailored XUV pulses, and efficient photo-fragment
imaging schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader aspects include the CAREER
educational objectives that will increase the representation of Hispanic
students in physics research; directly involve undergraduate students in
ultrafast science research; and lead to the development and web-based
dissemination of interactive learning programs. This training and outreach,
along with the forefront research will help make our nation more competitive in
the field of attosecond and femtosecond science. The educational plan targets
students from an under-represented group. In collaboration with a primarily
Hispanic institution (UTEP), Hispanic students will obtain hands-on experience
and vital exposure in a cutting edge field of research. With the involvement of
graduate and undergraduate students, the educational program leads to the
development of interactive learning programs in optics/AMO, along with a method
for web-based publication and dissemination, in a manner that will be useful to
wider community. The research spin-offs of this program will be in the form of
new insights and discoveries, which will impact other related fields such as
quantum optics, theoretical atomic and molecular physics, coherent control,
atmospheric chemistry, chemical imaging and radiation chemistry.