* 0955590
* CAREER: Chemical Frustration - A Guiding Principle for the Discovery and Interpretation of New Complex Intermetallic Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Daniel Fredrickson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 01/31/2011
* USD 0.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Synthetic and structural studies are continuously revealing
intermetallic phases to be a domain of unparalleled structural complexity and
diversity. The rate at which this diversity is expanding far exceeds that of the
development of theoretical models capable of accounting for and making
predictions regarding this structural chemistry. The absence of such models is a
bottleneck in the design of new intermetallic and alloy materials with tailored
structures. A common theme can be perceived in the results of recent theoretical
and experimental studies on complex intermetallic phases that may serve as the
basis for a more comprehensive theoretical framework. Structural complexity in
these phases can often be traced to a competition between or coexistence of
mutually exclusive bonding or geometrical packing modes, a tension referred to
here as "chemical frustration", by analogy with the phenomenon of magnetic
frustration. Under the support of the SSMC/DMR program, this project aims to
develop this concept through the examination of intermetallic systems designed
to contain inherent tensions between variants on simple close-packing (SCP) and
tetrahedra-based packing (TCP). Intermetallic systems will be studied with solid
state synthesis aimed at the discovery of new phases, the structural analysis of
these new phases, and electronic structure calculations. The theoretical efforts
will include the development of theoretical tools designed for the detection and
analysis of competing chemical bonding types. These theoretical tools will be
based on the Moments Method applied to Hückel calculations calibrated against
Density Functional Theory (DFT) results. In parallel, an education plan will be
pursued involving the creation of the Solid State Chemistry Web Resource Library
as part of the National Science Digital Library, as well as the development of
materials for this library.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Intermetallic phases form a broad family of compounds of
immense importance to materials science. They adopt a diverse array of crystal
structures that has yet to be accounted for with chemical bonding concepts. The
absence of a theoretical framework for understanding and predicting the
preferred crystal structures of these phases is a limiting factor in the design
of new metallic materials with useful properties for hydrogen storage,
catalysis, and superconductivity. In this SSMC/DMR-supported project, a joint
theoretical and experiment approach is taken to develop understanding the
driving forces underlying the crystal structures of these phases, and to gain
some degree of control over these structures. The approach draws a common theme
that has been perceived in some of the most complex intermetallic crystal
structures: structural complexity can be linked to a tension between mutually
exclusive bonding types coexisting in the same phase. In this project, new
compounds will be sought out by inducing such tension through the selection of
combinations of elements with inherent conflicts in the preferred types of
chemical bonding and atomic packing. This approach to the design of new
intermetallic structures has the potential of facilitating the development of
new alloys for a wide range of applications. Several of the compounds to be
investigated are also anticipated to have useful materials properties for
hydrogen storage and superconductivity. The educational and social impacts of
this work will also be considerable: the project will include the creation of
the Solid State Chemistry Web Resource Library, a repository of educational
materials for chemistry teachers and instructors interested in including current
topics in materials science in their classes. The project will promote diversity
in science through the participation of members of underrepresented groups.