* 0955085
* PECASE:  Developmental Engineering:  An Examination of Early Learning Experiences as Antecedents of Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Demetra Evangelou, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

This engineering education research CAREER award to Purdue University will
examine early childhood precursors to engineering thinking in children between
the ages of 3 and 5. This novel and comprehensive research in developmental
engineering has three phases which build on each other and integrate research
and education goals. This effort will investigate how young children perceive
and learn about the engineered world, and then will use these results to find
appropriate ways to integrate engineering concepts into early childhood
education and support of young children's discovery. The third phase will focus
on transformation of teacher education to include developmental engineering
pedagogy in classroom practice. Two different environments have been selected
for this study, a head start center and a university child development
laboratory classroom, to insure participation from a diverse population of
students. This research will advance understanding of fundamental issues related
to how young children start to think about and learn about engineering concepts.
Choices that determine education and career paths begin to accumulate from a
very early age, and this work will result in a much broader student population
with stronger STEM preparation. Over the long term this can increase the number
and diversity of engineering professionals needed to fill engineering jobs.