* 0955071
* CAREER: Unraveling Molecular Mechanisms of Biomineralization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Hendrik Heinz, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2015
* USD 430,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational research
and education to advance the fundamental understanding of biomineralization
processes, with an emphasis on silica and hydroxyapatite assembly in the
presence of short proteins in aqueous solution. This includes quantum-mechanical
calculations, the development of state-of-the-art force fields, coarse-grain
models, and understanding experimental observations at the molecular scale to
unravel interactions which enable and control the formation and properties of
biominerals, bone, and teeth. Knowledge of these molecular-scale interactions
will guide in the synthesis of specific biological templates such as peptides
and small proteins to assemble precursors into minerals of desired shape and
properties. Potential applications include new separation media and catalyst
supports, artificial bone and dental materials, and molecular therapeutics for
removal of mineral deposits in atherosclerosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will address current difficulties in understanding the specific binding
of biomolecules to inorganic surfaces. Accurate molecular models will be made
available to investigate such interfaces at length scales of 10 nanometers and
time scales exceeding 10 nanoseconds in full atomic resolution. Specifically,
methodology development includes: (1) force fields for silica Q2, Q3, and Q4
surfaces and various ratios between silanol and siloxide groups which
quantitatively reproduce surface and interface tensions measured in experiment,
(2) similarly accurate force fields for hydroxyapatite and fluoroapatite, (3)
equilibration algorithms and analysis tools for the simulation of non-covalent
self-assembly of nanostructures of different morphology, (4) the development of
multiscale simulation approaches from ab-initio to coarse-grain models and
bioinformatics approaches. Force field development will rely on previously
developed methods which enable one order of magnitude more accurate computations
of interfacial thermodynamic properties compared to earlier models. Results of
molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, and bioinformatics methods will be related to
experimental data by collaborators to understand concentration- and chemistry-
dependent changes in self-assembly and growth of nanostructures. An important
goal of this research is to advance the theory of biological self-assembly and
biomineralization with an aim toward synthesis and characterization of novel
biomaterials through collaborations with
experimentalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activities of this CAREER
award include training graduate and undergraduate students, as well as new
course development in computational materials science. Related STEM concepts
will also be introduced to High School students through hands-on projects at the
University of Akron in the labs of several researchers as part of the Advanced
Placement chemistry program. An Annual Engineering Career Day will be organized
at the University of Akron, including presentations and interactive sessions
across several engineering disciplines to introduce High School students to
intellectual challenges and career opportunities in engineering. High School
teachers will be engaged in these activities in collaboration with the
University of Akron. The PI will also organize the first two rounds of the US
National Chemistry Olympiad for High School students every year which covers
participation from 72 High Schools in a three-County region around Akron,
Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports computational research and education to advance the fundamental
understanding of the creation of biological mineral structures such as diatoms,
seashells, bone, and teeth. This is a common process in nature for the synthesis
of structural and highly functional materials under environmentally friendly
conditions. The PI will use theoretical models and computation to gain insight
into the formation of complex biominerals, bone, and teeth and to guide the
synthesis of materials that mimic those created by living organisms. Potential
applications include materials for orthopedics, and molecular therapeutics for
atherosclerosis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activities of this CAREER
award include training graduate and undergraduate students, as well as new
course development in computational materials science. Related STEM concepts
will also be introduced to High School students through hands-on projects at the
University of Akron in the labs of several researchers as part of the Advanced
Placement chemistry program. An Annual Engineering Career Day will be organized
at the University of Akron, including presentations and interactive sessions
across several engineering disciplines to introduce High School students to
intellectual challenges and career opportunities in engineering. High School
teachers will be engaged in these activities in collaboration with the
University of Akron. The PI will also organize the first two rounds of the US
National Chemistry Olympiad for High School students every year which covers
participation from 72 High Schools in a three-County region around Akron, Ohio.