* 0955471
* CAREER: Black Cobalt Oxide Nanowire Arrays: Synthesis, Properties, and Energy Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2015
* Yiying Wu, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 01/31/2015
* USD 590,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The objective of this CAREER project supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry (SSMC) program in DMR is to investigate the fundamental properties of
Co3O4 nanowire arrays and their applications for efficient solar energy
harvesting and conversion. Co3O4 is an exciting material for energy &
environmental science. It has one of the highest turnover frequencies for the
oxidation of water. It is a high-capacity anode material for Li-ion batteries.
Black cobalt oxide is also one of the most promising materials for high-
temperature solar selective absorbers. Nanowire arrays have the structural
advantages of large surface area, enhanced light absorption, and efficient
separation and collection of photo-excited charge carriers over thin film or
bulk counterparts. The PI's group has recently discovered a facile method for
growing mesoporous single-crystalline Co3O4 nanowire arrays and demonstrated
their superior performance as an anode in Li-ion batteries. This project is to
investigate their fundamental growth mechanism, study their basic electrical,
optical and catalytic properties and explore their applications for the oxygen
evolution reaction, photoelectrochemical cells, and solar selective absorbers.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Cobalt oxide is an exciting and versatile material for
solar energy harvesting and storage. This project is focused on understanding
the chemistry of cobalt oxide nanowire arrays, which is expected to open up
substantial opportunities in splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen molecules,
as well as converting solar energy into heat. This project also involves
integrating the PI's research interests in energy materials with the educational
goal of building a strong multi-tiered energy education program. For example,
the PI will integrate the research on solar selective absorbers with hands-on
activities of building solar cookers for elementary and middle school teachers
and students. Other activities consist of: (1) developing a new freshman seminar
class in sustainable energy technologies, (2) modifying the existing general
chemistry curriculum, (3) developing research modules for the Ohio Consortium
for Undergraduate Research: Research Experience to Enhance Learning (OCUR-REEL),
and (4) recruiting minority and women undergraduate students to take part in
research on energy materials. Through these activities, the PI hopes to build a
solid education program on energy & environmental science, which is vital for
the sustainable development of our society.