* 0955716
* CAREER:Comparative Osteohistology: Exploring Microstructural Signatures of Environmental Stress in Modern and Fossil Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Kristina Curry Rogers, Macalester College
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 06/30/2017
* USD 571,209.00

Bone tissue is commonly used to reconstruct life histories of fossil
vertebrates, but our understanding of bone histology is limited by a lack of
baseline data that test the relationships between bone microstructure and
biology in living animals. In order to clarify the relationships between bone
microstructure and the controlling parameters of phylogeny and environment, I
propose a study that documents histological variation (1) within single
skeletons; (2) among vertebrate taxa; and (3) across distinctive habitats.
Drought assemblages are the focal point of the study for several reasons. First,
modern systems indicate that drought and its attendant hardships leave a
signature in vertebrate hard tissues. Moreover, there is strong evidence that
drought generates bonebeds in the vertebrate fossil record that constitute the
archive of life history variation in ancient populations. The PI will first
compare the bone tissue of vertebrates inhabiting the drought-prone ecosystem of
Hwange National Park in Zimbabwe with a sample of vertebrates derived from
captivity and held in museum collections. Secondly, she will pursue similar
questions and methods as she investigates fossil vertebrate assemblages from
similar environmental contexts in the Late Cretaceous of Montana and Madagascar.
This research takes the first necessary step toward ground-truthing the bone
histological signals across vertebrate groups, environments, and time, and will
provide a baseline appreciation of bone histological responses to ecological
stress among taxonomic groups, body sizes, and even within single skeletons.
Ultimately, this study will have far-reaching implications for paleobiologists
and neontologists who use bone tissue to explore both modern and ancient
biological systems. The research component of this project is tightly integrated
with an educational outreach component that: 1) incorporates the research into
courses she teaches, including development of a new course that focuses
specifically on data collection and analysis in collaboration with Macalester
College undergraduates; 2) initiates domestic and international research with
~15 undergraduate students over the 5 years of the project; 3) connects 2
undergraduate students per year to academic enrichment programs aimed at under-
resourced K-12 minority students in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metro area; and 4)
creates K-12 curriculum tied to Minnesota Science Standards through
collaboration with undergraduates, public school teachers, and the Bell Museum
of Natural History.