* 0955444
* CAREER: A New Direction into Atmospheric Near-Surface Transport for Weak-Wind Conditions in Plant Canopies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Christoph Thomas, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 08/31/2015
* USD 665,707.00

Air exchange between forests and the lower atmosphere plays an important role in
the transport of heat, moisture, momentum and trace gases between the ground
surface and the atmosphere, thereby directly impacting human life and the
environment. Much remains to be learned about the mechanisms of air exchange
within the forest canopy layer, and its interaction with the overlying deeper
atmospheric boundary layer. The generally weak nature of subcanopy winds and
mechanical barrier presented by the network of tree branches forming the canopy
render conceptual frameworks for turbulent transfer (such as commonly applied
similarity theories) inadequate. The common generation of turbulence by shear on
a variety of time scales, poor exchange between the subcanopy and above-canopy
air, and short-circuiting of the energy cascade are not included in similarity
theory that forms the basis for turbulent fluxes in models. Moreover, ubiquitous
background "submesoscale" motions with spatial scales from tens of meters to
several kilometers become important and can lead to unpredictable sudden wind
direction changes, intermittent mixing, and non-equilibrium turbulence. No
current physical concept describes the nature of these motions. Cases of weak
airflow in concert with limited vertical mixing can result in high
concentrations of contaminants near the surface.

Intellectual merit: New field observations will be collected and analyzed at
various contrasting sites to generalize findings with the objective to:

i) identify forcing mechanisms of submesoscale motions, ii) evaluate the impact
of plant canopies of different overstory density on the wind, temperature, and
humidity fields, and iii) improve predictors for mixing in plant canopies that
incorporate the important physical mechanisms.

These investigations are key steps toward the long-term goal to develop a novel
improved framework to describe the flow and resulting transport under weak-wind
conditions for a range of overstory density and stratification. Observations
will be made with a unique combination of new and standard techniques, including
optical fiber measurement of temperature structure, acoustic remote sensing,
ultrasonic anemometers, and laser-illuminated flow visualizations. The research
will be integrated with educational activities in the classroom. A new graduate-
level field course will be developed and taught for students from several
disciplines. Both classroom and field activities will help spark the students'
curiosity and interest to better understand interactions between the lower
atmosphere and the land surface. The curricula will be enriched by connecting
theoretical concepts with hands-on research experience based on access to state-
of-the-art instrumentation.

Broader Impacts: The novel framework and new analysis techniques will lead to
improved formulations of turbulent fluxes applicable in non-ideal boundary layer
conditions. These generalized formulations will be designed for use in regional
and large-scale models, as well as dispersion and diffusion models. A set of
practical recommendations will be developed for the applied flux community to
reduce uncertainties in scalar budgets and predictions of water availability.
Two graduate students will be trained in theoretical and observational boundary
layer meteorology. This skill set is in high demand and demand likely will grow
if/when monitoring of greenhouse gases becomes mandatory. The hands-on field
education will foster critical thinking, improve retention of concepts, and help
many students to reach technical proficiency. One Oregon K-12 high school
teacher will be actively involved in field research and data analysis by
partnering with the Oregon Natural Resources Education program at Oregon State
University. This teacher's involvement will be leveraged to reach large numbers
of K-12 students in addition to the hundreds of students directly connected to
the participating teacher. Shared interests in air movement across the forested
landscape will stimulate an exchange of information with the Willamette National
Forest personnel.