* 0955260
* CAREER: Large-Scale Computational Neuroimaging of Brain Electrical Activity
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Lei Ding, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Current EEG/MEG based neuroimaging technologies receive limited attentions in
functional neuroimaging because their reliable performances have not been
successfully demonstrated in sophisticated brain tasks. The need for more
reliable, efficient, innovative EEG/MEG neuroimaging technologies that have high
spatial and temporal resolutions is urgent. The goal of proposed research is to
advance functional neuroimaging technologies in studying human brain functions,
via integrating novel techniques from different disciplines, i.e. multi-
resolution mathematic models, large-scale computation, advanced signal and image
processing, and high-end measurement devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research consists of applying the
well-established L-1 norm regularization technique to a different application
domain, namely EEG/MEG image analysis. The problem of image analysis is an
undetermined problem, and as such some form of regularization is required. The
traditional approach is to apply L-2 norm minimization, which is a valid method
when measurement errors are Gaussian random variables. However, when the
measurement errors are exponentially distributed, it is more meaningful to use
L-1 norm minimization. Moreover, the L-1 optimal solution is supported on a
finite (usually small) number of data points, thus naturally taking advantage of
the sparse nature of the optimization problem. The novelty of the proposed
research is the investigation of sparsity inducing models of neural behavior. In
the case of neuro-imaging, it is known from biological factors that during any
one millisecond interval, only a tiny fraction of the neurons in the brain
"fire". The proposed research therefore has the potential to identify the
parameters that describe this behavior. As partial evidence of this, the PI has
obtained some preliminary results based on synthetic data, when the correct
answer is known, and the results are encouraging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate novel problem-solving
strategies for scientific problems using advanced engineering principles, and to
clinical practice for neurological patients through the potential for reduction
in loss of life, job, and income. By incorporating authentic learning education
activities, we will broaden the participation of all levels of students, K-12
teachers, and other educators, in biomedical research and research educations.