* 0955816
* INTEROP--Spatial Ontology Community of Practice: an Interdisciplinary Network to Support Geospatial Data Sharing, Integration, and Interoperability
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Mike Dean, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 08/31/2014
* USD 733,142.00

Award: 0955816 PI: Nancy Weigand Project Title: Spatial Ontology Community of
Practice: an Interdisciplinary Network to Support Geospatial Data Sharing,
Integration and Interoperability (INTEROP)

Geospatial data, which describe location information for geographic features,
are pervasive across many disciplines and fundamental for diverse applications,
such as economic development, natural resources, environmental protection, and
emergency response. But, re-using geospatial data remains difficult because of
the heterogeneity. Although progress has been made by initiatives such as the
National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) and Geospatial One-Stop to
distribute data, it is now necessary to address issues of standards
harmonization and agreement on the meanings of relevant concepts from diverse
data sets due to the use of different community views. Semantic interoperability
has been recognized as a stumbling block to collaboration needed by research
communities. As a solution, well designed, formal ontologies, relying on
agreements between communities on unambiguous representation of concepts and
relationships for a given problem area, can be used as an analytic tool to
bridge community gaps. Unfortunately, many communities lack the expertise to
develop, test, and disseminate such ontologies on their own, and, further,
common ontologies require agreement across a range of communities. The purpose
of this Network is to create such opportunities for the geospatial community and
extend the results to related communities. The Network can be considered as an
umbrella over other more specific domains linked through the Network. The
Network is based on an existing Spatial Ontology Community of Practice (SOCoP)
network that already has a core group of active participants from academia,
government, and industry. Mechanisms for the Network include an on-line
collaboration environment, a repository for geospatial ontologies with tools;
educational and participatory workshops for a broad geospatial community to
solicit input on use cases, smaller working group sessions on one or two chosen
domains to collaborate on developing ontologies that work across use cases, and
interactions with standards groups for formal publishing of ontologies,
demonstrations, and research activities. The SOCoP INTEROP network will also
provide training and outreach in cross-area standards, data-sharing, and
information management in scientific and local communities by demonstrating the
power of cooperative modeling of semantics. An educational component on
geospatial ontologies will also be developed. The project will contribute to a
model to incorporate semantics into the next phase of the National Spatial Data
Infrastructure