* 0955098
* CAREER:  Political Institutions and the Distribution of Public Resources
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Ebonya Washington, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 02/28/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Forty-five years ago Blacks who tried to exercise their right to vote might have
met with violence. Today, a Black man is president. In forty years, Blacks have
made great progress in political representation in elected offices at all
levels. While the voting record of representatives of varying races has been
examined repeatedly, there is little evidence on whether increased Black
representation results in an increasing flow of public resources to Black
communities. More generally, there is a dearth of rigorous research on how
political institutions impact the distribution of public goods across
communities. This research project consists of three studies to address this
hole in the literature and to begin to disseminate findings, beyond the usual
scholarly outlets, through an interdisciplinary undergraduate course and policy
briefs for stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three projects derive their
intellectual merit from their tie to the political economy literature. They
derive their broader impacts from their implications for public policy. The
first project aims to describe the pattern of the distribution of public
resources across neighborhoods over time. By collecting 40 years of detailed
data on the placement of pools, fire stations, and other public goods in the
Philadelphia, this study will provide the first descriptive evidence on question
such as: 1) Do the same neighborhoods continue to "win" a larger share of
political resources over time 2) How does the distribution of goods across
neighborhoods of varying racial compositions change as the race of the elected
officials varies?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project exploits a 1982
amendment to the Voting Rights Act which exogenously increased the number of
Blacks in Congress to identify whether there is a causal link between
representative race and the distribution of resources across communities. The
work will speak to the literature on how identity shapes political behavior,
using an arguably more important and more tangible outcome than has been used in
previous work. The work is also relevant to the decennial discussion on how to
draw districts for federal and state legislatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
final project will also inform the redistricting debate. While congressional
districts must contain roughly equal numbers of United States residents, they
are not designed to equilibrate the number of eligible voters. This distinction
is particularly important when it comes to the non-voting incarcerated
population. While the majority of these non-voting prisoners are Black and hail
from urban areas, the majority of prisons are increasingly located in
predominately White rural counties. Thus if we consider the ratio of
representatives to eligible voters, these largely rural prison counties are
overrepresented relative to the average county. In this context, the final study
tests the theoretical supposition that as the ratio of constituents to
representatives rises, the resources that the representative brings home to the
district falls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts will come from integrating
these findings into the principal investigator's public finance and political
economy courses. In addition, these studies at the intersection of economics and
political science will form the basis of a new undergraduate course in Ethics,
Politics and Economics, an interdisciplinary major for which the principal
investigator serves on the advisory board. As it is important to educate not
only the leaders of tomorrow, but also those who make redistricting decisions
today, the principal investigator will further use her journalistic training to
author policy briefs for dissemination to stakeholders.