* 0955213
* CAREER: Cooperative Child Rearing and Health among Central African Foragers and Farmers
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2017
* Courtney Meehan, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 515,378.00

With the support of a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Award, Dr.
Courtney Meehan (Washington State University) will undertake a five-year cross-
cultural study of the effects of cooperative childcare on child development and
health. Because of the intensity and length of human child dependency and the
shortness of human birth intervals, human mothers often must provide for
multiple dependent children simultaneously. Thus it is likely that throughout
evolutionary history, non-maternal care has been necessary for successful
reproduction. However, despite recent interest in cooperative childrearing and
its implications for the evolution of human childhood and family organization,
few studies yet capture the complexity of human childrearing systems. To fill
this gap, Meehan will conduct longitudinal field research in two contrasting
social groups to test the hypotheses that human childrearing systems are more
flexible than described by previous researchers; that multiple non-maternal
individuals are sensitive to and respond to child needs; and that the
involvement of nonmaternal caretakers is necessary for successful child
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field research will be conducted in the
Central African Republic among Aka forest foragers and Ngandu farmers. To
document children's social networks and non-maternal investment, she and her
team will collect quantitative behavioral observations of children and maternal
resource exchanges. To explore the effects of non-maternal involvement, they
will perform child and family wellness exams to track family health and child
development over the five-year period. These quantitative data will be
complemented with ethnographic investigations to document cultural variation in
child development and child rearing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
important because it will provide data to explore the evolutionary implications
of cooperative childrearing for human childhood and families, and will
contribute substantially to our understanding of cross-cultural patterns of
childhood, and child growth and development, research areas that continue to be
dominated by data on Western societies. This project is designed to assess the
breadth, diversity, and dynamic nature of childrearing systems. In addition,
this project has a significant educational component that will train a diverse
body of graduate and undergraduate students. Educational activities include
training in the classroom and lab, outreach to underrepresented and
undergraduate students, experiential student training in the field, and active
student-researcher collaboration. Funding this research also fosters
international capacity building and collaboration with students and researchers
at the University of Bangui in the Central African Republic.