* 0955214
* CAREER: Predicting Nanoparticle Targeted Delivery Efficacy in Vascular Environment through Multiscale Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Yaling Liu, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 04/30/2011
* USD 403,704.00

0955214&lt;br/&gt;Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticulate systems
have been widely used in diagnostic imaging and targeted therapeutic
applications in recent years. One of the major challenges in nanomedicine is to
improve particle selectivity and adhesion efficiency under complex vascular flow
conditions. To deliver nanomedicine directly to the desired diseased tissue
while minimizing deposition/uptake by healthy tissues along the pathway, the
design of nanoparticle need to be considered together with the diseased region's
physical parameters (e.g. vascular diameter, blood flow rate, surface area,
etc). The goal of the proposed career development strategy is to uncover the
adhesion dynamics of nanoparticles and predict targeted delivery efficacy under
complex vascular environment through a multiscale modeling approach. In pursue
of this goal, a 3D multiscale model of nanoparticle transport, dispersion, and
adhesion dynamics will be developed. Such model will be used to predict particle
delivery efficacy in idealized vascular networks and vasculatures reconstructed
from scanned images. A fully integrated multiscale model, linking different
functional biological scales, imaging and physical system, will allow system
level nanomedicine evaluation for the first time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed multiscale simulation based method will provide a rigorous mathematical
model of nanoparticle adhesion dynamics under complex vascular environment.
Results of this work will pave the way toward new nanomedicine design and dosage
choice guidances for targeted drug delivery. The proposed interdisciplinary
research compliments the PI?s educational goals by integrating research into
educational and outreach activities such as graduate and undergraduate courses
and engineering summer camps. An interactive website hosting graduate student's
research projects will be created to allow high-school students to learn bio-
nanotechnology online. The education plan will increase the awareness among high
school teachers and students of the potential biomedical applications of
nanotechnology, to advance understanding of nano-bio interfacial phenomena for
students at all levels, and to increase minority participation in science and
engineering.