* 0955484
* CAREER: Quantum Tunneling in Superconducting and Ferromagnetic Nanoscale Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,07/31/2015
* Andrey Rogachev, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 550,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** &lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early CAREER award
supports a project with an objective to develop detailed understanding of
quantum phenomena in one-dimensional (1D) superconducting wires and in one and
zero-dimensional ferromagnetic structures. The project is directly motivated by
prospects of incorporating new physics that emerges at the nanoscale into the
design of better, more functional materials and devices. Specifically, the
unique ability of one-dimensional superconductors to sustain high magnetic
fields could be utilized in the design of more compact superconducting magnets
and would result in more efficient transmission and distribution of electric
power. Detailed understanding of the physics of 1D-superconductors could provide
new methods of controlling and, in fact, enhancing superconductivity at the
nanoscale, for example by coupling to a dissipative environment. The outcome of
the study on the ferromagnetic structures may influence practical applications
in magnetic recording. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in
an exciting multi-disciplinary research that covers physics, material sciences,
nanotechnology and electrical engineering. Small projects will be also offered
to local high school science teachers and high school students who will be
involved in summer research on magnetism. A new undergraduate course ?Physics
Core of Modern Technology and Life Science? will be developed. The course will
reinforce the core knowledge of electromagnetism, quantum mechanics and
statistical mechanics with carefully selected examples of technologically
important devices and structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early CAREER award supports a project with
an objective to develop detailed understanding of quantum phenomena in one-
dimensional superconducting wires and in one and zero-dimensional ferromagnetic
structures. The project is directly motivated by prospects of incorporating new
physics that emerges at the nanoscale into the design of better, more functional
materials and devices. The mechanism of superconductor-insulator transition in
1D nanowires will be investigated by continuously driving the transition across
the critical regime with a magnetic field. A high sampling-rate technique for
detection of individual phase slips will be developed and temporal correlations
between thermal and quantum phase slips will be studied. The effect of
dissipation on quantum phase slips will be elucidated by varying the
electromagnetic environment of a wire. A series of homogeneous ferromagnetic
nanowires will be fabricated by depositing cobalt, permalloy and rare earth
magnetic alloys on top of suspended insulated carbon nanotubes. The wires will
be used to test properties of extremely constrained magnetic domain walls. Low
temperature transport measurements will be carried out in search for quantum
nucleation and quantum depinning of domain walls in these wires. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in an exciting multi-disciplinary
research that covers physics, material sciences, nanotechnology and electrical
engineering. Small projects will be also offered to local high school science
teachers and high school students who will be involved in summer research on
magnetism. A new undergraduate course will reinforce the core knowledge of
electromagnetism, quantum mechanics and statistical mechanics with carefully
selected examples of technologically important devices and structures.