* 0955621
* CAREER: Microstructure of Jammed Particulate Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Jasna Brujic, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2016
* USD 550,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This Faculty Early Career Award supports a
project with a goal of understanding the structure and dynamics of randomly
packed particles. At a given density, particulate systems pack into a
mechanically stable and amorphous jammed state whose geometry is hidden from
view. This project will therefore employ transparent, fluorescent emulsions (a
suspension of droplets of one liquid in another) to look through the packing of
the droplets in 3D using a special type of microscope called a confocal
microscope. The resulting geometry of the packing will then test the principles
of the random organization of the particles as a function of parameters, such as
the pressure, the protocol by which the packing is created, the distribution of
sizes of the particles and the interaction between the particles. This study
aims to lead the way to a novel theoretical understanding of packing inspired by
experimental data. This problem is of relevance to fundamental research and to
many industries, ranging from oil extraction through porous rocks, to grain
storage in silos and the compaction of pharmaceutical powders into tablets. The
integration of the research in the laboratory and the science education in the
New York area and beyond will take place on a new mobile facility called the
Biobus. Since its start in 2007, the BioBus has reached over 10,000 students at
more than 30 different minority-serving institutions and has received an
extremely positive response from students, teachers, and the media alike.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This Faculty Early Career Award funds a project with
a goal of developing an understanding of random packing on the microscopic
scale. A confocal microscope will be employed to study jammed particulate
matter, using an emulsion system. The study of jammed materials will then be
extended to their dynamic rheological and micromechanical properties. Having
experimental access to the forces between individual particles and their
rearrangement, the microscopic mechanisms of stress relaxation and energy
dissipation in these systems will be assessed. Understanding packed particulate
materials with statistical models, would not only impact industrial processes,
such as oil drilling or grain storage, but also provide broad insight into the
behavior of complex systems experiencing structural arrest. Along with training
high-school, undergraduate and graduate students who participate in the research
in the area of soft-condensed matter physics, the educational plan involves K-12
outreach through a novel science education facility called the Biobus. The
mobile lab provides school students with a dynamic, hands-on science curriculum:
one that fosters exploration of the natural world, which will help develop the
next generation of scientists.