* 0955873
* CAREER: Engineering Biomimetic Interfaces with Dual Chemical-Mechanical Gradients to Study Cell Migration
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2017
* Padmavathy Rajagopalan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2017
* USD 451,379.00

This Career award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research to Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University is to study cell
migration, specifically to understand how different and potentially conflicting
signals that are processed by the cell in terms of direction and extent of its
motion. Since in vivo systems are inherently complex, this research program will
aim to develop a class of engineered interfaces that will be used as biomimetic
substrates to study cell migration. The overall goals of this project are to
design polymeric interfaces that exhibit dual and opposing chemical and
mechanical gradients, and to monitor cellular locomotion and responsiveness on
these substrates. The specific scientific goals of the project are: a) to
utilize a unique and versatile method to introduce multiple biomimetic
interfaces on a single substrate; b) to conduct cell migration studies; c) to
measure the elasticity of live cells; and d) to study how cells remodel the
substrate. Together, these studies are expected to reveal insights into the
simultaneous effects of chemical and mechanical stimuli on cellular response.
The educational component of this CAREER award seamlessly weaves concepts in
biomaterials research into education and outreach. The PI will introduce a week-
long laboratory module for ethnically diverse female students that focuses on
cell-biomaterial interactions. Through this activity, these students would gain
valuable insights into formulating a scientific problem, understanding how to
design and conduct new experiments and analyzing data from these
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The movement of cells (cell migration) is an
extremely important biological phenomenon because of its critical role in
developmental biology, tissue regeneration, cancer metastasis, and wound
healing. Multiple stimuli can modulate and direct cell migration. This Faculty
Early CAREER project will focus on developing an understanding how different and
potentially conflicting signals are processed by a cell in order for it to make
a decision in the directionality and extent of motion. The education component
of this project seamlessly weaves concepts in biomaterials research into
education and outreach. The PI will introduce a week-long laboratory module for
ethnically diverse female students that focuses on cell-biomaterial
interactions. Through this module, these students are expected to gain valuable
hands-on experience on different aspects of laboratory research such as
formulating a scientific problem, designing an experiment, conducting
experiments, and analyzing data from these experiments.