* 0955225
* CAREER: Ecosystem Change in Forests and Grasslands from Decades to Millennia: A Retrospective Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2017
* Kendra McLauchlan, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2017
* USD 447,382.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION ABSTRACT

BCS - 0955225 Kendra K. McLauchlan Kansas State University

The nitrogen (N) cycle is one of the planet's most critical biogeochemical
cycles because N can potentially both fertilize and harm ecosystems. However,
the long-term patterns of N availability in forest and grassland ecosystems are
poorly understood, limiting our ability both to understand recent changes in
ecosystem function and to predict future functioning. This research project will
investigate changes in nutrient cycles at three sites in mid-North America in
great detail during the Holocene (past 10,000 years). The research will examine
contrasts in vegetation history among three sites to reconstruct past changes in
N cycling and other ecosystem properties. In particular, the researchers will
obtain past records that measure changes that take 10, 100, 1,000, and 10,000
years at three sites: one prairie site, one forest site, and one site that
transitioned between forest and prairie during the Holocene. At each site, the
researchers will measure several things (including stable N and carbon isotopes,
pollen, charcoal, and selected elemental concentrations) in sediment cores taken
from small lakes. Additionally, both histories in wood from living trees in the
forested watersheds and a regional record of foliar chemistry from leaves
preserved in herbaria near the grassland site will be obtained. The project has
four main goals: 1) reconstruct the development of terrestrial N cycles over
Holocene timescales at multiple sites, 2) evaluate the relative roles of
vegetation, climate change, and disturbances as drivers of biogeochemical cycles
on timescales from decades to millennia, 3) improve interpretations of stable N
isotopes in sediment, wood, and leaf tissue on the landscape-scale, and 4)
formalize a set of techniques that can be used by other researchers to determine
if current human-caused changes to the global N cycle are increasing or
decreasing N availability.

The empirical records generated in this project will provide the first insights
on Holocene N cycling as well as allow evaluation of the relative impact of
human-caused N deposition on grassland and forested ecosystems in the 20th
century. The research will identify ecosystem characteristics that make systems
vulnerable or resistant to N pollution, particularly if the vegetation type
(grassland or forest) matters. It also provides policy-relevant understanding
regarding N as a potential pollutant whose deposition would be expensive to
regulate. The research provides a new perspective: the retrospective approach to
understanding modern global change, strengthening observational and experimental
approaches. The research will provide a clear picture of the role of history in
determining the effects of acute and chronic stressors on ecosystems, with
important implications for N emissions. In addition to the scientific advances,
the project will help train the next generation of scientists, including middle
school, undergraduate, and graduate students. Finally, research results will be
brought directly to the public by designing an exhibit and educational materials
at the Visitors Center at Itasca State Park, Minnesota, USA.