* 0955344
* RCN-UBE: Establishing an Ecological Research/Education Network at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2010,09/30/2016
* Jeffrey Simmons, Ohio Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* christopher meyer
* 09/30/2016
* USD 494,980.00

This award is supporting development of an integrated research/education network
among ecologists at primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs), with the goal
of enhancing the involvement of undergraduates in large-scale ecological and
environmental science research. Towards this goal, the network is 1) developing
collaborative research projects at regional to continental scales, with special
attention to the constraints of scientists with significant teaching
responsibilities; 2) designing those projects to maximize student engagement in
authentic science while maintaining a goal of generating publication-quality,
transformative data; 3) creating a continental-scale ecology course module that
will be team-taught by scientist-educators distributed across different PUIs,
using data from collaborative projects as a centerpiece; 4) enhancing the role
of PUI scientists and their students in existing and emerging ecological
research networks, such as the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON);
and 5) creating an online database of future and existing data sets collected
from the network of PUIs. The project aims to include any and all researchers at
PUIs that perform long-term ecological research with undergraduates, and that
have the potential to incorporate the network's research/education experiences
into their curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
research/education network is based in its potential to engage the considerable
intellectual and labor capital at PUI institutions to advance continental-scale
ecology, and to produce workable models for how PUIs can contribute to
continental science and develop vital and sustainable research programs through
collaboration. Consistent with the underlying premise that collaborative
research is a highly effective teaching tool, the network is providing
guidelines for creating rich ecological learning experiences based on this
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this network are inherent
in giving undergraduate students at PUIs greater access to authentic,
collaborative, large-scale research projects. By involving students in all
phases of these studies through both traditional teaching labs and independent
research, this network aims to further their ability to think across scales and
disciplines, enhance their sense of connections among sites, and broaden their
understanding of how ecological drivers vary over space and time. Students are
experiencing scientific collaboration first-hand through interactions with peers
and faculty with diverse expertise at a range of PUIs, as they work in teams to
address ecological questions. Additionally, the network is offering workshops
aimed at broadening participation of underrepresented groups in ecological
research with undergraduates, is encouraging PUI ecologists to engage in
existing ecological research networks, and is making its activities, datasets
and assessment results publically available via a website, workshops, and
presentations at annual meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
jointly by the Biological Sciences Directorate and the Division of Undergraduate
Education.