* 0955410
* CAREER: Bringing a dynamic, stochastic, and computational, understanding to subjective probabilities
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Timothy Pleskac, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 05/31/2015
* USD 510,443.00

We rely on the probability judgments of experts and laypeople every day. Space
shuttles are launched not only on the basis of weather forecasts, but also on an
engineer's subjective opinion that a part will or will not fail. Military
missions and political policies are put in place using intelligence analysts'
beliefs that an event will occur or has occurred. Without doubt the use of
probability judgments to make decisions makes the accuracy of subjective
probabilities of utmost importance. Indeed the accuracy of subjective
probabilities has been well studied in the cognitive and decision sciences. Yet,
an equally valuable aspect of subjective probabilities is the amount of time it
takes judges to formulate their estimates. Clearly, the time a judge takes to
make a probability judgment has external costs to both the judge and the
decision maker. Yet, little is known about the internal time course of
subjective probability judgments. Consequently, the impact these external costs
have on subjective probabilities and their accuracy is not known.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In this project the Principal Investigator pursues research examining
how variables external to the judge (e.g., time pressure; rewards and penalties)
and internal to the judge (e.g., attention and sequential effects) impact the
time course and accuracy of subjective probabilities. A general framework called
Judgment Field Theory will integrate how these internal and external variables
impact probability judgments. Moreover, the framework offers a cognitive account
of how different descriptions of the same event (e.g., Lance Armstrong will win
the race vs. Lance Armstrong won?t lose the race) change how judges evaluate the
likelihood of an event occurring and how this evaluation changes as a function
of time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research are three-
fold. First, the research will help in the development of methods to evaluate
the accuracy of subjective probabilities. These methods can ultimately be used
to improve the accuracy of judges. Second, the theoretical framework will be
used in the development of an undergraduate psychological methods course
curriculum that infuses a traditional methods course with techniques of
cognitive modeling. Finally, a broader impact is the outreach to and integration
of a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students into cognitive science
at MSU.