* 0955640
* CAREER: Hierarchical Representations for Visual Categorization and Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* David Freedman, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 06/30/2015
* USD 963,292.00

Humans and other advanced animals have an impressive capacity to recognize the
behavioral significance, or category membership, of a wide range of sensory
stimuli. This ability is critical, because it allows us to respond appropriately
to the continuous stream of stimuli and events that we encounter in our
interactions with the environment. Of course, we are not born with a built-in
library of meaningful categories, such as 'tables' and 'chairs,' that we are
pre-programmed to recognize. Instead, we learn to recognize the meaning of such
stimuli through experience. With National Science Foundation Funding, Dr. David
J. Freedman is carrying out studies whose goal is to understand how visual-
feature encoding in early visual processing areas is transformed into more
meaningful representations at more advanced neuronal processing stages in the
brain. The goals of the proposed studies are to compare neuronal representations
of visual-motion processing stages across a network of interconnected brain
areas in and around the parietal lobe during visual motion categorization tasks.
Specifically, one series of experiments compares neuronal responses in two
distinct interconnected regions of parietal cortex, the lateral and medial
interparietal areas, which are known to be more involved in visual and
somatosensory or motor processing, respectively. Activity in these two areas is
examined during a categorization task that requires motor decisions to be
executed in response to visual stimuli, allowing the relative roles of the two
areas in the decision making process to be determined. A second series of
experiments is comparing cortical activity in the lateral intraparietal and
prefrontal cortices during a novel visual categorization task in which subjects
learn multiple independent category rules and apply those rules flexibly and
dynamically to incoming visual stimuli. This study gives critical insights into
the contributions of frontal and parietal cortex to flexible rule-based
categorization. Together, these studies can yield important insights into how
learning influences the encoding of visual information and into the roles of
interconnected networks of parietal and frontal cortices in visual recognition
and decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While much is known about how the
brain processes simple sensory features (such as color, orientation, and
direction of motion), less is known about how the brain learns and represents
the meanings or category of stimuli. A greater understanding of visual learning
and categorization is critical for addressing a number of brain diseases and
conditions (e.g., stroke, Alzheimer's disease, attention deficit disorder, and
schizophrenia) that leave patients impaired in everyday tasks that require
visual learning, recognition, and/or evaluating and responding appropriately to
sensory information. Dr. Freedman's research is helping to guide the next
generation of treatments for these brain-based diseases and disorders by helping
to develop a detailed basic understanding of the brain mechanisms that underlie
learning, memory and recognition. These studies also have relevance for
understanding and addressing learning disabilities, such as attention deficit
disorder and dyslexia, which affect a substantial fraction of school age
children and young adults. A more detailed understanding of the basic brain
mechanisms underlying learning, memory and attention will likely give important
insights into the causes and potential treatments for disorders involving these
cognitive faculties.