* 0955259
* CAREER: Programming Mesenchymal Stem Cell Fate: An Integrated Research and Education Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Mariah Hahn, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2013
* USD 328,593.00

This Career award by the Biomaterials program in the Materials Research Division
to Texas Engineering Experimental Station, College Station is to advance
rational scaffold design for organ regeneration and to develop the next
generation of tissue engineers. These studies will be carried out with a
particular focus on guiding adult mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) differentiation.
Growth factors have long been recognized as potent drivers of MSC growth and
differentiation. However, recent studies have demonstrated that scaffold
stiffness can have a similar degree of influence on MSC differentiation. These
findings have opened up the possibility that MSC differentiation can be dictated
by tailoring scaffold material properties alone. A complex array of scaffold
properties is currently recognized to impact MSC lineage progression. The goal
of the proposed studies is to determine the relative influence of these various
scaffold properties on MSC differentiation using a novel biomaterial platform
based on collagen-mimetic proteins with programmable cell interaction sites.
Understanding the dominant scaffold properties in terms of driving specific MSC
differentiation will allow focus on optimizing this narrowed scaffold property
set when designing scaffolds for organ regeneration. Successful completion of
the proposed work is expected to significantly advance the rapid design of
tissue scaffolds, leading to improved treatments for organ damage. The proposed
education activities focus on increasing the interest and confidence of
minorities and young women in STEM at critical periods during which STEM
confidence often decreases. These activities include exposing middle school,
high school, and undergraduate students to biomaterials and to associated
cutting-edge scientific techniques and will advance the next generation of
tissue engineers by promoting the increased representation of traditionally
underrepresented groups in high-level STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tissue
engineering holds great promise for the treatment of patients with damaged
organs and generally involves combining cells with a biomaterial support. The
present proposal encompasses a set of integrated research and education
activities designed to dramatically advance biomaterial design for organ
regeneration and to develop the next generation of tissue engineers. MSCs are a
promising patient-derived cell source that can be induced to differentiate into
a range of cell types. However, the ability to control MSC differentiation at a
level required for organ regeneration has not yet been achieved. A complex array
of biomaterial factors are known to impact MSC differentiation. The goal of the
proposed studies is to identify the dominant biomaterial factors in terms of
guiding specific MSC differentiation. Understanding the dominant biomaterial
influences on MSC differentiation will allow focus on optimizing subset of
factors, rather than a broad range of potential factors, when designing
biomaterials for organ regeneration. The proposed education plan includes middle
school, high school, and undergraduate outreach. The proposed outreach
activities focus on increasing the interest and activities of minorities and
young women in STEM related topics. The education plan was developed in close
consultation with education experts and will advance the next generation of
tissue engineers by promoting the increased representation of traditionally
underrepresented groups in high-level STEM careers.