* 0955089
* Assessment of Fifteen Nanotechnology Science and Engineering Centers? (NSECs) Outcomes and Impacts: Their contribution to NNI Objectives and Goals
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Philip Shapira, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 03/31/2011
* USD 199,987.00

Nanoscience and nanengineering ("nano") R&amp;D is extraordinarily active and
diverse and much of it conducted in the context of research centers. These are
designed to facilitate effective research knowledge transfer which in turn
depends on understanding mechanisms that facilitate cross-disciplinary
networking and the integration of diverse fields of knowledge relevant to
application. Research centers constitute a key strategy in the National
Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI)to pool resources, facilitate interdisciplinary
research and enable links with industry to accelerate technology transfer and
industry applications of nanotechnology results (NSET 2007). Research centers
play a role in acheiving all four goals of hte NNI strategic
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Need for Rapid: The stage in the program, with the
NNI approaching a decade of existence, makes it extremely important to
understand whether the vision for the field is unfolding as planned.
Specifically, we need to know the ways in which research centers shape the
direction of hte field both thematically, with other scientific and
technological results, amnd materially, with their conditributions to education
and infrastructure. In other words, how have you research centers actually
performed the role assigned to them in the NNI and what has their contribution
to the current state of affairs in nano been? The timing and criticality of the
assessment information provide grounds for this RAPID proposal and also point to
the broader impacts of this project. The project will focus only on the 15 NSECs
that have had a long enough cycle of funding to show impacts and will not make
specific recommendations related to funding individual centers. It will address
the programmatic level for future center
solicitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Nano centers have
produced outputs and outcomes over the period of their existence in the frame of
the NNI, such as papers, reports, collaborations with other research teams and
with industry, patents, citations, which have been tracked quantitatively.
However, nano studies have not produced consensus on the mechanisms and profiles
of centers in fostering interdisciplinarity, or how to integrate diverse fields
needed to move toward viable applications, or how to bolster research knowledge
diffusion or innovation, all of which underlie their outputs and are critical in
understanding their contribution to the goals and objectives of the policy. We
seek to advance the assessment of research centers' impacts and outcomes through
a mixed methods approach that will connect the bibliometric, statistical,
quantitative characterization of center activity with an in-depth, qualitative
analysis. The approach will be an explanatory sequential design that seeks to
enhance the interpretation of the results of a qualitative study with in-depth,
focused qualitative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The point of departure will
be the quantitative information on outputs and outcomes available from outgoing
tracking of center activity, previous reports and evaluations of NNI programs,
NNI data from FY2001 to FY2009, as available, and indicators of
interdisciplinarity and integration of knowledge derived from the published
record available in multiple publication and patent databases. Current nano
R&amp;D entails all stages form fundamental research through commerical
innovation. Consequently, cross-sector (academic-government-industry "triple
helix") interactions are important and intended by design in the NNI strategic
plan. Integration of research knowlege across nano specialties is vital, and we
simultaneously attend to convergence of nano with bio, cognitive, and
information sciences. Centers seek to facilitate integration of both
intellectual and social elements to spur knowledge generation and translate NNI
happen through their implementation of the new mode of knowledge production. In
this project, we address the critical need for a tailored design of the
assessment of their outcomes and impacts in this new field. NOTE: This project
does not include the ASU Center for Nanotechnology and Society nor any NSEC
addressing societal implications.