* 0955959
* CAREER: Deciphering Ionic Current Signatures of Polymer Transport through a Nanopore
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Aleksei Aksimentiev, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2016
* USD 425,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
computational and theoretical research and education on translocation of
polymers through nanopores. Nanopores are ubiquitous in nature and engineering.
Their functionality ranges from transport of solutes in and out of a living cell
to chemical and biological separation and drug delivery. This research program
investigates electric field-driven transport of a prototypical polymer DNA
molecule through biological and synthetic nanopores and accompanying changes in
co-passing ionic current used to characterize the transport by experiment.
Nanopore translocation experiments enable testing of physical models of diverse
nanoscale phenomena at the single-molecule level. They provide information about
nanoscale electrostatics and hydrodynamics, solvation and entropic forces,
selectro-osmotic effecs, atomic-scale friction, adhesion, and conformational
dynamics of biopolymers. The fundamental difficulty in interpretation of the
nanopore translocation experiments is that the microscopic processes of interest
are characterized indirectly, by measuring their influence on the nanopore
current. In order to more fully exploit the unprecedented sensitivity of
nanopore probes, a quantitative physical model is required to relate the
microscopic events in the nanopore to the measured ionic current.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to provide a comprehensive physical
description of polymer transport through biological and synthetic nanopores
through an innovative modeling method that combines all-atom molecular dynamics,
Brownian dynamics, and multiscale simulations. This method will preserve the
atomic-level information of the molecular dynamics method, while capitalizing on
the computational efficiently of the Brownian dynamics and multiscale methods.
The approach will exploit the thousandfold difference in the time scales of ion
and polymer transport. The process of DNA transport through a nanopore will be
characterized in statistical terms. The obtained ensemble of DNA conformations
will be used to compute the corresponding ionic current blockades. The final
step of the approach is to take into account the electro-kinetic effect that
couples the ionic current to the polymer conformation. The main difference of
this approach from the coarse-grained models that have been proposed to date is
in preserving the all-atom information about the structure of the solute and
nanopore and determining the ionic current blockade to the experimental
accuracy. Combined with experiment, such predictive capability will greatly
enhance utility of nanopores as tools to probe nanoscale systems and
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program could have direct impact
on nanopore applications in biosensing and nanotechnology, such as
instrumentation for personal genomics, nanofluidic electronics, and single
molecule manipulation. The educational activities will focus on developing a
laboratory course and lecture demonstrations for an undergraduate biological
physics course. Another major undertaking is transforming a graduate course
"Physics of Nanomachines," into a textbook, which will describe the physics of
nanoscale interactions that governs operation of miniature biological,
synthetic, and hybrid machines. One very specific objective of the program is to
recruit a minority student to carry out the research activities. The program
will provide the research community with modeling methods and tools implemented
by professional programmers in the popular Open Source programs, including a set
of self-contained tutorials containing all necessary instructions and examples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
computational and theoretical research and education to simulate long chain-like
molecules being pulled through tiny holes that have diameters the size of a
large molecule. Of particular interest are long chain-like molecules produced by
living organisms. These are often called biopolymers. For a brief moment, the
molecule is confined to the small volume defined by the tiny molecule-sized
hole, also known as a nanopore, and its properties can be examined section by
section. It is thought that through the process of pulling the biopolymer
through the tiny hole the shape and chemical makeup of the molecular string can
be determined. The PI will focus on developing a comprehensive physical
description of this process using novel computational modeling methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding that is gained could have
direct impact on applications in biosensing and nanotechnology, such as
sequencing DNA, future electronic devices, and single molecule manipulation. The
educational activities will focus on developing a laboratory course and lecture
demonstrations for an undergraduate biological physics course. Another major
undertaking is transforming a graduate course "Physics of Nanomachines," into a
textbook, which will describe the physics of interactions that governs operation
of miniature biological, synthetic, and hybrid machines. One very specific
objective of the program is to recruit a minority student to carry out the
research activities. The program will provide the research community with
modeling methods and tools implemented by professional programmers in the
popular Open Source programs, including a set of self-contained tutorials
containing all necessary instructions and examples.