* 0955805
* Collaborative Research: Extensin modules comprising self-assembling amphiphiles create scaffolds that nucleate cell wall formation: elucidation of roles and rules
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Maura Cannon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The plant cell wall is a self-assembling supramolecular structure of
interpenetrating carbohydrate polymers: cellulose, hemicellulose and pectin, and
a minor component of extensin proteins. Wall properties arise from correct self-
assembly but very little is known about how this occurs. It is known that one
(RSH) of the 20 different extensins in the model plant, Arabidopsis, is critical
for correct formation on new plant walls, and that this extensin has the
capacity to self-assemble to form a scaffold. Several lines of evidence suggest
that extensins provide templates on which other components organize themselves.
The central question here is how do extensins form scaffolds? Extensins are
highly repetitive glycopeptides of alternating hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino
acid motifs, with an abundance of the positively charged amino acids lysine and
histidine. Functionality of these extensin components will be tested using
synthetic genes to replace RSH in the rsh mutant. In addition to this genetic
study, purified RSH analogs and walls containing them will be characterized,
biochemically by isolation and characterization of wall peptides, including
cross-linking assays, and biophysically by imaging of analog self-assembly using
atomic force microscopy. The project also aims to identify plant and wall
differences with extensin analog sequences. Defining the molecular interactions
of extensins in the primary cell wall, and the precise roles of the conserved
peptide motifs, are highly relevant to understanding wall self-assembly, defense
responses and plant morphogenesis. As the most abundant biomass on earth, plant
cell walls contribute crucially to self-sustaining civilizations from shelter,
to food, fiber and fuel. A potential impact of this work is wall remodeling to
enable new and improved uses of plant cell wall, not least the production of
biofuels. Junior researchers including those with minority status will work as
part of a team crossing several scientific disciplines to solve this significant
biological problem.