* 0955241
* CAREER: Shear-induced Deformation and Nonlinear Rheology of Colloidal Gels
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2015
* Ali Mohraz, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 11/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

0955241&lt;br/&gt;Mohraz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal gels are
particulate materials with constrained dynamics and remarkable viscoelasticity,
and enjoy a diverse host of technological applications including ceramics,
catalyst supports, membranes, food products, and composites. The quiescent
microstructure and dynamics, linear viscoelasticity, and steady shear rheology
of these materials have received considerable attention, both theoretically and
experimentally. However, a quantitative picture of their microstructural
evolution during transient large strain deformations that are typical of their
processing conditions, and how it governs their nonlinear rheology, has remained
elusive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed CAREER program will use a combined
experimental/computational scheme to address how the nature of interparticle
interactions and the local structure of colloidal gels mediate their nonlinear
rheology and transient deformation under well defined macroscopic flow fields.
The model materials will be suspensions of fluorescent poly(methylmethacrylate)
microspheres suspended in density and index matching organic solvents, in which
gelation will be induced by the addition of a non adsorbing polymer. With this
model system, the strength and range of attractive interparticle interactions
can be controlled and systematically varied. The microstructural response of
weakly aggregating colloidal gels to macroscopically imposed nonlinear
deformation will be directly resolved in 3D, and with single particle
resolution, by quantitative confocal laser scanning microscopy (QCLSM). Local
phenomena, such as pair wise relative angular displacements, which underpin the
suggested role of singly connected junctions as soft pivot points, and the
microstructural origins of nonlinear rupture and stress overshoot in colloidal
gels, will be directly resolved for the first time. The microstructural
evolution as resolved by QCLSM will be used as input into a computational model
to quantify the thermodynamic contribution from the interparticle bonds to the
stress tensor, and the model predictions will be compared to experimental
measurements of the transient shear stress. This innovative scheme will exploit
the unique power of QCLSM in resolving the microstructure with single particle
resolution, to develop a better understanding of gel nonlinear rheology, and
specifically, its thermodynamic determinants. The roles of interparticle
interaction geometry and local microstructure will be assessed through
systematic experiments with anisometric colloids and dense systems with rigid
local subunits, respectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques and findings
from the proposed research activities will be directly incorporated into a
graduate level course in Colloid Science and Engineering. The CAREER program
will also train graduate and undergraduate students in state of the art methods
of quantitative confocal microscopy, colloid synthesis, data driven modeling,
and complex fluids rheology. Moreover, it will initiate a summer outreach
program, aiming to instill interest in science and engineering careers in high
school students from populations that are traditionally underrepresented in
these disciplines, and provide the undergraduate and graduate students with a
mentoring opportunity. Finally, the outreach activities and modules will be
disseminated worldwide via the PI's research website.