* 0955639
* CAREER: Fundamental cell-mineral-redox interactions in the sulfur system
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Gregory Druschel, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2013
* USD 258,453.00

Greater understanding of redox-active elements like sulfur and iron are key in
the processes that affect problems such as ocean transitions through deep time,
sour gas and oil evolution, hydrothermal chemistry and the origins of life, the
supply of iron to the sea, industrial desulfurization, agricultural sulfur
cycling, and metal mobility. Microorganisms have been a potentially important
part of sulfur cycling for billions of years (Johnston et al., 2005; Mojzsis et
al, 2007), yet many of the fundamental interactions between microorganisms and
elemental sulfur are not understood. Advancing our understanding of how these
systems behave requires delving into the detailed interactions between cells
(bacterial, archaeal, and eukaryotic), minerals (especially nanoparticles), and
water chemistry (especially redox speciation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Elemental sulfur occurs as bulk and nanoparticulate phases and can be
utilized by microorganisms for all 3 major catabolic paths through use as an
electron acceptor, donor, or essentially both in the case of disproportionation.
Dissolved sulfur species also interact with elemental sulfur, and those species
can additionally react with metals, most importantly iron. Microorganisms must
solubilize elemental sulfur in order to metabolize it, but this mineral is
fundamentally different from other minerals where microbe-mineral interactions
have been well studied, such as iron oxide minerals (for example Hernandez and
Newman, 2001; Childers et al., 2002; Burgon et al., 2003; Lovley, 2008; Newman,
2008). Solubilizing elemental sulfur can be accomplished through interaction
with organic ligands or through interactions with other sulfur species to form
new soluble intermediates such as polysulfides. Investigator proposes to develop
a combined in situ analytical capability to investigate sulfur speciation and
elemental sulfur mineralogy in field and laboratory tests to address the
following hypothesis: The size and surface character of elemental sulfur is a
key component controlling sulfur cycling in biotic and abiotic reactions in many
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Advances in fundamental
cell-mineral-redox interactions in the sulfur system provide an opportunity to
integrate some exciting educational experiences to engage stakeholders and
professionals in health, policy, and legal fields with research goals that will
yield transformative insights of value to the broad study of sulfur-based
microorganisms and element cycling through time and in environmentally relevant
systems. Sulfur species and minerals are importantly affected by a number of
known organisms, but the level of detail proposed for elemental sulfur particle
size/character and redox speciation has never been applied. When comparing the
wealth of information that has come from years of investigating detailed iron
oxide-microbe interactions (Newman, 2008), a detailed investigation of
fundamental microbe-mineral-redox interactions involving sulfur may yield
critical new insights. The application of the knowledge gained through these
investigations of the sulfur system can be applied to broader thinking about
similar cell-mineral-redox interactions that affect problems of human health.
This opens an opportunity to advance the training of scientists to communicate
results with the non-scientific public, and provide training to the medical
professionals, policymakers, and legal professionals that utilize mineralogical,
geochemical, and microbial information in addressing problems such as asbestos
mineral exposure, groundwater arsenic contamination, and selenium toxicity. A
series of classes and professional workshops will be developed, alongside a
series of learning modules illustrating fundamental cell-mineral-redox
interactions, to engage students and professionals in hands-on experiences of
how geochemical, mineralogical, and microbial data is gathered, assessed,
evaluated, and debated to arrive at reliable information. The participation of
stakeholders in the practice of scientific data collection, evaluation, and
debate integrated with the training of scientists with better communication
skills represents not only an advance in the preparation of scientists, but an
advance also in preparing professionals who will work with those scientists.