* 0955647
* CAREER: Volatiles in the Earth's Interior:  A combined theoretical and experimental approach
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2009,12/31/2017
* Wendy Panero, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2017
* USD 617,562.00

Earth is the water planet, with 70% of the surface covered by water and
accounting for 0.025% of the mass of the planet. The degree to which water is
distributed and stored at depth, however, remains largely unconstrained. Yet
water has a great influence on almost all of the physical and chemical
properties of earth materials. This includes lower viscosity and seismic
velocities, while enhancing electrical conductivity. Together with the observed
viscosity increase in the lower mantle, observed mass flux from the upper to
lower mantle, and lack of water storage capacity of the major minerals of the
lower mantle, this suggests that the lower mantle is dry, leading to a
transition zone water filter hypothesis at the base of the transition zone.
Alternatively, the viscosity contrast between the upper and lower mantle can be
explained without such a water filter by a change in the dominant mode of water
storage between the upper and lower mantle. The hydrogen stored in the major
minerals of the upper mantle is then stored in minor minerals of the lower
mantle, leaving most of the volume of the lower mantle dry and stiff.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test the central hypothesis of this proposal, this work
will combine high-pressure and temperature experimental measurements using
pioneering microfabricated samples for use in with theoretical computations.
This will clarify the underlying physical and chemical processes responsible for
variations in seismic wave speeds, viscosity, and electrical conductivity
resulting from the presence of water at depth. The results of this work are
broadly applicable to the field of Earth Science and beyond, with implications
on the effects of glacial isostatic adjustment on present-day sea level rise to
the design of solid-oxide fuel cells. Water-bearing rare-earth perovskites are
potential solid-oxide fuel cell (SOFC) materials. A clear understanding of the
mechanism of hydration of these materials, as well as the temperature stability
limit of hydration can allow for a better design of these devices. Appreciation
of the defect mechanisms active in deep-earth silicate perovskites will
translate to these rare earth perovskites to allow for design of more efficient
and more robust SOFCs. This CAREER award will also aid in development of several
learning modules that integrate geophysical concepts and methods into courses
taught across an earth science curriculum. In particular, these modules will
have a focus on multivariant reasoning in scientific exploration. The
effectiveness of these modules will be evaluated by pre- and post-testing of
existing and to-be-developed ConcepTests. These modules will be created and
tested in the PI's courses and later integrated into OSU's School of Earth
Sciences courses.