* 0955945
* CAREER: Non-Equilibrium Physics of Biological Interfaces
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Martin Forstner, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 794,533.00

In this project the PI will quantify and understand the non-equilibrium behavior
of biological membranes and membrane coupled processes in the context of
dynamical systems. The objective will be met by employing physically
reconstituted systems that are driven out of equilibrium in a controlled manner.
This approach will allow the systematic and quantitative study of the
bidirectional interrelations between dynamic membrane organization and the
function of membrane associated proteins that arise in non-equilibrium
situations. The following aims will be undertaken: Aim 1: The driving mechanisms
based on simulated ion flux will be characterized and the concentration profile
of multivalent ions at charged membranes will be studied. Aim 2 will focus on
the aggregation dynamics of multivalent lipid species under ionic forcing. Aim
3: Study the modulation of protein action on multiply charged lipids in
spatially heterogeneous membranes and the resulting structural response of
membranes. Aim 4: Will address the question how combined systems of membranes
and proteins organize in time and space under simultaneous forcing. In addition
the following outreach activities will be undertaken: (1) Initiation of a pre-
college level outreach program that will use biophysics based tools to improve
physical science education in local schools and connect students to people and
academic research on campus. It includes class demonstrations and lecture units
led by graduate students, development of experiment based class modules
involving high school teachers and a lab- internship program for high school
students. (2) Development of biophysics and soft condensed matter based
laboratory modules for physics classes for non-majors. In addition, the PI will
develop a biophysics course for upper-division physics majors and entry levels
graduate students. The course will provide a basic foundation for students and
enable them to understand physics in its relationship to other scientific
fields. It will also equip the students for active interdisciplinary research at
the intersection of the physical and life sciences. (3) By engaging in the
research aims of this program, graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in biophysical methods and techniques and they will advance their
knowledge and communication skills beyond the traditional boundaries of
scientific disciplines. Detailed documents and assessments related to all of
these endeavors will be made available to the broader community