* 0955195
* CAREER:  A Hybrid Approach for Flexible Nanomanufacturing - Maskless Plasmonic Nano-Lithography
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Cheng Sun, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop a new maskless optical nano-fabrication technology with highly
desirable process scalability and flexibility. The underlying process physics
and chemistry will be studied by a combination of multiphysics-based modeling
and experimental characterizations. A range of novel nano-devices for high
efficiency energy harvesting and scalable bio-sensor array will be explored. The
education objective of this CAREER award is to create education pipeline that
prepares young researchers with strong fundamentals, cutting edge technological
skills, and most importantly, innovative ideas to meet the demand for advancing
nanoscale science and engineering. The approaches include 1) establishing a new
education curriculum in Nanomanufacturing through the infusion of research
discoveries; 2) inseminating knowledge of the advancements in nanotechnology to
the under-represented population at Chicago Public School District; and 3)
through close interaction with industrial partners, preparing the students with
full prospective of nano-manufacturing and nano-metrology in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the Maskless Plasmonic
Nanolithography technology will pave the way for future development of a variety
of nano-scale devices and system with ultimate performance, such as high speed
computation and signal process, broadband communication, disease diagnostics for
health care, and detection and identification of biological and chemical weapons
for homeland security. This work will also create integrated research and
education program of graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students at
Northwestern University with emphasis in reaching out to the underrepresented
groups.