* 0955172
* CAREER:Engineering Functional Tissue Assembly and Remodeling Through Developmental Biology
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Jonathan Butcher, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 443,000.00

Tissue assembly and remodeling occurs at significantly faster rates during
embryogenesis than in adulthood, but these mechanisms are poorly understood.
Efficient strategies to control tissue adaptation and remodeling, as well as
accelerate the construction of cardiovascular tissue replacements, can be gained
by harnessing "natural engineering" paradigms that prescribe cardiovascular
development and maturation. This proposal will uncover these mechanisms for
heart valves, a critically important cardiovascular soft tissue. The guiding
hypothesis is that heart valve tissue assembly and remodeling is controlled by a
mechanically sensitive genetic signaling network that is active during
valvulogenesis and reactivated in aged valves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal addresses a fundamental gap in our understanding of tissue assembly and
remodeling processes with unique experimental and computational tools. These
studies will provide first mechanistic insights integrating organ, tissue, cell,
and molecular length scales that will transform engineering strategies to
control valvular remodeling at any stage in the lifecycle. Implementation of a
novel living embryo culture system will enhance inquiry based learning
curricula. Assimilation of developmental biology and engineering at the graduate
level will give specialized students much needed breadth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unique experimental tools suitable for mouse tissues will
enable quantitative mechanistic understanding of important functional
consequences of sublethal genetic mutations. The visible living embryo system
implemented in this proposal can be used as a centerpiece to communicate many
basic phenomena to the general public as well as the scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will augment awareness and appreciation for the
advancement of science.