* 0955646
* CAREER: Control of Functionality in Transition Metal Oxides with Metal-Metal Bonding
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2017
* Peter Khalifah, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2017
* USD 601,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program aims to control the functionality of
materials by targeting specific electronic structures through "internal design"
principles rather than through less direct structure-property relationships.
This approach will be used to find new thermoelectric materials within the class
of transition metal oxides with direct metal-metal bonding, which lifts the
typical degeneracy of the d-electron states giving rise to both small band gap
semiconductors and high density-of-states metals. A thorough investigation of
physical properties (such as resistivity, magnetism, thermopower, and thermal
conductivity) will be undertaken to explore whether the fÂ¬-electron-like states
of these compounds can be tuned to produce improved materials performance, and
whether these unusual electronic states give rise to any unexpected phenomena.
In addition, spectroscopic studies of these materials will be carried out to
test the potential of these materials as stable small band gap semiconductors
for optical applications. Through these investigations, it should be possible to
develop a framework for better understanding this intriguing class of compounds.
This work will be supported by efforts to develop synchrotron
microcrystallography techniques with the long term goal of obtaining single
crystal diffraction data from the crystallites in typical powder
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
performance of many high-tech devices is limited by the properties of the solid
state materials from which they are built. This project will test new strategies
for designing solid state materials for energy applications, directly
incorporating theoretical calculations into the design process to efficiently
discover improved materials. The primary target of this project is better
thermoelectric materials, which have applications for electricity production
through waste heat recovery, satellite power generation, and efficient solid
state refrigeration. The metal oxide systems being studied may also provide new
superconducting compounds and new small band gap semiconductors for infrared
(IR) detection applications that can serve as air stable and non-toxic
alternatives to current systems based on cadmium mercury telluride compounds.
The fundamental synthesis, characterization, and theoretical skills necessary to
understand and carry out the "internal design" of materials will be integrated
into teaching and outreach efforts, as they provide the key insights needed to
generate materials solutions for energy and other societal challenges.
Particular emphasis is placed on crystallography, including national educational
efforts aimed at addressing deficiencies in typical academic curricula and at
broadening participation in experiments at x-ray and neutron national laboratory
facilities. Active research mentoring of students interested in energy research
at all levels will be a key component of this effort, including the diverse
undergraduate and high school students in the New York City Metropolitan area.