* 0955515
* CAREER: Theoretical Development of Bio-Inspired Water Splitting Photocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Christine Aikens, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2016
* USD 599,500.00

Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Chemical Catalysis Program of
the Chemistry Division supports the efforts of Professor Christine M. Aikens of
Kansas State University to analyze which aspects of the oxygen-evolving center
(OEC) of photosystem II contribute to its effectiveness as a catalyst for water
splitting and therefore to predict which structural and electronic aspects are
required in synthetic catalysts used for oxygen evolution. Professor Aikens
employs a variety of electronic structure methods in order to accomplish this
aim including: density functional theory, second-order perturbation theory, and
multireference methods. Combined quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical (QM/MM)
methods that include electrostatic embedding are employed to examine the role of
the protein or solid-state support on catalytic activity. Some of the issues
that are studied include the role of the protein backbone on structure and
charge distribution in the Mn4Ca core, the impact of transition state energies
on predicted overpotentials, the proper theoretical methods required to
accurately model the catalytic cycle, how metal oxide clusters, single crystal
surfaces, and nanostructured supports change the charge distribution and
efficiency of the Mn4Ca reaction center, and whether the stoichiometry of the
OEC plays a role in its effectiveness as a
catalyst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular modeling software is incorporated into
the Chemistry 1 laboratories at Kansas State University in order to help
students learn how to visualize molecular geometries. An annual one-day Energy
and Sustainability Workshop for middle-school students focuses on topics such as
solar power, biological energy, and other technology related to renewable energy
and materials. Students attend introductory seminars and engage in hands-on
activities. This workshop seeks to include rural students from sparsely
populated areas as a means of broadening participation in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
award by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the
efforts of Professor Christine M. Aikens of Kansas State University to study
aspects of the oxygen-evolving center (OEC) of photosystem II, a complex,
naturally-occurring protein which uses light to produce oxygen, electrons and
hydrogen ions (protons) from water. Biological systems have evolved efficient
catalysts for water splitting to form oxygen during photosynthesis, but natural
systems do not normally evolve hydrogen. This theoretical and computational
research analyzes aspects of the oxygen-evolving center of photosystem II that
contribute to its effectiveness as a catalyst for water splitting. Similar
aspects are then targeted in synthetic materials. This research aids in the
development of clean and renewable sources of energy for the 21st century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular modeling software is incorporated into the
Chemistry 1 laboratories at Kansas State University in order to help students
learn how to visualize molecular geometries. An annual one-day Energy and
Sustainability Workshop for middle-school students focuses on topics such as
solar power, biological energy, and other technology related to renewable energy
and materials. Students attending the workshop engage in hands-on, introductory
activities. This workshop seeks to include rural students from sparsely
populated areas as a means of broadening participation in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;