* 0955572
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Creating a Network of Undergraduate Biology Education Researchers
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2012
* Mary Pat Wenderoth, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 01/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The fastest growing sub-disciplinary group within the emerging field of science
faculty with education specialties is biology. Yet, these faculty are isolated
and fragmented across the sub-disciplines of biology, and there is no one
meeting or society where biology faculty come together to exchange ideas, set
research agendas, and build collaborations. We will begin to address this issue
by organizing a workshop to lay the groundwork for establishing a leadership,
vision and network to promote and maintain scholarly work in biology. We will
identify the major advances in biology education research in the past 5-10
years, and determine the major research questions of the field, how to support
and advance high quality and rigorous hypothesis-driven research, and how best
to learn from the work of our colleagues in STEM education research. The
outcomes of this meeting will be a paper documenting the proceedings, a wiki to
facilitate networking, and a draft of a full RCN-UBE proposal to create a new
society, Society for the Advancement of Biology Education Research, SABER.

Intellectual Merit: The efforts in the field of biology education research are
not as focused as similar research efforts in other science disciplines. We lack
a common database (such as PubMed) where our research findings and those of the
learning sciences are reported, which leads to duplication of effort and lack of
a common foundational knowledge. This workshop will address these and other
infrastructural issues as well as set an agenda for future biology education
research.

Broader Impact: Coordination of research efforts will foster faster advances in
how college student learn biology, which will benefit current and future
undergraduates, particularly underrepresented minorities, who leave the basic
and life sciences at a much greater rate than other college disciplines. By
advancing our understanding of how best to help students learn biology, we may
be able to stem this loss of talent in biology.

This project is supported jointly by the Biological Sciences Directorate and the
Division of Undergraduate Education.