* 0955668
* CAREER: Gender Quotas and Women's Political Representation
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Mona Lena Krook, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2013
* USD 360,741.00

The past two decades have witnessed unprecedented gains in women's access to
elected office. This trend has occurred in all major regions of the world,
largely as a result of the adoption of gender quota policies aimed at increasing
the number of women selected as political candidates. The recent and global
nature of these developments has sparked both scholarly and popular interest.
The expanding literature on gender quotas, however, focuses almost exclusively
on questions of design, adoption, and numerical impact. Yet, even a cursory look
at quota campaigns reveals that these measures are not simply linked to concerns
to increase the numbers of women elected. Advocates suggest that such provisions
will increase diversity among the types of women elected, raise attention to
women?s issues in policy-making processes, change the gendered nature of the
public sphere, and inspire female voters to get more politically involved. In
contrast, opponents express concerns that quotas will facilitate the election of
"unqualified" women, bring women to office with little interest in promoting
women's concerns, reinforce stereotypes about women's inferiority as political
actors, and deter ordinary women's political participation. Despite their
prevalence in quota debates, the empirical validity of these claims has not yet
been systematically addressed. By extension, the potential ramifications of
quotas for other political processes are not yet well-understood.

Building on my previous work on gender quotas and women's political
representation, this study develops and tests a series of hypotheses regarding
quota impact via a large-n dataset of quota campaigns and in-depth case studies
in three regions of the world: Western Europe, Latin America, and Sub-Saharan
Africa. The investigation is organized around three major facets of political
representation: descriptive representation, or the basic attributes of those
elected; substantive representation, or attention to group interests in policy-
making; and symbolic representation, or the cultural meanings and ramifications
of the representative process. Placing questions of representation at the center
of analysis does not simply offer a chance to determine whether quotas produce
the consequences anticipated by supporters or those feared by opponents. It also
provides an entry for (1) assessing whether quotas constitute a step forward for
democracy and for women, or alternatively, serve to perpetuate existing patterns
of domination and inequality, and (2) exploring how these reforms speak to a
variety of literatures in political science by investigation how electoral
reforms like gender quotas affect trends in candidate recruitment, legislative
behavior, and public opinion and mass mobilization.

The project also seeks to have a broader impact through an integrated program of
research, educational, and outreach activities. It will produce scholarly
publications, as well as seek to incorporate a wide range of participants and
communicate the results to an audience of researchers, policy-makers, and
advocates through workshops, collaborative research, a project website, and a
new international network of scholars and activists. Two major aspirations are
(1) to mentor a new generation of researchers at various stages of their
professional development, as well as (2) to help actors "on the ground" better
understand the positive and negative consequences of gender quotas, with an eye
to empowering them with knowledge that can be used to better realize the
original aspirations of these reforms. These activities aim to contribute to
wider policy debates regarding relationships between quotas, democracy, and
women?s empowerment, thereby ensuring the lasting impact of the project beyond
the five years of the award while also establishing a solid foundation for a
productive and creative scholarly career.