* 0955760
* CAREER:  The Statistical Mechanics of Filamentous Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Gregory Grason, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2016
* USD 444,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education on supermolecular assemblies of nanoscale filaments.
Biofilaments present inherent challenges to theoretical study owing to the
flexibility of the filaments themselves and the complexity of interactions among
them. These effects are governed by long-wavelength physics, representing both
soft deformations along filaments, as well as collective effects of inter-
filament packing geometry. The PI will investigate the statistical and
thermodynamic properties of filamentous assemblies that derive from the common
structure of biological filaments. Namely, biofilaments are universally long,
flexible and helical. The research addresses three aims: 1) establish the role
of chirally-induced topological defects in finite-diameter bundle formation; 2)
build a statistical theory of protein-mediated bundling of filamentous actin;
and 3) explore the statistical mechanics of crystallization of pure and
inhomogeneous filament assemblies. Project (1): The PI will establish a
fundamental consequence of the geometric frustration between two dimensional and
chirally ordered materials in the context of dense biofilament bundles. The PI
will focus on the role played by disclinations that screen long-range stresses,
which are themselves induced by chiral interactions between neighboring
filaments. The PI aims to illuminate the influence of chirality on molecular
assembly and provide insight into assembly mechanisms of biological filaments
that are inherently limited in size. Project (2): The PI aims to construct a
statistical mechanical framework, a coupled lattice-gas and lattice spin model,
to explore the assembly thermodynamics of parallel actin bundles. The goal is to
determine how an intrinsic frustration between the respective helical and six-
fold symmetries of f-actin and bundle assemblies gives rise to cooperative
binding of cross-linking proteins and influences bundle formation. Project (3):
The PI will investigate the critical properties of filamentous systems as they
pass through an unusually complex phase transition from two dimensional liquid-
crystals to true three dimensional solids. The PI further aims to assess the
role of quenched impurities inherent to crystallization of polydisperse
filaments and expand our knowledge of the role of disorder in soft materials.
The education component supports an effort to develop a new educational program
that leverages existing center and faculty resources to create a Soft Matter
Research in Theory summer program for undergraduate students. The program is
designed to enhance the skills of students and enable them to participate in
ongoing theoretical research projects. This program introduces students to the
methods and challenges of modeling soft materials and the excitement of research
in this area.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education on assemblies of filaments composed of large molecules
that have dimensions on scale of a nanometer ? a billionth of a meter.
Filamentous assemblies like these are found inside biological cells and play an
important role in giving them structural integrity. This award supports research
to understand how filamentous assemblies organize themselves into more complex
structures. This has important consequences for the structural and mechanical
properties of filamentous assemblies. Aspects of the research will be done in
collaboration with experimental efforts that use x-rays to study filament
bundling in cells. The PI seeks to uncover fundamental principles that will also
apply to the design of new synthetic materials that are structured on the
nanometer scale.

This research is an example of fundamental research in the mathematical and
physical sciences at the boundaries with biology which has the potential to
advance both.

The education component supports an effort to develop a new educational program
that leverages existing center and faculty resources to create a Soft Matter
Research in Theory summer program for undergraduate students. The program is
designed to enhance the skills of students and enable them to participate in
ongoing theoretical research projects. This program introduces students to the
methods and challenges of modeling soft materials and the excitement of research
in this area.

