* 0955407
* CAREER: Molecular Mechanism of Vision
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* E. Chui-Ying Yan, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2015
* USD 937,167.00

Vision begins with the absorption of a photon of light by the retina. It is
absorbed by rhodopsin, a pigment in the retina, which consists of a retinal
molecule bound to the opsin protein and is embedded in the membrane of a rod
photoreceptor cell. Photons trigger the photoisomerization of the retinal
molecule from the 11-cis to the all-trans form. A conformational change in opsin
associated with the isomerization of retinal is what ultimately generates a
visual signal by the cell. Rhodopsin has evolved to be a very reliable detector:
it can respond to a million-fold range of light intensity. At the same time, it
is exquisitely sensitive, detecting even a single photon. This sensitivity
requires very low "dark noise" or isomerization rate when no light is present.
Retinal can isomerize due to heat as well as light, and the isomerization is
identical. To gain ever better night vision, animals evolved rhodopsin whose
dark noise at 37Â°C is reduced to one thermal isomerization event every 420
years. This project seeks to answer a question that has puzzled scientists for
decades: What is the mechanism by which rhodopsin achieves its incredibly low
dark noise without compromising its sensitivity? In particular, the project will
test the hypothesis that a recently discovered extensive hydrogen-bonding
network in the rhodopsin molecule prevents thermal
isomerization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visual processing has fascinated scholars
for centuries and makes this project appealing for science education and
outreach, as well as important for advancing the scientific understanding of the
visual system. This research is at the interface of physical and biological
science and will provide valuable cross-disciplinary training for students and
researchers at all levels, from high school to postdoctoral. Through the
established collaborations with the Community Office at Yale and Hunter College
of the City University of New York, the project will provide research
opportunities to pre-college and college students, many of whom are
underrepresented in science and have limited exposure to frontier scientific
research. Moreover, the lab members will attend the annual conference for the
Society of Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science to recruit
Native American and Hispanic graduate students, who are currently
underrepresented in the department. Through the integration of research and
education, this project will blend teaching and outreach with scientific
discovery while encouraging the inclusion of underrepresented groups in the
science program at Yale University.&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported
by Molecular Systems cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life Processes in the Division of Chemistry.