* 0955909
* CAREER: Earth Rheology and Deformation Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2016
* Anthony Lowry, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2016
* USD 500,047.00

Mountain-building, earthquakes and other expressions of continental tectonics
depend fundamentally on how rocks flow in response to stress. Rock flow
properties depend upon temperature, rock type and fluid content, none of which
are easily measured at depth, thus limiting our fundamental understanding of
tectonic processes. This project will combine gravity and topography data with
new tools for seismic imaging and new deformation measurements and modeling
tools to carefully measure mass density variations in the Earth and the rock
flow that inevitably must accommodate them. By measuring how rock flow responds
to large vertical stresses, or ?loads?, that result from piling of sediments or
volcanic flows on the Earth?s surface, from intrusion of magmas into the crust,
and from thermal and crustal thickness variations, we can better understand flow
properties of rock and also determine how these flow properties change from one
place to another. The project?s scientific objectives have potentially far-
reaching implications for our fundamental understanding of earthquake physics,
seismic hazard and mountain-building processes. Knowledge of rock flow
properties has the potential to greatly improve our understanding of the
earthquake cycle and evolution of stress on faults, and may help to inform
studies of glacial melting and other climatological
changes.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;This project develops an innovative approach to
estimating rheological parameters (and effective flow viscosity) of the
lithosphere from stochastic inversion of dynamical models of gravity,
topography, surface heat flow and geodetic data, coupled with new analysis tools
for seismic measurement products. A key innovation will be the circumvention of
errors commonly introduced in modeling of seismic velocity fields by inverting
seismic measurements (e.g. receiver function amplitude stacks) in combination
with the other data for desired 3D fields of mass and temperature. These in turn
will be used as inputs to dynamical models, which will employ stochastic methods
to invert for stress, strain rate and 3D variations in rheological parameters at
shallow (lithospheric) depths. Forward modeling of Earth deformation
incorporating 3D viscosity heterogeneity at shallow (lithospheric) depths
suggests that lateral variations in flow rheology exert a very fundamental
control on horizontal velocities and strains at the Earth?s surface. Stochastic
inversion approaches to estimating lithospheric flexural strength in continental
interiors exhibit strong correlation of sharp gradients in strength with
locations of intracontinental seismic belts and geodetic strain focusing.
Stimulated in part by the wealth of new data accruing from the EarthScope Major
Research Equipment initiative, as well as by recent revolutions in data analysis
methodologies and computing power, the project will examine the fundamental
question of whether rheology does in fact exert a first-order control on
intraplate deformation and explore whether stochastically inverted estimates of
lithospheric rheology may illuminate seismic hazard. Project research will also
explore mechanisms for (and possible utility of) observed azimuthal anisotropy
of isostatic response as well as possible reasons for a discrepancy in estimates
of shallow viscosity from long-term isostatic response versus from postseismic
and Pleistocene lake rebound studies. The principal scientific products will be
new, fully three-dimensional estimates of shallow (lithospheric) mass density,
temperature and flow rheological parameters that will be made available to the
scientific community and can be used to constrain deformation modeling, or as a
means of separating out solid-Earth viscoelastic signals that are intertwined
with other desirable signals such as fault slip or ice mass loading histories.