* 0955560
* CAREER: Convergence of Space Geodesy in Plate Boundary Research and Geoscience Education
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2018
* Peter LaFemina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 04/30/2018
* USD 508,995.00

This project investigates the kinematics and mechanics of oblique convergence
and strain partitioning and the geodynamic affects of ridge collision on upper
plate deformation subduction zones to gain a better understanding of the
formation of fore-arc terranes. This study integrates new and existing GPS data,
seismic data (earthquake locations and centroid moment tensor solutions), and
geologic observations with numerical models to: 1) estimate the magnitude and
spatial variability of coupling on interplate thrust and fore-arc strike-slip
faults; 2) determine the rate of fore arc motion; and 3) conduct an analysis of
the forces associated with strain partitioning and ridge collision. The study
focuses on two convergent margins, southern Central America (Cocos-Nazca-
Caribbean plates: Panama) and northern South America (Nazca-South America
plates: Ecuador). In southern Central America, Cocos plate convergence is
orthogonal and the Cocos Ridge collides with the margin. There is no well-
developed margin parallel fore-arc strike-slip fault here and it has been
suggested that fore-arc motion to the northwest and southeast is driven by ridge
collision. In northern South America, Nazca plate convergence is oblique and the
Carnegie Ridge collides with the margin. Margin parallel fore-arc strike-slip
faults accommodate northeast motion of the North Andean block. GPS networks will
be established in Panama and Ecuador to better constrain the kinematics of
surface deformation caused by the interaction of the Cocos and Nazca plates with
the Central American isthmus (Caribbean plate) and South American plate. The
educational component of this CAREER award : 1) enhances quantitative literacy
in the geosciences through the development of six plate tectonics spreadsheet
modules whose effectiveness will be assessed; 2) provides international research
and education experiences for undergraduate students through the UNAVCO Research
Experience in Solid Earth Science for Students and the Penn State University
Center for Advanced Undergraduate Studies Experience programs; and 3) provides
international research and education experiences for graduate students; 4) forms
the basis for new courses on plate boundaries.

Subduction zone plate boundaries release the greatest amount of elastic energy
producing great earthquakes and devastating tsunamis. The interaction of plates
at subduction zones can be complex where convergence between plates is not
orthogonal to the plate margin and where submarine ridges collide. In these
cases, motion in the overriding plate can be partitioned between megathrust and
strike-slip motion. This study aims determine the forces that control this
behavior in two examples in Panama and Ecuador through a combined use of GPS
data, which will refine the motion vectors, and modeling to constrain the forces
at play. Students will be engaged in the project through classroom activities
using the data and through international research experiences. The results of
this study will assist in understanding earthquake hazards in Central America.

This research project is supported by the Earth Sciences Division's Tectonics
and Education & Human Resources Programs and the Office of International Science
and Engineering Americas Program.