* 0955689
* CAREER: Theoretical studies of optical properties of molecules near metal nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Lasse Jensen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2014
* USD 613,047.00

Lesse Jensen of the Pennsylvania State University, University Park is supported
by a CAREER award from the Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in
the Chemistry Division to develop theoretical approaches and molecular
simulation strategies for understanding optical properties of molecules near
metal nanostructures.

The PI bridges quantum mechanics with electrodynamics descriptions to simulate
optical properties of molecule-metal systems and elucidate the mechanisms for
surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). This technique is currently the only
method capable of detecting and identifying simultaneously a single molecule.
DNA detection and early detection of chemical and biological warfare are
examples of the broad implications of this experimental technique. The novel
theoretical methodology bridges the gap between quantum mechanics descriptions
of electronically localized molecules with the electrodynamics descriptions of
electronically delocalized metal nanostructures over many nanometers. The
approaches in this proposal enable accurate descriptions of molecules, explicit
treatment of molecule-metal coupling, and realistic descriptions of metal
nanostructures with complex shapes. A systematic plan to understand the
different enhancement mechanisms and the synergy between them is put forward
with the expectation of establishing a unified description of SERS.

Broader impact efforts combine state-of-the-art methods that will fundamentally
advance the understanding of SERS, which will be distributed broadly and
incorporated in packages such as NWChem and ADF. The development of the nano-
optics simulator, a visualization module to be integrated in a variety of
educational platforms, will promote essential concepts in nanoscience, foster
interests in scientific computing and visualization, and encourage young
scientists to pursue careers in nanotechnology.