* 0955341
* Collaborative Research:   RCN: Vulnerability of Permafrost Carbon
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* A. David McGuire, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,512.00

Humans are altering the global cycling of carbon (C) on Earth. The addition of
billions of tons of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere is changing its heat-
trapping capacity, which in turn is changing the Earth's climate. Large amounts
of carbon are stored within the soils of terrestrial ecosystems. Recently,
attention has been drawn to the thawing of permafrost (permanently frozen
ground) as a mechanism that could move significant quantities of stored C from
land to atmosphere in response to a changing climate. Because of the size and
nature of the permafrost C pool, decomposition of previously frozen, old organic
carbon is one of the most likely positive feedbacks from terrestrial ecosystems
to climate change in a warmer world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While ground
temperature increases in permafrost regions are well documented with data from
permafrost borehole networks, as well as from surface temperature observations,
there is a knowledge gap surrounding the response of permafrost carbon to
climate change. This Vulnerability of Permafrost Carbon research coordination
network (RCN) project will bring together biological and physical carbon cycle
researchers. Through a series of meetings, working groups will be established
that will address key questions about carbon cycling and vulnerability in
permafrost regions and synthesize data and literature. An interactive website
will be developed for non-scientists and the media that will synthesize the
state of knowledge about permafrost. This RCN will strengthen the
interconnection between biological and physical scientists, between early and
later career-stage scientists, and will produce new knowledge through synthesis
that can be used to quantify the role of permafrost carbon in affecting climate
change in the 21st century and beyond.