* 0955714
* CAREER: Dynamics and Transport of Excited Strongly Correlated Many-Particle Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Vadim Oganesyan, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports computational and theoretical research, and education
aimed at elucidating the emergence of macroscopic dissipative transport from
inherently deterministic and usually quantum microscopic motion of interacting
particles. Recent explorations of this fundamental question have been anchored
by three phenomena: (i) the so called "bad metal" behavior in synthetic
conductors, (ii) many-body localization, and (iii) equilibration of anharmonic
oscillators in one dimension. While the first of these is well documented in
many interesting materials, such as vanadium dioxide, Buckminsterfullerene, and
high temperature superconductors, the latter two are primarily motivated by
fundamental questions of many-body theory. The PI aims to propose clear ways to
discern these often subtle phenomena in simple experiments.

Rather than more common approaches that involve taking a limit of zero absolute
temperature, the PI will focus on finite temperature approaches for which very
precise numerical computations of dynamical properties are possible. Because
phenomena of interest dominate asymptotic low frequency response at non-zero
temperatures, calculation at finite temperature enables a convenient avenue for
exploration. By most common approaches are not able to address hallmarks of
correlated transport as violation of Mott-Ioffe-Regel limit and non-Drude
optical response. Motivated by the particularly spectacular examples of
correlated transport extending from low to very high temperatures, the PI will
explore the idea that the high temperature regime may serve as the novel
starting point for analyzing a broad range of experiments done at intermediate
to low temperature, from bad metals to heavy fermions to apparent quantum
critical points.

This award supports educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. The PI plans a diverse research group where students at different
levels will be involved in mentoring, education and research experiences. The PI
plans to teach an exploration-based course in cross-disciplinary computational
research. The PI aims to help boost a public appreciation of materials research
with a focus on exposing non-expert audiences to cutting edge research in an
accessible form with the aim of effectively stimulating lifelong interest in
learning. Outreach activities stemming from this CAREER award will also include
colloquium-style public lectures about condensed matter physics and PI's own
research.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports computational and theoretical research, and education
involving novel phenomena associated with electron motion in synthetic materials
that conduct electricity, magnetic materials, and atomic motion in gases of
atoms cooled near the absolute zero of temperature. The PI will develop
theoretical and numerical methods to describe the motion of electrons in
response to applied fields, for example an applied voltage. The PI seeks in part
to understand the microscopic origins of dissipation that degrades electron
motion. The PI takes a different approach than much of the previous research
that has been done on this topic. The research more generally focuses on
understanding the dynamical behavior of many electron or many atom systems in
which the constituent electrons or atoms interact with each other, the systems
are described by quantum mechanics, but the temperature may be high enough that
the system is approaching the crossover to classical mechanics. Many electron
systems such as these may appear in certain kinds of materials and in
nanostructures under the right conditions.

This award supports fundamental research that aims at our understanding of
electronic properties of materials and the microscopic origins of how energy is
lost in electronic motion. The results may lead to the discovery of new
phenomena advancing fundamental science and may also lead to new technological
applications.

This award supports educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. The PI plans a diverse research group where students at different
levels will be involved in mentoring, education and research experiences. The PI
plans to teach an exploration-based course in cross-disciplinary computational
research. The PI aims to help boost a public appreciation of materials research
with a focus on exposing non-expert audiences to cutting edge research in an
accessible form with the aim of effectively stimulating lifelong interest in
learning. Outreach activities stemming from this CAREER award will also include
colloquium-style public lectures about condensed matter physics and PI?s own
research.