* 0955637
* CAREER: Freeze-frame Spectroscopy, a technique for elucidation of fundamental interactions underlying nanocatalytic reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* David Moore, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2015
* USD 640,000.00

This CAREER award by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division
supports the work of Professor David T. Moore of Lehigh University to develop
freeze-frame spectroscopy (FFS), an experimental method to directly probe
interactions of reactant molecules with nanocatalysts. Freeze-frame spectroscopy
is explicitly designed to stabilize the pre-reactive complexes of interest in
cryogenic matrices so that they may be structurally characterized using
vibrational spectroscopy. The high-resolution afforded by this matrix-isolated
spectroscopic technique allows detection of the characteristic shifts in
vibrational bands associated with the interaction of the reactant molecules and
the catalyst material. The FFS approach also explores nanocatalytic reaction
pathways. Resonant laser pumping is used to rapidly deposit energy into the
stabilized pre-reactive complexes so that they can cross activation barriers to
form reactive intermediates or product complexes that are then trapped and
characterized. Professor Moore's research focuses on carbon monoxide (CO)
oxidation on gold nanoparticles in order to better understand how trends in
nanoparticles size and charge correlate to trends in reactivity. Laser pumping
experiments are carried out at the free-electron laser facility (FELIX) in
Nieuwegein, Netherlands, in order to verify the pre-reactive nature of the
detected complexes and to further characterize the potential energy surfaces of
the catalytic reaction pathways. A new partnership with South Mountain College
has been developed to provide immersive learning experiences in scientific
research to non-science majors.

This CAREER award by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division
supports the work of Professor David T. Moore of Lehigh University to develop
freeze-frame spectroscopy (FFS), an experimental method which looks at
interactions between reactant molecules and nanometer-sized catalysts. Catalysts
are used to increase the speed of chemical reactions. Direct examinations of
reactant-catalyst complexes are rarely possible because good catalysts do not
bind reactants very strongly or for very long. FFS overcomes this hurdle by
using very low temperatures to slow the catalytic reactions and then employing
light to take a "snapshot" of the reactant-catalyst interaction. The FFS
experiments are verified by additional laser studies conducted in the
Netherlands. Professor Moore's graduate students travel to Nieuwegein to perform
these measurements and to gain an appreciation for international culture.
Initials studies examine the catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide (CO) by
oxygen (O2) on gold nanoparticles. This reaction has relevance in the
alternative energy arena, since CO is a potent poison for the catalysts used in
hydrogen fuel cells. The broader impacts of this work include the development of
new methods for teaching science to humanities and social science majors within
the liberal arts curriculum. Instructors will work with students to develop
short, focused research projects with relevance to the students' primary areas
of interest. These projects provide the undergraduates with insight into vital
aspects of the scientific method.