* 0955283
* CAREER: Dynamics and Impacts of Fine-Scale Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Noah Diffenbaugh, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Cai
* 07/31/2016
* USD 443,795.00

This project will test the hypothesis that fine-scale processes regulate the
response of climate to elevated greenhouse forcing at the spatial and temporal
scales that matter most for climate change impacts. In order to test this
hypothesis, the investigators will establish an approach to climate change
uncertainty quantification that uses a suite of impacts metrics as indicators of
the magnitude and spatial heterogeneity of physical climate change. This
approach will require a combination of existing and new climate model
experiments; climate model configuration and testing; observational data
analysis; and climate change impacts analysis. This over-arching hypothesis will
be tested by systematically testing sub-hypotheses relating fine-scale climate
processes to (1) the level of greenhouse forcing, (2) the response of large-
scale climate processes, and (3) the internal climate system
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will produce a suite of
high-resolution climate model experiments and impacts analyses. These
experiments and analyses will contribute to a systematic, quantitative
evaluation of the importance of fine-scale climate processes relative to other
sources of climate change uncertainty, as well as a quantitative assessment of
the potential impacts of elevated greenhouse gas concentrations on a suite of
impacts indicators. Although this impacts-based approach will have the secondary
benefit of generating climate change impacts assessments (including for severe
heat, severe precipitation, and snowmelt), the primary benefit will be to better
identify, understand and compare key physical processes that govern the response
of the climate system to elevated greenhouse forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will have a number of tangible broader impacts, including the design,
development, and assessment of a framework for the Stanford University Learning
About Climate Change web-resource. The investigators will also seek to broaden
the participation of underrepresented groups through graduate student recruiting
efforts. Further, the results of this project are likely to result in tangible
benefits to society, particularly given the current need for improved scientific
understanding and communication that inform local, state, national, and
international climate policy.