* 0955286
* CAREER: Novel Plasmonic Properties of Individual Nanoparticle Chains Investigated by Correlated Structural Imaging and Single Particle Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,10/31/2015
* Stephan Link, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 10/31/2015
* USD 620,190.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) program of the
Division of Chemistry will support the CAREER development plan of Prof. Stephan
Link of the Department of Chemistry at William Marsh Rice University. Prof. Link
and his students will combine novel single particle optical spectroscopy
techniques with electron microscopy methods in order to understand the energy
coupling between metal nanoparticles in close packed nanoparticle assemblies.
Understanding the energy transfer in nanoparticle assemblies will ultimately
determine the feasibility and aid in the development of cost-effective platforms
for bottom-up chemical synthesis and self-assembly of nanoparticle-based
functional materials such as antennas and waveguides, which are tolerant of
variations in NP size, shape, and ordering. The PI and his students will connect
their excitement about research and discovery in nanotechnology with outreach
activities to educate K-12 students about nanotechnology and inspire them about
careers in science related fields. Specifically, the PI will develop lectures
for K-12 students on how NP size and shape is related to color and how this
correlation is observed in an ensemble vs. single particle study. These lectures
will be presented in the Civic Scientist Program at Rice University. The
proposed project will provide excellent training opportunities to graduate
students at the research frontier of physical sciences.