* 0955148
* CAREER: Plasmons for Solar Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2015
* Terry Bigioni, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 04/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

0955148 Bigioni

Photovoltaic solar cell technologies will play a vital role in efforts to
reduce carbon emissions and to provide clean and secure sources of energy.
However, to be competitive with abundant, nonrenewable fuels such as coal for
electric power production, solar panel efficiencies must be improved, and
production costs must be reduced in order to deliver a lower unit cost of
electric power production. One trend is to reduce the thickness of the solar
cell, which decreases distances for charge transport, reduces materials usage,
and speeds up the deposition time. Another trend is to use inexpensive materials
such as TiO2 or polymers. Thinning cells to improve performance and reduce costs
has its limits, since thinner solar cells absorb less light. To address this
problem, plasmon-supporting metal particles offer significant promise to
increase the ability of thin solar cells to absorb light. Plasmon-supporting
metal particles can be used to efficiently couple light into a broad range of
photovoltaic materials, without the need to radically redesign devices.

Intellectual Merit

This research will develop nanostructured materials for plasmon-mediated solar
energy conversion, and gain fundamental understanding of this process. Ligand-
passivated colloidal metal nanoparticles will be used as the model plasmonic
material, since their optical, electronic, and chemical properties can be
independently tuned by the core and ligand shell. The colloidal approach also
allows the particles to be mixed or spread in a wide number of materials by a
variety of strategies. Using plasmons to improve light absorption in solar cells
is expected to have performance enhancing features. Specifically, the high light
absorptivity of plasmons produces electrons closer to the photoanode, shortening
the charge transfer path and improving photocurrent collection. The decrease in
the necessary thickness for the solar cell device stack could also reduce
material and processing costs. Furthermore, plasmons enable the use of new
materials and strategies that would otherwise be unable to absorb light
efficiently.

The research has three aims. The first aim is to develop novel synthesis
strategies for making nanocomposite materials and hybrid structures for
plasmonic light capture. The second aim is establish the fundamental principles
governing energy transfer between metal nanoparticles and different photovoltaic
media. The third aim is understand the impact of metal nanoparticles on charge
transport within these materials in working devices. All of these activities
seek to understand the basic science of how plasmon-supporting metal
nanoparticles function in photovoltaic energy capture and transfer systems.

The novelty and intellectual merit of this research is that it will provide
basic understanding of how core-shell plasmonic metal nanoparticles affect light
and absorption and charge transfer in photovoltaic devices. This research is
potentially transformative because plasmon-mediated solar energy conversion
offers a completely new and tunable approach to enhance light absorption and
increase charge transport photovoltaic devices, leading to enhanced efficiency
and thinner devices that in turn have the potential to reduce unit electrical
power generation costs.

Broader Impacts

Outcomes of this research have the potential to improve the efficiency and
reduce costs of solar cells. These outcomes could also make collateral
advancements in related areas such as nanomaterials synthesis, nanostructured
thin film growth, and metal-enhanced fluorescence for biological imaging and
sensing.

The educational activities are designed to integrate alternative energy and
nanotechnology research into the education of graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students, as well as high school teachers. The first broader impact on
education will be the integration of alternative energy and nanotechnology into
the undergraduate and graduate curriculum. The second broader impact will result
from the involvement of undergraduate and high school students and teachers in
chemical and materials research. The third broader impact is the education of
the public on general energy concepts, especially in the context of current
energy related issues, through a set of modules in a web-based video format.