* 0955013
* CAREER: Nanoscale Multi-element Plasmonic Devices for Tunable THz Detection Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Nezih Pala, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 09/30/2016
* USD 399,929.00

This integrated research and education plan investigates a new family of
plasmonic devices for tunable detection of THz radiation at room temperature
through systematic theoretical and experimental study of plasmon-THz
electromagnetic radiation interactions in complex nano-scale Field Effect
Transistor (FET) structures. The proposed multi-element plasmonic devices will
have very high speed and high responsivity at room temperature with wide range
of continuous tunability by DC bias. To reach the stated goal a holistic
approach with its theory, demonstration, implementation, education and
dissemination will be adopted with the following major tasks: (1) Theoretical
study of 2D electron gas plasmons-THz radiation interactions in a) single-
channel multi-gate FET structures and b) multi-channel FET structures. (2)
Design, fabrication and extensive characterization of resonant absorption and
photoresponse characteristics of the proposed devices to demonstrate room
temperature tunable detection of THz radiation. (3) Implementation of the
proposed devices for engineering applications including THz focal plane array
imaging sensors and THz biological and chemical sensors with integrated
microfluidic channels. (4) Integration of K-20 education and underrepresented
groups into research activities.

Intellectual Merit: THz technology has potential applications in medicine,
biology, chemistry, security, and space. Many of these applications require
spectral selectivity. However lack of tunable sources and detectors necessitates
the use of complex methods (e.g. heterodyne detection) or bulky optical
components for frequency selection. Despite their impressive responsivity
levels, conventional THz detectors are not tunable or suitable for portable
applications. The PI proposes a transformative plasmonic device technology which
could lead the first tunable direct detectors operating at room temperature. The
proposed devices are micro/nano-scale semiconductor devices which can be easily
integrated with semiconductor electronics. With their tunable resonant
absorption characteristics, proposed plasmonic devices can also be used as very
fast tunable filters for other THz detection methods. These advantages will pave
the way for THz-spectrometer-on-chip. The proposed research will also result in
a thorough understanding of the THz electromagnetic radiation-plasmon
interactions in complex FET structures which have not been fully understood yet
and will expand our knowledge in the science of plasmonics. Analytical and
numerical models which will be developed and tested will also help to create
other novel devices such as tunable plasmonic THz sources, photomixers, and
plasmonic crystals with nanoscale resonance elements such as quantum dots and
plasmonic nanowires. Development of efficient coupling and conversion techniques
for THz radiation can also make energy harvesting possible in far infrared and
THz range of the electromagnetic spectrum which is currently not exploited as a
widely available renewable energy source.

Broader Impact: The integration of experimental effort along with theoretical
analysis will offer invaluable experiences to graduate and undergraduate
students at Florida International University and create synergy between
departments of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Biomedical Engineering and
College of Medicine leading new applications for the proposed device technology.
A complementary education plan will develop a program for disseminating
knowledge of the advancements in THz technology and nanotechnology into high
school and university classrooms. It will include an outreach to K-12 students
in a predominantly underprivileged and socio-economically impacted neighborhood
of Miami, FL. Several undergraduate students from the diverse population of FIU
will be actively involved with the proposed research activities. Education
component also includes supervising two graduate students and development of a
graduate course on THz technology and applications. Proposed plan will enhance
the research infrastructure for the scientific communities at FIU and in south
Florida by supporting the FIU THz Research Lab. Building on existing strengths
and closely working with these communities; the PI will make the services
developed within this proposal available to researchers across the nation. The
PI is also planning to increase the impact of this work via international
technical workshops, and an edited book in this area. In the long run,
development of tunable THz detectors will simplify the THz imaging and detection
systems by eliminating necessity of these complex frequency selection apparatus
and/or tunable sources. Therefore the proposed devices have the potential of
bringing an abundance of THz applications into life such as security and medical
imaging, biochips, chemical and biological sensing and DNA analysis as part of a
long-term research and possible commercialization opportunities.