* 0955236
* CAREER: The Stability and Influence of Metastable Retained Austenite During Fatigue of Advanced Steel Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Kip Findley, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 621,294.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Recently, advanced high strength steels have been developed
with significant amounts of retained austenite in the microstructure. Stress and
strain induced transformation of retained austenite to martensite results in
excellent combinations of strength and ductility in these alloys. The stability
of retained austenite during fatigue cycling and its effect on cyclic stress-
strain behavior has not been comprehensively investigated and is the focus of
this investigation. Two steel alloy systems that contain retained austenite will
be used for the investigation, transformation induced plasticity (TRIP) alloys
and superbainite. TRIP alloys have superior strength and formability, while
superbainite has vast potential for structural purposes because of excellent
combinations of strength and toughness. Four key variables will be assessed:
retained austenite stacking fault energy, dislocation density, morphology, and
the surrounding microstructure. Experimental and computational tools will be
used to quantify the impact of retained austenite on fatigue behavior. The tools
include servohydraulic load frames for fatigue testing, advanced electron
microscopy and x-ray diffraction for characterization, the Los Alamos Neutron
Science Center for simultaneous mechanical testing and characterization, and
object-oriented finite element analysis. Fundamental and quantitative
understanding will be obtained for the relationship between the above variables,
retained austenite stability, and fatigue properties. It is anticipated that
this understanding can be applied to other steel alloys and material systems
such as nitinol that exhibit similar phenomena.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The objective of the proposed work is to determine the
effect of deformation-induced changes on fatigue properties of advanced steel
alloys, and also use this understanding to promote engineering and advanced
materials applications to high school students and teachers, undergraduates, and
graduate students. Smart metal alloys that take advantage of changes in the
material during deformation are being implemented more widely in medical,
infrastructure, and transportation industries. Enhanced properties can be
obtained in steel alloys through deformation-induced changes. Two alloy systems
that take advantage of this phenomenon will be studied in this investigation.
TRIP (transformation induced plasticity) steels exhibit promise for increased
strength, ductility, and crashworthiness over alloys traditionally used in the
automotive industry. Superbainite, recently developed at Cambridge University,
is processed to provide outstanding combinations of strength and toughness.
Since both of these alloys are intended for structural purposes, they may be
subject to fatigue loads, but their fatigue behavior is not well understood.
Using the proposed research as a basis, programs will also be developed to
educate high school teachers and urban high school students in the Colorado
Uplift program about materials engineering and more broadly, about the impact of
materials development on their everyday lives. The objective is to inspire
students to pursue science and engineering degrees and become educated future
voters and policymakers. The research will also be incorporated into the
undergraduate laboratory curriculum in the mechanical behavior of materials
course at the Colorado School of Mines as an example of smart material systems.
Undergraduate and graduate researchers will be educated through the research
process and will participate in the high school outreach activities and thus
gain an understanding of how science and community service can be intertwined.
Finally, the project will facilitate future domestic and international
collaborations with partners such as Los Alamos National Laboratory and
Cambridge University.