* 0955027
* CAREER:Molecular scale electronic biosensor for single molecule sensitivity and high specificity
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2016
* Walter Hu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop molecular-scale
biochemical field effect transistors or FETs based on lithographically defined
semiconducting quantum wires with nanopatterned functional monolayer to study
single-molecule detection of protein and DNA. Study of single-molecule
interaction with NW is enabled by physically limiting attachment of only single
or few molecules on the nano-dot of self-assembled monolayers. Using this sensor
platform, a comprehensive understanding of electronic biosensing mechanisms,
ultimate sensitivity, and bio-abio interfaces down to single-molecule level will
be developed. Correlations between device physics, surface chemistry, and sensor
performance at molecular scale will be investigated. These insights will be
leveraged to develop advanced modulated sensing strategies, such as pH-modulated
sensing, multi-channel detection and mapping of protein specific activity vs.
cross-reactivity, to improve detection specificity. If successful, the proposed
methods will lead to an innovative and manufacturable nanoelectronic bio-chip
for label-free biosensing with single-molecule sensitivity and high specificity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits:&lt;br/&gt; The proposed study of
ultimate capability of electronic bio-sensor down to the single-molecule level
will significantly advance the understanding of electronic biosensing and
provide guidance for future sensor design. This challenging study is enabled by
an innovative and reliable biosensor using a patterned monolayer nano-dot as
binding interface for a quantum wire transistor defined by lithography. The use
of nanolithography to define the nanowires with size (2-10 nm) comparable to
those by chemical synthesis will provide better uniformity, device reliability,
and manufacturability. It allows in-situ integration with CMOS circuitry on
chip. The proposed techniques combining protein titration signature (pH-
dependence) with modulated biasing and data analysis with semi-orthogonal
mapping of protein specific activity and promiscuous activity to improve
specificity are novel and highly transformative. By combining the studies of
ultimate sensitivity and specificity, the correlation between them will be
investigated, leading to the establishment of critical design rules for
electronic biosensor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed molecular-scale biosensor and comprehensive understanding of electronic
interaction between nanoelectronic devices and bio-molecules at single-molecule
level will contribute to the fields of biosensors, nanoelectronics,
nanofabrication, and molecular electronics. Improved electronic sensors as a
general platform could have a considerable impact on a wide-range of biochemical
detection and disease diagnostics including pathogen/virus detection, gene
expression, immune-screening, whole blood analysis, as well as home land
security. It provides a single-chip biosensing solution desired for point of
care detection and diagnostics to overcome the limitations of current optical
sensors that require bulky and expensive equipment, labeling, complex sample
preparation, and long processing time. The program will utilize a concept of
?e-Biosensor Discovery Kit? to generate significant educational impact,
including integration of research and education, promoting diversity, and
outreach to K-12, underrepresented women and the Hispanic student body at UTD
and local community colleges as well as the workforce in the Dallas and
Fort/Worth area.