* 0955500
* CAREER: Electron Quantum Kinetics in Metallic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Maxim Vavilov, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2016
* USD 425,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education
focused on the response of electrons in nanoscale structures to external fields,
such as electric fields. These systems are out of thermodynamic equilibrium and
the propagation of electrons is very sensitive to external fields. The PI will
pursue a theoretical description based on the quantum kinetic equation combined
with diagrammatic and semiclassical methods and focus on the electronic
properties of metallic nanoparticles and nanowires, and lateral electron quantum
dots which are governed by a complicated interplay between quantum electron
propagation and interaction-induced relaxations. The PI will analyze the role of
Coulomb, magnetic, and superconducting pairing interactions between electrons in
determining transport and thermodynamic properties of nanoscale conductors. Of
particular interest are the instabilities due to magnetic and superconducting
interactions. In equilibrium bulk systems these instabilities are known to
result in phase transitions. The PI will look for manifestations of these
instabilities in out-of-equilibrium nanoscale systems and their effects on non-
linear transport and noise characteristics of these systems. The PI will also
investigate transport in conventional superconductors with a subsystem of
interacting magnetic impurities. High mobility two-dimensional electron systems,
existing in semiconductor heterostructures, also show a wide variety of non-
linear phenomena in moderate magnetic fields, such as microwave-induced
magnetooscillations and oscillatory differential dc resistance. The results of
experimental studies of high mobility two dimensional electron gases have been
puzzling and further investigation is needed, including an analysis of electron-
electron and electron-phonon interactions. Two-dimensional systems with more
complicated band structure will be investigated as well. The education component
involves developing a special lecture course and a research opportunity for
students aimed at enabling them to learn modern theoretical methods and to work
independently on cutting edge research projects following their graduation. It
also includes an outreach component that will aim to explain the modern
challenges of condensed matter physics arising on nanometer length-scales to
high school students and members of the local community. The PI will proactively
engage members of underrepresented groups in research and learning. The PI will
also actively participate in existing local outreach programs aimed at enhancing
public awareness of progress, promises and benefits to society of materials
sciences and nanotechnology.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education focused on metallic structures of atoms and molecules that have
dimensions on the scale of nanometers. For reference, a human hair is about a
hundred thousand times larger. The electrons contained in these tiny
nanostructures require a quantum mechanical description that includes their
wave-like properties. This research project is focused on how the electrons in
nanostructures respond to external fields, like an electric field that one might
associate with conventional electric power source. Recent experiments have shown
that interesting new phenomena can arise. A focus of this research is the
discovery of new phenomena as well as contributing to the understanding of
experiments on wire-like nanostructures and nanostructures that are little more
than one or an assembly of dots. Some macroscopic materials become magnets or
may display other electronic states of matter. These arise as a consequence of
interactions among electrons. The PI is particularly interested in discovering
analogs of these states that arise in nanostructures where the electrons are
exposed to fields.

This is fundamental research that contributes to the discovery of new phenomena
and new states of matter on the nanoscale which can lead to new electronic
device technologies in the quest to sustain increasing performance and
decreasing size of electronic devices that have characterized the rise of modern
computers.

The education component involves developing a special lecture course and a
research opportunity for students aimed at enabling them to learn modern
theoretical methods and to work independently on cutting edge research projects
following their graduation. It also includes an outreach component that will aim
to explain the modern challenges of condensed matter physics arising on
nanometer length-scales to high school students and members of the local
community. The PI will proactively engage members of underrepresented groups in
research and learning. The PI will also actively participate in existing local
outreach programs aimed at enhancing public awareness of progress, promises and
benefits to society of materials sciences and nanotechnology.