* 0955518
* CAREER: A Roadmap for Quantum Simulation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Peter Love, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

Quantum theory and the computer were arguably the two most profound scientific
developments of the twentieth century. Quantum mechanics underpins every
fundamental physical science. Computation has made a profound impact on almost
every area of life, and science is no exception, with computer simulation
extending our understanding in fields ranging from from fluid mechanics to
genomics. However, when we apply computation to the study of quantum systems we
face fundamental limitations arising from the difference between classical and
quantum physics. Quantum mechanics presents serious conceptual challenges,
displacing basic classical notions of physical reality such as the deterministic
trajectories of Newtonian motion. This means that exact computer simulation of
quantum systems often requires tracking many possible outcomes simultaneously,
requiring resources which grow rapidly with the size of the system. However,
this also implies that computers which operate according to quantum mechanics
should have different capabilities than existing classical computers - in
particular, they should allow effcient simulation of quantum systems. Simulation
of other quantum systems is therefore one of the most promising applications of
quantum computing. The number of quantum bits (qubits) required to implement
these algorithms is in the few hundreds even for applications beyond the reach
of classical computation. The work funded in this proposal will provide a
theoretical roadmap of detailed experiments leading us from the few qubit
quantum computers of today to the applications on few tens to few hundreds of
qubits which can compete with current calculations of scientific interest. We
focus on applications of relevance to chemistry, specifically the calculation of
molecular energies and simulation of chemical reactions.

The development of even a medium scale quantum computer for quantum simulation
would be a technological feat of considerable importance. The work performed in
this project will bring this goal closer. Many aspects of this work will be
disseminated in the form of a numerical toolkit for quantum simulation, placing
the ability to easily design experiments in quantum simulation in the hands of
experimental groups. The focus on quantum simulation applied to quantum
chemistry means that such experiments will be guided towards the development of
devices capable of performing quantum simulations with broad impact in many
areas of physical science. The grant will support postdoctoral scholars and
undergraduate students at Haverford college and so enhance the research
environment for undergraduate students at Haverford college. The educational
experience of students outside the physical sciences at Haverford College will
be enhanced through the development of a new course for non-majors on
foundational questions in quantum mechanics. The impact of this work will also
extend beyond the student community through a set of public lectures connected
to this new course.