* 0955536
* CAREER: Encrypted Virus Nanoparticles for Targeted Gene Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Junghae Suh, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2016
* USD 544,156.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0955536 PI: Suh, Junghae ORG: Rice University

Title: CAREER: Encrypted Virus Nanoparticles for Targeted Gene Delivery

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Delivering nucleic acid-based therapeutics into target cells
specifically is a considerable challenge. Current approaches to achieving
targeted gene delivery are limited to modifying the delivery vectors to
recognize particular cell surface receptors. Unfortunately, in certain diseases,
such as breast cancer, chances of finding a specific cell surface biomarker that
identifies all cancer cells are low. Thus, a therapeutic that targets a single
cell surface receptor will likely face difficulties in achieving specificity. As
a potentially superior alternative approach, the PI proposes to develop
innovative virus based gene delivery vectors that are able to compute multiple
biomolecular signatures, which in combination are unique to breast cancer, to
achieve improved targeting and delivery of nucleic acid therapeutics into breast
cancer cells. The virus nanoparticles will be programmed to detect the presence
of enzymes misregulated in cancer. A collection of virus nanoparticles encoded
with high levels of biomolecular encryption will be developed. The nanoparticles
will "unlock" only upon sensing the correct combination of enzymatic inputs
preset for identity and intensity. Only successfully unlocked virus capsids will
go on to deliver their therapeutic payload into the cell nucleus. Rational and
combinatorial design approaches will be used in synergy to engineer virus
scaffolds whose bioactivities are actuated by single inputs or by dual inputs
under a defined Boolean logic operator. Such sophisticated gene delivery vectors
should yield improved therapeutic outcomes. The impact of this research extends
far beyond the gene delivery field. The creation of advanced genetically encoded
nanoparticles that are able to sense complex stimuli and respond with desired
programmed functions can be used as the active components of a number of
technologies that already depend on the capabilities of nanoparticles.
Nanomaterials able to conduct such complex biomolecular information processing
can be very useful for numerous applications, ranging from biomedicine to
national defense. This novel technology will enhance the current technical
possibilities of nanoscale devices.

BROADER IMPACTS: The PI proposes a highly integrated high school to graduate
level training, education, and outreach program centered on educating students
about viruses and their exciting place in bionanotechnology. Diversity has been
incorporated with care throughout the research and educational plan. The PI will
leverage the developed networks of several key organizations, including NSF-
funded Center for Biological and Environmental Nanotechnology (CBEN) and
Alliances for Graduate Education in the Professoriate (AGEP), to reach large
numbers of underrepresented students through lectures, informal lunch meetings,
and lab tours and demonstrations. High school and undergraduate students will be
exposed to the emerging technologies built from viruses and will be given the
opportunity to conduct research in the PIs laboratory. The PI will provide
extensive mentorship to students to guide them towards a successful future in
science and engineering. Knowledge and inventions derived from the PIs research
will be incorporated into a new graduate level course, "Viruses for
Bionanotechnology", as well as into the lectures aimed at high school and
undergraduate students. Importantly, the PIs graduate students will be trained
to become conscientious future mentors aware of the importance of diversity.