* 0955818
* CAREER: Typical and atypical development of brain regions for Theory of Mind
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Rebecca Saxe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* david moore
* 07/31/2016
* USD 446,069.00

Our ability to reason about the thoughts of other people is the bedrock of our
daily lives. Adults must think about others' thoughts constantly, from simple
conversations to bluffing in a poker game. Even one-year-old babies learning
their first words rely upon sophisticated inferences about the intentions of the
speaker. Thinking about thoughts is ubiquitous, but it presents a serious
cognitive and computational challenge. Prior research by Dr. Rebecca Saxe of MIT
suggests that typical human adults achieve this feat partly by using a dedicated
neural mechanism -- a group of brain regions that are recruited for thinking
about thoughts. This CAREER award will pursue the implications of these results:
How do specialized brain regions for thinking about thoughts develop in
childhood? What role do these regions play in the social cognitive deficits
observed in Autism? How is the development of these brain regions affected by
changes in childhood experiences, such as delayed access to language? The
proposed studies will investigate these questions by using behavioral tasks to
measure development in children's ability to think about others' thoughts, and
functional neuroimaging to measure concomitant development in the brain. The
experiments will compare task performance and neural responses in typically
developing children, children diagnosed with Autism, and children who
experienced delayed exposure to language (e.g., deaf children of non-signing
parents).

The research proposed here will generate new insights both within developmental
cognitive neuroscience, concerning the structure and function of a fundamental
domain of human cognition, and across disciplinary boundaries, addressing key
questions in developmental psychology and neuroscience. The project may also
help guide the translation of this basic research into interventions for
children who are socially at risk. Additionally, the project will support the
development of an elementary school neuroscience curriculum to bring the
generated knowledge about children's developing brains back to the children
themselves.