* 0955897
* EcoHealthNet: Ecology, Environmental Science and Health Research Network
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Gregory Glass, Ecohealth Alliance inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2015
* USD 497,121.00

Infectious diseases play a key role in ecosystems: regulating wildlife
populations, mediating inter-specific competition, causing dramatic population
declines, even driving local extinctions of wildlife. During the last two
decades, ecologists have led the growth of a new field of disease ecology,
developing theoretical and practical research that understands these
interactions. However, integration of disease ecology into veterinary and human
health sciences has been slow, partly due to the slow response of health science
curricula to incorporate these advances. This lack of integration, and the
significance of pathogens shared among animals and humans (zoonoes) has led to
repeated calls for increased collaboration among ecologists, veterinarians and
public health researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is
to develop "EcoHealthNet," a new "Ecohealth Alliance" linking Centers of
Excellence in NGOs, Universities, and Research Societies and fusing the fields
of Conservation Medicine, Medical Geography, and the "One Medicine" or "One
Health" concept. EcoHealthNet will fill a critical role in bringing together
ecologists, environmental biologists and the disciplines more traditionally
involved in infectious diseases - veterinary medical, human medical and public
health researchers. It will provide mentored training opportunities for more
than 100 graduate students, openly recruited from the medical (human and
veterinary), ecological, epidemiological, microbiological, economic, and
environmental science fields. The training will include workshops in
epidemiology, mathematical modeling of infectious disease, and field
epidemiology; and international applied field research in ongoing, well-
supported programs such as the ecology of Nipah virus, Avian Influenza, rodent
pathogen diversity in urban America; West Nile Virus and SARS ecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the five years of this project, over 100 students
from diverse backgrounds will be trained in tackling the global problem of
emerging diseases which threaten wildlife conservation, public health and
development. Research findings will be disseminated through peer-reviewed
publications, media interviews, conference presentations, and congressional
briefings, in close collaboration with national and intergovernmental agencies
that cover conservation, development, trade issues, and public health. Network
members will help make data publicly available via online databases, via the
student section of the International EcoHealth Association, the Wildlife Trust
Alliance and the EcoHealth Alliance.