* 0955494
* CAREER: Integrating Neuroimaging and Patient Studies of Learning and Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Daphna Shohamy, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 06/30/2016
* USD 794,508.00

Learning is essential to behavior, enabling organisms to draw on past experience
to improve choices. A fundamental question is how different brain systems
involved in learning interact to support adaptive decisions. With funding from
the National Science Foundation, Daphne Shohamy is addressing this fundamental
question. One way in which people gradually learn the relationship between
actions and outcomes is by using trial-by-error feedback. This type of learning
has traditionally been defined as implicit or habitual, and it is thought to
depend on a neural structure called the striatum. A distinct and independent
learning system is thought to uniquely support explicit memory for facts and
events and to depend on the hippocampus. Emerging data suggest that this dual-
system view of memory is over-simplified. This research program explores how
different brain systems for learning interact and jointly guide behavior. The
project adopts an integrative approach that draws on functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies in healthy individuals, combined with studies
of learning in patients with isolated damage to specific brain systems. Imaging
studies provide insight into the spatial and temporal characteristics of brain
and cognitive mechanisms. Patient studies augment evidence of the necessity of a
system for specific learning processes. By integrating functional imaging and
patient research, results from this project will contribute to a deeper
understanding of the role of the striatum and the hippocampus in learning, and
of how these learning systems interact to guide adaptive
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program provides unique
opportunities for training and education at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. Integrating multiple core tools of cognitive neuroscience (functional
imaging, patient studies, behavioral analyses), students are trained in
different approaches to a unified research question. Through this training, they
learn to value the principle of converging methods, a theme that is further
emphasized in a program of regular joint meetings with students and faculty in
laboratories with complementary expertise. Determining the brain and cognitive
mechanisms underlying different forms of learning will lay the foundation for
potential future interventions to improve education and treat learning deficits,
both in healthy individuals and in individuals with brain disorders. To
facilitate this translational process, the research program forms the basis of a
program of public outreach about the relevance of research on learning and the
brain for education and public health. Public lectures and an undergraduate
course on cognitive neuroscience in the media focus on broad communication of
the relevance of cognitive neuroscience research for many aspects of society,
including education, law and medicine. &lt;br/&gt;