* 0955449
* Supporting Young Investigators Summer Research Institutes of the Consortium for the Science of Socio-Technical Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Steven Sawyer, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 191,197.00

This award will fund two years of Summer Institutes for young investigators of
socio-technical systems. The Summer Institutes are designed to foster
intellectual depth and development among the young researchers who attend. These
workshops will be managed by the Consortium for the Science of Socio-Technical
Systems (CSST). The CSST resulted from recognizing the growing importance of
research on the interplay of humans and technology, or socio-technical systems
as identified by prior intellectual and community building efforts of the NSF.
The CSST involves faculty members in diverse fields, such as social informatics,
social computing, CSCW, computational social science, HCI, and information
science. The Summer Institute select late stage graduate students and early
stage faculty for participation in the program through competitive review of a
research based submission. Through an intensive multi-day program the Summer
Institute provides an opportunity for research programs to be shaped through
intellectual exchange with more experienced researchers as well as enhanced
through collaboration with other young researchers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual experience during the Summer Institute facilitates creation of a
social network among the participants and with several senior researchers who
serve as instructors for the Institute. This network plays a major role in the
professional development of the participants and in the evolution of the field
of socio-technical systems research. The diversity of Summer Institute
participants (e.g., institutional, disciplinary, geographic, gender, minority
group status), serves to broaden participants' perspectives at a critical stage
in their careers. In addition, there will be more attention to organizing the
CSST and developing more ways to increase the visibility of the CSST activities.