* 0955811
* CAREER: Hyaluronan-Protein Networks in Solution and in the Polymer Coat of Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2017
* Jennifer Curtis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 01/31/2017
* USD 512,330.00

This Career award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research to Georgia Institute of Technology is to study the mechanistic
understanding of the link between the properties of hyaluronan (HA)-rich
materials and biological functions. A number of advanced micro-characterization
techniques that are rarely used in cell biology studies will be applied in this
study, including passive microrheology, fluorescence recover after
photobleaching, optical force probe microscopy and osmotic pressure studies.
These biophysical and soft condensed matter tools will be used for a systematic
investigation of the structural properties (network architecture, heterogeneity,
mesh size, bundling, shape) and mechanical properties (compressibility, loss and
storage moduli) of two major categories of HA-protein systems. In a first
thrust, model HA-protein solutions will be used to investigate HA interactions
with versican, a protein found in the extracellular matrix, and with the
presumptive HA crosslinking proteins TSG-6, heavy chain and PTX-3. The second
thrust directly tackles the pericellular coat, a HA-protein network anchored to
many cell surfaces. Recent studies have indicated that mechanical and
topographical features of HA-protein structures imparts onto its biological
environment a diverse range of structural and viscoelastic properties with far-
reaching consequences for cell physiology and pathology such as fertilization,
cell migration, inflammation, and cancer metastasis. Overall, this project is
expected to provide both a very fundamental scientific knowledge in biomaterials
and cell biology. As part of the outreach activities, these research studies
will be integrated into the Direct to Discovery program at Georgia Tech that
provides seamless video conferencing between researchers and classrooms using
Georgia?s Peach Net high-speed internet infrastructure, and working closely with
a designated teacher in a rural, socioeconomically-disadvantaged community to
develop new teaching and training modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hyalrunon
polymer plays an important role in many body functions - both physiological and
pathological - such as lubricating fluid in cartilage, fertilization of human
egg, joint inflammation and spread of cancer. Yet, very little is known about
these various hyaluronan architectures, and their functions and properties.
Using novel tool and approaches, this project is expected to provide both
fundamental scientific knowledge of this biomaterial and cell biology, while
simultaneously providing new insights to a material whose therapeutic use is
well established. As part of the outreach program and working closely with a
designated teacher in a rural, socioeconomically-disadvantaged community, this
research project will be integrated into the Direct to Discovery (D2D) program
at Georgia Institute of Technology that provides seamless video conferencing
between researchers and classrooms using Georgia?s Peach Net high-speed internet
infrastructure. Modules will be designed to combine the teacher?s lecture
material with (virtual) visits to the PIs Lab using D2D technology, giving
students an opportunity to explore cell culture, study viscoelastic properties
of materials, and use of different experimental tools ? all the while reaching
educational goals to learn topics such as the ?structure and function of cells?,
?nature of matter?, and ?conceptual laws of forces?.