* 0955170
* CAREER: Multi-Functional Particle Assemblies in Polymer Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2010,08/31/2010
* Pinar Akcora, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2010
* USD 90,050.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will design multi-functional
polymer composites displaying self-assembled nanostructures with tunable
mechanical and electrical properties in this CAREER project. The project aims to
construct equilibrium magnetic nanostructures in which their multi-functional
properties can be varied and optimized with the intermolecular forces. Polymer
decorated iron oxide nanoparticles are a comprehensive model system offering
both anisotropic and isotropic interactions that can be tuned with particle
size, particle functionality (e.g. length and density of grafted chains, ions or
bioligands) and external magnetic fields. This research plan will explain the
role of various interactions and elucidate the formation of thermodynamically
equilibrium self-assembled structures through non-linear rheology, scattering
and microscopy. The PI proposes to investigate the fundamentals of the self-
assembly mechanism for three-dimensional structures and their novel reversible
self-assembly behavior. The role of conformational entropy of polymer chains on
the assembly mechanism will be also examined. In addition, the phase diagram for
a mixture of particles with different sizes will be studied to achieve complex
novel structures other than obtained from monomodal particle sizes. Cluster
organization kinetics and transition from disordered to ordered structures will
be measured in-situ to underpin the stability of equilibrium states and
reversibility of complex architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will offer a
promising and simple synthesis and processing method to make multi-functional
nanomaterials which can be used for applications requiring enhanced mechanical
and electrical properties. This CAREER project will open new routes to the self-
assembly of magnetic nanoparticles which can be applied to self-healing
membranes and composites with tunable properties. The results will have an
impact on design of new polymeric composites as they behave akin to smart
materials, such as stimuli-responsive copolymers sensitive to pH and temperature
or materials in which the conductivity and transduction properties change with
the arrangement of particles. Moreover, the reversible self-assembly concept
will have potential applications in biocompatible materials, mechanical sensors,
highly reinforced compounds and new energetic materials. The fundamental
nanoscale interactions and their impact on the mesoscale properties (e.g.
combined mechanical and conductive properties in one material) of flexible
polymer nanocomposites will be explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the course
of this project, the PI plans to educate and train high school science teachers
by offering research experiences in her laboratory to develop a collaborative
science project for high school science curricula. To foster the interest of
underrepresented students in science, research and engineering, she will work
with the Society of Women Engineers and disseminate her research findings in
their local and regional meetings and outreach activities. The PI will integrate
her research activities into teaching of polymer science and will also actively
engage undergraduate students in research. &lt;br/&gt;