* 0955445
* Workshop: Engineering the Operations of Future Manufacturing Systems; held at the Univ. of Michigan, May 12-14, 2010.
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* S. Jack Hu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 08/31/2010
* USD 39,540.00

This grant provides support for a workshop on "Engineering the Operations of
Future Manufacturing Systems", which will be held in conjunction with a regional
meeting of the National Academy of Engineering on a similar topic, "Engineering
to Improve the Operations of Manufacturing Enterprises - A National Symposium"
in May 2010. A group of experts in fields related to manufacturing will be
invited to discuss how knowledge and expertise from three domains: 1) the
physical sciences that underpin the development of modern manufacturing
processes and materials; 2) the mathematical sciences that provide models and
tools that comprise operations research; and 3) the life and behavioral sciences
that provide the basis for human system integration guidelines and models, can
be integrated to develop new models and methods to improve the operations of
manufacturing enterprises. The group's initial impressions and recommendations
will be presented to the NAE symposium to seek feedback and suggestions, and
will be revised and then summarized into a report to
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcomes of the workshop are: (1) A set
of recommendations on new areas of research on improving operations within
manufacturing enterprises; (2) A potential framework for implementing the
recommendations; (3) Identification of new technologies to keep the US
manufacturing competitive on the world stage; and (4) Specific recommendations
to guide potential changes in engineering education to support future
collaborative Operations Engineering and Manufacturing Engineering R&amp;D and
academic programs.