* 0955636
* CAREER: Rational Design of Green Catalysts for Chemical Oxidations
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Elon Ison, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 03/31/2015
* USD 530,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports Professor Elon A. Ison at North Carolina
State University who will develop new methodologies using transition metal
catalysis to accomplish the clean and efficient oxidation of hydrocarbons. The
proposed work will rationally design new catalytic systems for use in the
conversion of hydrocarbon feed stocks into valuable materials via chemical
oxidation. Traditionally, oxidations are performed with strong stoichiometric
oxidants, including salts of Mn(VII), Cr(VI), Os(VIII), and chlorine-based
oxoanions. These reagents, in addition to their significant costs, lead to
environmental contaminants. The solution to the critical problem of selective
oxidation is the development of transition metal catalysts that can mediate
reactions that result in desired oxidized products and minimize undesirable by-
products. In nature, enzymes are employed as catalysts for aerobic oxidations
and are characterized as oxidases and oxygenases depending on their catalytic
mechanisms. Oxidases catalyze the oxidation of substrates by employing dioxygen
as a hydrogen acceptor, while oxygenases oxidize substrates by oxygen atom
transfer. Oxygen atom-transfer oxidation reactions, that is, oxygenase mimics,
are well-known and are among the most successful methods in asymmetric
catalysis. These processes highlight the two main strategies that will be
employed in this research program that will design systems for the catalytic
oxidation of organic substrates. Processes that do not involve oxygen atom
transfer in substrate oxidation (?oxidase? systems), will utilize oxygen as a
terminal oxidant, and processes that involve the transfer of an oxygen atom to a
substrate (?oxygenase? systems), will utilize nitrous oxide as an oxidant.

Broader impacts will involve the development of new courses and labs on the
undergraduate and graduate levels in the area of catalysis and green chemistry.
Additionally, a new graduate seminar series called ?Inorganic Research Seminar
Series?, and an annual symposium entitled ?Inorganic Catalysis and Energy (ICE)?
aimed at establishing collaborations among the inorganic groups at North
Carolina State University and the research institutions within the Research
Triangle area will be developed. Broadening participation will include the
mentorship, development, and recruitment of a new generation of scientists
(high-school, undergraduate, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates)
from diverse backgrounds to explore careers in STEM fields that utilize
catalysis as a technology.