* 0955849
* Systematics and Biogeography of the Family Cicadidae Worldwide: Subsampling the Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Chris Simon, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2015
* USD 664,150.00

The NSF Tree of Life project has made substantial contributions to establishing
the major branches of the tree of life dating back hundreds of millions of
years; this project will focus on the most recent branches. The major goal of
the current proposal is to reconstruct and interpret the evolution of the family
Cicadidae worldwide as a model for the origin and transcontinental spread of
insect biodiversity over the last 65 million years. Most of the plants and
animals populating the earth today arose during this era. Genetic data will be
used to test five hypotheses concerning the timing and diversification of this
remarkable group of more than 3000 insect species. To accomplish this new
molecular and analytical tools for genealogical tree building, biogeography and
speciation/extinction studies will be incorporated. Fossil and geological
calibrations will be applied to groups that no one has previously attempted to
date. Cicadas have natural advantages because they are distributed worldwide and
their natural history creates strong genetic/geographic patterns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the course of our research a new generation of
systematists will be trained and trees, maps, keys, photographs, and databases
will be created and made available through the worldwide web. A strong
international team of researchers and collaborators with complementary expertise
in natural history, acoustic analyses, morphological taxonomy, and molecular
systematics as well as detailed knowledge of local biogeographic regions has
been assembled. The phylogenies produced will help systematists to group
undescribed species and genera for which morphological characters are elusive or
contradictory. New biodiversity is guaranteed to be discovered. Higher-level
taxonomy that has been confused for more than 100 years will be re-evaluated in
light of new molecular and morphological data.