* 0955346
* CAREER: Shear Banding in Bulk Metallic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2010,08/31/2010
* Wendelin Wright, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 08/31/2010
* USD 115,539.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Metallic glasses exhibit enormous yield strengths that exceed
those of the strongest superalloys, but their use as structural materials is
limited by their low ductility, the direct consequence of shear banding. The
long-term research goal of this proposal is to characterize shear band
propagation in bulk metallic glasses so that the extraordinary strengths of this
unique class of materials can be exploited for use in structural applications.
In pursuit of this goal, the research objectives are to test the hypotheses that
1) shear bands in bulk metallic glasses propagate simultaneously rather than
progressively across a sample, 2) shear band velocities are typically on the
order of millimeters per second during serrated flow, and 3) shear band velocity
is a function of the imposed strain rate. The final failure event will be
characterized, and the conditions under which a shear band propagates
catastrophically will be determined. The research approach requires macro and
microscale testing at strain rates spanning several orders of magnitude in
concert with temporally and spatially resolved measurements of strain.
Characterization techniques to be employed include high-speed video imaging and
data acquisition from strain gages during uniaxial compression testing,
microcompression testing using nanoindentation, scanning electron microscopy,
and acoustic emission measurements of shear banding
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: ?Metallic glass? - the name
suggests something quite remarkable. Metallic glasses and conventional metal
alloys are typically combinations of several elements, such as aluminum, copper,
nickel, and titanium. But whereas the atoms in conventional metals are arranged
in orderly, crystalline arrays, the atomic arrangements in metallic glasses have
no long-range order. The result is that the mechanical behavior of metallic
glasses is fundamentally different from that of their crystalline counterparts.
Most notably, metallic glasses are extraordinarily strong, but unfortunately,
they exhibit macroscopically brittle behavior. Since bulk metallic glasses
comprise a relatively new class of materials, the current understanding of their
mechanical behavior is far less sophisticated than that of crystalline metals,
particularly with respect to the atomic level and microscopic mechanisms of
plastic deformation. The research goal of this proposal is to investigate the
microscopic deformation mechanisms in metallic glasses through a combination of
mechanical testing, materials characterization, and modeling so that the
potential of metallic glasses as structural materials can be fully realized. A
laboratory-based workshop on metallic glasses for first generation
undergraduates majoring in engineering at Santa Clara University (SCU) will
enhance the cultural capital of these students at an early point in their
academic careers to maximize their opportunities for enrichment and success in
college. This workshop will be adapted for use in other SCU outreach efforts for
underserved high school students in the community. Results and insights gained
from assessments of outreach to first generation college students and members of
underrepresented groups will contribute to the development of best practices for
promoting the participation of these students in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields. At a local level, these efforts will
increase the number of students from first generation and underrepresented
groups majoring in STEM fields.