* 0955003
* CAREER: Colloidal Origami: Directing and Designing Complex Colloidal Assemblies Using Magnetic Fields
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2015
* Sibani Biswal, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 11/30/2015
* USD 428,178.00

0955003 Biswal

The aim of this proposal is to develop linear colloidal chains that fold into
specific shapes using self and directed assembly. This colloidal origami will
consist of chains of magnetic colloids that are linked together to form a bead
spring bead structure. These chains will have welldefined chemical and physical
properties that function to fold them into specific architectures. For example,
by controlling the repulsive and attractive interactions along a flexible chain,
a colloidal knot structure can be formed. Active exploration of diverse
chemistries and connectivities in these polymer inspired colloidal assemblies
will offer the potential for selforganized materials with greater chemical
diversity and stability than current colloidal assemblies.

Linking magnetic colloidal particles into flexible chains will be achieved by
exploiting laminar flow characteristics in microfluidic devices. The first
objective of this work is to create a chain with heterogeneous rigidity. These
multi link chains, colloidal analogs of block copolymers, are composed of
magnetic particles which have been linked together with polymers of different
lengths. The second objective is to generate attractive and repulsive
interactions along the backbone of a chain by introducing point dipoles and
patterned charges. This includes synthesizing ferromagnetic particles with
varying magnetic susceptibilities and creating chains composed of ferromagnetic
and paramagnetic particles. The final objective is to understand the resulting
chain structures that form with the goal of controlling the folding pathways of
these chains.

The intellectual merit of this proposal is the development of novel colloidal
microstructures formed when magnetic particles are chemically patterned using
microfluidic flows and magnetic fields. These microstructures are of great
interest because they impart interesting material properties; for example, by
switching from one microstructure to a closely related structure, one may alter
the viscosity, elastic modulus, and optical properties of the material. This
assembly concept is driven primarily by the desire to create materials that have
the capacity for folding and self-assembly, but also possess the diversity of
possible chemical functionalities.

The educational plan in this proposal includes integrating the research proposed
with interactions with local middle school and high school students. The PI's
lab will host two female high school students in a project using magnetic
colloidal assembly in microfluidic devices. These students will use this project
to compete in the International Sustainable World Project Olympiad, an
international science fair aimed at promoting awareness in science and
technology. The plan also includes outreach to the community in the form of lab
demos entitled Magnetic Gummy Worms for middle school children. The PI will also
engage undergraduate and graduate students in scientific learning through
research and the development of new curriculum and colloquia. This includes the
development of an advanced level course entitled Directed Colloidal Assembly,
that will be available to chemists, physicists, and engineers.

This research proposal brings together methods from surface science and
microfluidics to create new colloidal materials. The broader impact of this
proposed work is to develop an integrated research and teaching program on
colloidal origami that will advance the field of soft materials by leading to a
better understanding of colloidal assembly and opening the door to new particle
technologies.