* 0955970
* EAGER: Towards Complete MAV Control Using Arrays of Synthetic Jets:  Preliminary Study
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2012
* Reda Mankbadi, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 07/31/2012
* USD 71,503.00

The project investigates the development of flow/flight control system for a
fixed-wing micro air vehicle (MAV) operating in a gusty urban environment, by
using a carefully distributed array of zero-net-mass-flux (ZNMF) synthetic-jet
actuators. A detailed analysis of a target scenario is provided as the primary
motivation for the proposed efforts. Critical issues in the MAV flow, flight
stability and propulsion MAV are identified. A high-fidelity numerical approach
is proposed for addressing a number of fundamental issues related to (i)
accurate modeling of synthetic jet micro-flows including scaling effects, (ii)
elucidating effectiveness of synthetic jets for control of highly separated
unsteady MAV flows at low Reynolds numbers, and (iii) examining the possibility
of using reduced-order models of synthetic jets for future multi-disciplinary
design optimization studies. Additionally, the project efforts include
supervision of student teams in developing a Matlab Simulink environment for
design of controlled MAV flight envelope using low-order representation of
arrays of synthetic jets with tailored phase alignment and frequencies to
produce adequate forces and moments. This work will lay foundation for follow-up
collaborative efforts on MAV flow, flight stability and thrust control modeling,
multi-disciplinary design optimization, micro-manufacturing, and eventual
testing of the vehicle prototype.

Advancing the state-of-the-art of the micro air vehicle flight control
technology, addressing fundamental flow control issues at the level of
interacting jet micro flows and highly unsteady, separated grazing macro flows,
and ensuring strong participation of undergraduate and graduate students in
challenging design tasks constitute the primary intellectual merits of the
proposed plan. As an educational merit, the planned activities will
significantly enhance the offered design curriculum by introducing new advanced
topics with focus on analysis, design, and optimization of micro air vehicle
systems. In its broader impact, the integrated plan will contribute to creating
a research team environment in the predominantly teaching university, will
involve a significant number of undergraduate (including female and minority)
students in advanced research projects, and will pave the way to the proposed
multi-university collaboration effort involving simulations and design of a MAV
prototype equipped with arrays of synthetic jets for complete control of the
vehicle.