* 0955649
* INTEROP ECO-OP: Employing Cyber Infrastructure Data Technologies to Facilitate IEA for Climate Impacts in NE & CA LME's (#3 & #7)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Andrew Maffei, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,089,000.00

Award: 0955649 PI: Peter Fox Project Title INTEROP. ECO-OP: Employing Cyber
Infrastructure Data Technologies to Facilitate IEA for Climate Impacts in NE &
CA LME's (#3 & #7)

The purpose of this INTEROP proposal is to facilitate the deployment of an
Integrated Ecosystem Approach (IEA) to management in the Northeast and
California Current Large Marine Ecosystems (LMEs). The direct result of the
proposed activity will be application-level data and information enhanced
communication for developing the consensus networks to define the specific
components of interest to support the implementation of NOAA?s Driver-Pressure-
State-Impact Response framework (DPSIR) decision framework and the
cyberinfrastructure technologies to ensure data interoperability and reuse. This
new capability will serve as the essential foundation for the formal synthesis
and quantitative analysis of information on relevant natural and socio?economic
factors in relation to specified ecosystem management goals which can be applied
in other LMEs.

The scope of the network includes key stakeholders in four areas: scientists and
data providers, agencies, national communities of practice, and decision makers/
policy developers. The network will undertake major activities at the core team
working level; technical sessions and focused workshops within each of the
stakeholder areas as well as across and among the areas. Integrative activities,
aligned with existing NSF-funded interoperability focused projects, community
conferences and meetings will provide dissemination and broad engagement
opportunities. Also key to the network activities is semantically rich use case
development using expertise in semantic web methodologies, especially related to
diverse vocabulary needs across the stakeholder areas.

Explicit in this project is the very broad dissemination of results; the diverse
major stakeholders include decision and policy makers both at the agency and
government levels as well as agency scientists and managers. The developed
semantics based on leveraging existing standard vocabularies is likely to have
very broad interest and use and enable extended interoperability across many
disciplines. The very nature of open (semantically-enabled) data frameworks is
that they receive substantial unintended use with the potential to provide
substantial infrastructure improvements for research and education.

The potential benefits to society at large in terms of providing a routine and
sustainable IEA that is linked to decisions and policy along with the feedbacks
to the underlying monitoring and data collection cannot be under estimated. This
project provides a pilot toward a robust and sustainable implementation for new
national agendas such as those contained in the U.S. National Ocean Policy (July
2010).