* 0955485
* CAREER:   Quantitative Mass Spectrometry Analysis of Histone Codes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Benjamin Garcia, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2012
* USD 652,752.00

Intellectual Merit: This project addresses an important fundamental question in
biology. Is there a biological code of modifications on histone proteins that
regulate gene expression patterns? Histones are small proteins that associate
with DNA to form chromosomes, and individual site-specific post-translational
modifications on the histones are associated with gene activation or silencing.
However, the effect that simultaneous combinations of histone modifications have
on gene activity is not known. The main reason for this lack of knowledge is
that methods for quantitative characterization, or even qualitative
identification, of combinatorial histone modifications by any standard
biological technique do not exist. Towards this end, this research will develop
novel mass spectrometry based proteomic methods and accompanying bioinformatics
to quantitatively characterize combinatorial histone modification patterns and
their influence on gene expression under different biological conditions in
yeast. The integrated and transformative proteomic techniques developed by this
project will be of immediate use to a wide range of scientists. Results of these
experiments will be made publically available in a web based database hosted
through the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics at Princeton
University. These studies in combination with biochemical experiments will help
provide a systems biology outlook on gene expression that will lay the basic
scientific foundation to advance several applications, such as cellular
reprogramming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will provide
an introduction to genomics and proteomics to both educators and students
(including minorities) at the community college level. Although there are many
existing programs to support undergraduate and graduate research at the
university level and to promote science to K-12 students, few such programs
exist for community college students. Multiple opportunities will be made
available. Strategic partnerships with local industrial collaborators have been
created to initiate a mechanism of support for community college student summer
research experiences. A summer proteomics workshop will be used to educate and
train community college educators in theory and practice of modern proteomics
research. This workshop will offer classroom lectures and laboratory training,
allowing the attendees to prepare samples, acquire and interpret data and learn
post-acquisition data processing. A website containing tutorials, reviews and
other resources will be made freely available as an external means for the
community college educators to continuously update their proteomics training
upon returning to their campuses. Outreach initiatives will include recruitment
of underrepresented students through participation in minority research
conferences such as at the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native
Americans in Science, and through direct interaction with diversity programs
(i.e. McNair Scholars) at other colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
co-funded by CHE (Chemistry of Life Processes) and MCB (Genes and Genome
Systems).