* 0955379
* CAREER: The Plasmochemistry and Photochemistry of the Upper Atmosphere Induced by Transient Luminous Events
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2017
* Ningyu Liu, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 02/28/2017
* USD 412,801.00

The project will investigate lightning as a source for high-altitude optical
emissions known as transient luminous events (TLEs). The objectives of the
investigation are to quantify the plasmochemical and photochemical effects of
TLEs in the upper atmosphere and to reveal possible pathways of atmospheric
species upon impact by short, impulsive external forces. These goals will be
achieved by developing and applying a self-consistent plasma chemistry and
photochemistry model for TLEs, remote sensing of TLEs through optical
spectroscopy, continuous data acquisition by building and maintaining a TLE
observation site at Florida Tech, and comparing modeling results with satellite
measurements and high-speed video observations from
ground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational objectives of the project are to
train the next generation of researchers in the areas of aeronomy and to foster
the interest of high school students and general public in atmospheric sciences.
The education activities include: 1) graduate and undergraduate student
training, 2) curriculum development by incorporating elements of the research
into classroom, 3) building a TLE website for data sharing and public outreach,
and 4) improving high school science education by participating in the Florida
Tech InSTEP program, an NSF-funded GK-12 program.