* 0955111
* CAREER: Efficient, Secure and Robust Control of Cyber Physical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Bruno Sinopoli, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/29/2016
* USD 400,000.00

As computers, communication bandwidth become increasingly faster and cheaper,
computing and communication capabilities will be embedded in interconnected
devices placed in complex physical environments. We refer to systems that bridge
the cyber-world of computing and communications with the physical one as cyber-
physical systems (CPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The convergence of computing and communications
raises significant engineering challenges because of the scale, the need to
bridge physical and software domains, and the need to operate efficiently,
securely and reliably. We propose to develop innovative methods and tools for
three critical sub-problems:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Efficient Resource
Allocation, i.e. the capability to efficiently parse the potentially enormous
amount of data to distill the information relevant to failure/attack detection,
estimation, control, and decision-making. We propose to study novel approaches
for sensor scheduling to address energy efficiency and performance guarantees
with respect to estimation and detection
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Security, i.e. the capability to detect
malicious attacks, to guarantee continuity of operations with gracefully
decreased functionalities, and to ultimately thwart attacks by reconfiguring and
restoring full functionality. We propose to integrate security in the system
design process, by defining classes of threats and designing attack resilient
control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Robustness/Reconfigurability. CPS must be
engineered to handle change. We propose to model and analyze the interaction
between sensing, communication and computing infrastructure to enable robust/
reconfigurable design of decision-making
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technological impact of the proposed work is rooted in the development of design
tools for robust, secure CPS that will reduce design cycle time, increase
operational efficiency and make a compelling economic case for widespread use of
CPS. Efficiency implies less energy consumption and therefore lower emissions.
Reliability and security will prove crucial to the adoption of such technology
in many industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The educational impact of
this project stems from the transition of research directly to classrooms
through cutting-edge courses and to laboratories by building suitable test-beds
that will offer a comprehensive learning experience for the next generation of
engineering students.