* 0955561
* CAREER: Theoretical Approach to Dirac and Related Critical Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Oskar Vafek, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2015
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports integrated
research, education, and outreach activities in theoretical condensed matter
physics. The research focuses on materials which exhibit Dirac, or related,
criticality. The research has three thrusts: 1.) explore the effects of
temperature, the electron-electron interaction, and disorder on the transport
scaling functions of systems where low-energy excitations behave as massless
Dirac fermions; 2.) examine the effects of interaction and temperature on the
electronic ordering of Dirac and related materials, both near weak and strong
coupling instabilities; 3.) explore the physics of materials where Dirac
fermions arise due to an onset of many-body ordering and understand their
coupling to magnetic fields and to collective excitations near phase
transitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this proposal
involves developing new wiki-based learning tools at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels. The PI will utilize collaborative wiki-textbook writing as a
tool for building a firm knowledge structure and for reinforcing students'
conceptual grasp of the subject. At the completion of the teaching component of
the proposal, the PI plans to publish the findings in a pedagogical press,
expecting that this interactive learning model will have impact across academia.
Education and outreach efforts will be linked to the Florida State University--
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory Center for Integrated Research and
Learning. The PI will develop a wiki-component for the SuperNet, an educational
network connecting scientists and teachers with a shared purpose of getting
students interested in and excited about science. The goal of the network is to
establish new learning communities of scientists, teachers, and students who
jointly explore physics through inquiry-based, hands-on activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports integrated research, education, and outreach activities in
fundamental theoretical condensed matter physics. In nature, there appear to be
no known elementary particles that are charged and massless. Photons, the quanta
of light for example, are massless particles, but they have no electric charge.
Recently, condensed matter physicists have uncovered a special class of
materials whose charge carrying excitations behave as if they are massless
particles. The electronic excitations in a two-dimensional, single atom thick
sheet of carbon, known as graphene, behave like massless particles. Through the
remarkable physics and chemistry of materials, the properties of massless and
charged particles can be explored. These materials may be useful for future
electronics device applications due to the properties of these intriguing
particles. The PI aims to develop and use advanced theoretical techniques to
further unlock the mysteries of graphene and to further understand the
consequences of the unusual behavior of electrons in this and related materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this proposal involves
developing new wiki-based learning tools at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. The PI will utilize collaborative wiki-textbook writing as a tool for
building a firm knowledge structures and for reinforcing students' conceptual
grasp of the subject. At the completion of the teaching component of the
proposal, the PI plans to publish the findings in a pedagogical press, expecting
that this interactive learning model will have impact across academia. Education
and outreach efforts will be linked to the Florida State University--National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory Center for Integrated Research and Learning. The
PI will develop a wiki-component for the SuperNet, an educational network
connecting scientists and teachers with a shared purpose of getting students
interested in and excited about science. The goal of the network is to establish
new learning communities of scientists, teachers, and students who jointly
explore physics through inquiry-based, hands-on activities.