* 0955824
* CAREER: Chemical Heterogeneity in Earth's Lower Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2017
* Kanani Lee, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2017
* USD 619,600.00

The Earth's bulk composition is fundamental to the understanding of the
formation and evolution of not only Earth but also other planets in our own and
other solar systems. However, estimates of the composition of Earth's mantle,
which comprises more than three-quarters of the Earth's volume and nearly two-
thirds of its mass, remain controversial and elusive. The compositional makeup
of this region is especially important for understanding chemical heterogeneity,
which constrains deep structure and mixing and is crucial for inferring the
thermo-chemical evolution of the Earth, from planet building and the magma
ocean, to continental growth and the formation of the oceans and atmosphere.
Investigations of natural rock assemblages that have compositions that include
aluminum and calcium in addition to oxygen, silicon, magnesium and iron, have
suggested that the upper and lower mantle are chemically distinct and that the
transition zone may not only involve a change in mineral structure but may also
mark a quasi-compositional boundary. There are several candidates for the
'natural' bulk Earth composition, and in this CAREER award she seeks to
investigate the properties and signatures of these under extreme conditions. For
example, two plausible lower-mantle compositions include one derived from the
building blocks of the planet and another derived from parent bodies of ocean
island basalts. Investigating the behavior of these compositions at high
pressures and temperatures will test hypotheses on Earth's formation, elucidate
the geochemistry of the deep mantle, and determine if mantle reservoirs of
varying composition are seismologically identifiable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed mineral physics research uses extreme experimental conditions designed
to reproduce and 'probe' the Earth's deep interior, and the exploration of such
inaccessible regions is readily disseminated to the public through multimedia
and graphical approaches. In particular, the PI proposes a novel way of teaching
Earth science through the use of comics, in both printed and digital form. In
doing so, the PI will be able to make topics such as Earth formation and
evolution more accessible to students in the New Haven Public Schools System, as
well as to the general public through online publication. Another integral part
of this proposal is the training of graduate and undergraduate students in high-
pressure mineral physics research through laser-heated diamond-anvil cell
experiments at national synchrotron facilities. This training will contribute to
the education of the next generation of independent researchers who will possess
a thorough knowledge of high-pressure experiments that impact our understanding
of the transfer of mass and energy within our planet. The proposed research will
be carried out at facilities of all scales (PI's laboratory, departmental,
national and international laboratories) and results will be disseminated
broadly through teaching, community outreach, seminars, conferences and peer-
reviewed publications.