* 0955265
* CAREER:  Analysis and Measures of Risks in Modern Electric Energy Portfolio and Its Impacts on Power System Reliability: Measures, Algorithms and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Ning Jiang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,002.00

Objectives:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Electric Supply Risk research
is to establish scientific frameworks and to develop novel algorithms for
measurement of risks in future electric energy supply and their impacts on the
power system reliability. The approaches include extending the recent advances
in risk analysis theory to develop efficient computational algorithms, construct
output models of intermittent and variable energy resources, and apply the
research outcomes to develop measures of the risks in future electric energy
supply. These risk measures will be used to understand and quantify the impact
of integration of large-scale uncertain generation resources on the power system
reliability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in its interdisciplinary research that
will advance the principles, measures, algorithms and applications for
understanding and quantifying the risks in the future energy supply and their
impacts on the power system reliability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project comes from the
fundamental research and the technological advancement that address several key
issues in defining the impact of risks from renewable energy resources. These
risks directly affect the execution of the national energy policy. The broader
impact is also reflected in the integrated education to address a serious
nation-wide issue: severe reduction of power engineering workforce in the near
future. This project will promote the participation from under-represented
groups and women in power and renewable energy research. Furthermore, the
proposed outreach to high school students will be helpful to increase their
awareness of the benefit of renewable energy and the necessity of risk
management.