* 0955353
* CAREER: Magnetostructural Correlations in Rare Earth - Transition Metal Pnictides and Tetrelides
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Mykhailo Shatruk, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2015
* USD 511,824.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in DMR studies chemical factors that influence
magnetic behavior of solid state materials. The first part of the project
focuses on investigation of magnetostructural correlations and anomalous
magnetic behaviors in rare-earth transition metal phosphides and arsenides with
the ThCr2Si2-type structure. The overall goal is to understand how chemical
modifications impact the structural and magnetic properties of these phases,
which exhibit dramatically different magnetic behavior depending on the nature
of the rare-earth and transition metals. The targeted materials are closely
related to the isostructural FeAs-based superconductors, and it is expected that
findings from this part of the project will also provide knowledge that is
relevant to other important classes of materials. The second part of the project
uses exploratory synthesis for discovery of lanthanide-rich magnetic phases in
Ln-T-X systems (Ln = rare-earth metal; T = transition metal; X = P, As, Ge, Sn).
Very few phases have been reported in the rare-earth rich part of such ternary
diagrams, and the extensive exploration of compositions with &gt; 40% content of
Ln may uncover new materials with prominent magnetic properties. The study of
correlations between structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of these
materials will contribute to our understanding of complex interactions between
the localized f-electrons and itinerant d-band
magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in DMR supports the search for magnetic solids
with improved performance which requires fundamental understanding of
correlations between the crystal structure and magnetic behavior. The proposed
research is directed at the exploration of this relationship and preparation of
new materials with potentially promising magnetic properties. These goals will
be achieved through chemical modification of materials to control their magnetic
behavior and the use of innovative synthetic approaches for the discovery of new
magnets. The project will provide training for graduate and undergraduate
students in the fields of solid state chemistry, crystallography, and magnetism.
The research objectives are intertwined with the development of an innovative
curriculum in materials chemistry. As a part of the project, a series of visual
materials will be implemented to provide an introduction to instrumental methods
in materials research for both undergraduate and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;