* 0955752
* CAREER:  Strain Balanced Quantum Dots for High Concentration Solar Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Seth Hubbard, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 03/31/2016
* USD 454,810.00

Technical: The research objective of this CAREER award is to address the
fundamental materials research need for future high-efficiency solar cells.
While existing studies suggest benefits of nanomaterials in enhancing solar cell
efficiency, there remains a significant amount of fundamental materials research
necessary for practical implementation. Examples include selection of the
appropriate quantum confined materials system, study of the growth and
incorporation mechanisms of epitaxial nanostructures into solar devices, and
relation of the optical and electrical results to theoretical predictions.
Additionally, high concentration photovoltaic systems must operate under
elevated operating temperatures, thus degradation mechanisms in nanomaterials is
a critical issue. The project is designed to investigate the following materials
based topics: 1) vapor phase epitaxial growth and characterization of multi-
layer stacks of group III-V quantum dots (QD) using a dot-barrier strain
balancing technique; 2) analysis and demonstration of true wavefunction overlap
and miniband formation in quantum dot solar cells using both optical and
electrical characterization, and 3) study of degradation mechanisms in QD cells
under variable environmental conditions. In all of the above, emphasis is placed
on understanding the interplay between high quality vapor phase epitaxial growth
of the quantum dot, nanostructured solar cell optical and electrical
characterization, fundamental quantum mechanical predictions and subsequent
carrier transport mechanisms. This project leverages existing activities in
nanomaterials and solar cell development at the Rochester Institute of
Technology NanoPower Research Labs and NASA Glenn Research
Center.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses basic research issues in
a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. The
success of the project is expected to have impacts on the further advancement of
nanostructured materials for solar energy harvesting and, in general,
nanoscience and nanotechnology. The research and education activities of the
project are integrated. This project trains Ph.D. and undergraduate students in
the emerging fields of nanotechnology and photovoltaics. Students have the
opportunity to spend the summer at NASA Glenn Research Center's Photovoltaics
and Power Technologies Branch, learning valuable skills involving nano-material
growth and state-of-the-art solar cell characterization techniques. The
knowledge gained from the research can be directly incorporated into developing
both undergraduate and graduate level courses in next generation photovoltaics,
thus involving an even lager body of students in renewable energy topics. Beyond
the teaching aspect, the results of this project are planned to be disseminated
through both publication and collaboration with companies such as Emcore
Photovoltaics and Spectrolab.