* 0955028
* CAREER: Advanced Aerosol Synthesis of Metal Oxides for Photocatalytic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Sara Skrabalak, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 01/31/2016
* USD 641,771.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of fundamental importance is the
discovery of new synthetic techniques that can be predictably manipulated to
yield materials with defined and controllable features. While widely recognized
as a powerful route to compositionally-complex inorganic solids, ultrasonic
spray pyrolysis (USP), which is an aerosol-based synthetic technique that uses
ultrasound for nebulization, has been under-realized as a synthetic route to
architecturally-diverse particles. This CAREER project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program will emphasize precursor design and
decomposition behavior, as well as aerosol droplet phase and surface chemistry,
to achieve architecturally-diverse particles with USP for photocatalytic
applications including water splitting for solar H2 generation. Synthetic
targets include i) highly-tailored titania photocatalysts in which porosity,
crystal phase distribution, and surface decoration are controlled and ii)
visible light driven O2-evolving photocatalysts with high active site
dispersion. The former will be achieved by exploiting a newly discovered salt-
assisted route to porous particles in which low-melting salt mixtures serve as a
pore template and pre-formed titania colloids serve as the building blocks to
the larger porous particles. The latter will be achieved by targeting valence
band modified transition metal oxides. In this case, architecturally-diverse
particles will be achieved with USP by deviating from convention and selecting
precursors that yield templates and/or structure-directing agents via i)
reaction (e.g., metathesis approaches) or ii) decomposition from single-source
precursors. Given that the proposed research addresses such a timely issue, the
development of sustainable energy sources, it is also of utmost importance that
considerable effort be spent educating the community about it. To this aim, an
Energy Ambassadors' Program is proposed in which undergraduates, with guidance
from senior laboratory members, return to their high schools to discuss their
research through an engaging demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Substantial resources are being directed toward the
development of alternative energy platforms in attempts to minimize the
potentially catastrophic effects associated with the burning of fossil fuels.
Given that the sun provides the Earth with 120,000 trillion watts (TW) of
energy, solar energy conversion represents the most viable means of sustainably
producing 13 TW, which is consistent with global human demand. The proposed
research aims to develop new materials for harnessing the energy of the sun to
split water into hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2), with H2 representing a clean
fuel that does not emit greenhouse gases or other pollutants upon use. The new
materials will be prepared by an aerosol-based synthetic approach, with an
emphasis on discovering new ways in which the architecture and shape of the
resulting particles can be controlled by producing structure-directing agents
using chemical methods. Controlling the shape and architecture of the prepared
particles potentially provides a way in which the desirable features of a
material can be enhanced selectively, thus maximizing their light harvesting
properties and surface reactivity. Given that the proposed research addresses
such a timely issue, it is also important that effort be spent educating the
community about solar energy science. Thus, an Energy Ambassadors' Program is
proposed in which undergraduates, with guidance from senior laboratory members,
return to their high schools to discuss their research through an engaging
demonstration.