* 0956890
* SBIR Phase II:   Dynamic Device for the Treatment of Stress Urinary Incontinence
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Richard Vecchiotti, Curant, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2012
* USD 508,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II (SBIR) project will develop a
novel biomedical device to better treat stress urinary incontinence (SUI). SUI
is a complex disease affecting millions of Americans in a debilitating manner
which significantly impacts physiological and psychological wellness. The
technology being developed is an implantable device for the treatment of SUI
that will, as intentioned, be the first product to offer a universal, and more
effective, solution to this multi-factorial problem. Building on the Phase I
successful demonstration of technical feasibility, the main Phase II objective
is to further refine and evaluate the device in preparation for future human
trials. If successful, the device will simply and mechanically provide a
reactional dynamic therapy that more closely resembles natural physiology than
any other incontinence device currently available. This process will be
empowered by focused research designed to analyze and better define the exact
elements underlying the pathophysiology of SUI. This research will not only lead
to a broader acceptance and understanding of the complexity of SUI, in both men
and women, but also enable the company to optimize its technology. This project
will be undertaken by the grantee in collaboration with leading urologists,
engineers, and experienced entrepreneurs of the biomedical industry.

The broader/commercial impact of this project is advancement in understanding,
acceptance, and treatment of urinary incontinence. Urinary incontinence is one
of the most common chronic ailments; affecting over 25 million Americans and
accounting for an extended yearly cost of more than $19.5 billion. Additionally,
this condition is a leading contributor to the loss of self-dependency and
nursing home admittance. If successful, the technology will address a critical
societal need with a device that offers a cure to underserved patients rather
than a palliative compromise. The implications of this technology extend beyond
urinary incontinence and should create opportunities to advance patient
treatment for conditions such as fecal incontinence, gastro-esophageal reflux
disease, and glaucoma.