* 0956552
* Wildfire Regime Shifts in Southern South America from Tree-Ring Reconstructed Fire History Networks:  Climatic Controls, Land Use, and Ecological Feedbacks
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 04/30/2014
* USD 307,491.00

In many parts of the world, extreme wildfire events and increases in area burned
since the early 1980s have been attributed to a combination of global warming
and land-use trends. Some land-use practices, such as logging and grazing, may
convert fire-resistant forests to more fire-prone vegetation types, thus
creating positive feedbacks towards more fires, more CO2 release, and enhanced
warming. Numerous studies in the Northern Hemisphere have linked variability in
wildfire activity to both 20th century warming and teleconnections with El Ni√±o-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) in the tropical Pacific and high-latitude climate
modes such as the Arctic Oscillation. In the Southern Hemisphere the leading
extratropical mode of atmospheric variability is the Southern Annular Mode (also
known as the Antarctic Oscillation) consisting of a redistribution of
atmospheric mass between middle and high latitudes. Recent changes in the
magnitude of the Southern Annular Mode are associated with a strengthening of
the westerlies, variations in mid-latitude storm tracks, and warmer-drier
conditions in Patagonia. The post-1950 positive trend in the Southern Annular
Mode is interpreted as a signature of anthropogenic forcing by increased
greenhouse gases and/or reduced stratospheric ozone.

Professor Thomas Veblen from the University of Colorado will analyze tree rings
to reconstruct fire history in southern Patagonia over the past 400 years in
order to relate variability in fire history to year-to-year variability, as well
as the 20-30 year temporal variability of ENSO and the low-frequency of
atmospheric variability, and their interactions. This study will also determine
how forest burning followed by livestock impacts is converting fire-resistant
southern beech forests to more flammable open woodlands and grass-shrublands,
thus creating a positive feedback further enhancing fire potential. The study
will determine the physical setting and land-use conditions that favor shifts in
vegetation types from fire-resistant forests to fire-prone shrublands by mapping
pre-burn and post-burn vegetation types from satellite imagery and historical
air photos at numerous sites burned in the latter part of the 20th century.

Understanding the site-specific potential for shifts from fire-resistant forests
to fire-prone shrublands is essential for mitigating and adapting land-use
practices to climate-induced changes in wildfire activity. Under recent climate
trends, weather extremes (including fire-promoting droughts) are increasing in
magnitude and frequency, and can have far-reaching implications for ecosystems
resilience as well as CO2 emissions to the atmosphere. The long-term (multi-
century) fire records that this study will produce are necessary to understand
how these recent trends in fire activity depart from the historical range of
variability, and how variability in wildfire activity relates to climate
variation as well as land-use trends. The study will elucidate the role of
livestock raising (a major land use of global importance) in converting fire-
resistant forests to more fire-prone vegetation, and provide a forecasting tool
for predicting fire risk in relation to climate variability.