* 0956071
* CAREER: Optoelectronic Nanocomposites: Controlling the Properties of Bulk Ceramic Heterostructures using External Electric Fields.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2015
* Javier Garay, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 435,001.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The ability to bend (refract) light using
transparent materials is familiar and useful in many devices such as cameras and
telescopes. Light refraction properties of a special class of materials called
electrooptic materials can be controlled using electric fields. Since electric
fields are relatively easy to generate and change, electrooptic materials allow
light paths to be changed 'on the fly'. Electrooptic materials could find a host
of new applications if the electrooptic response could be attained faster or
using smaller fields. The aim of this CAREER project is to extend the
applicability of electrooptic ceramics by using a composite approach. Typically
ceramic composites are opaque, but by carefully controlling their structure
large ceramic materials whose light transmittance properties can be controlled
by applying electric fields will be produced. These materials should be useful
in a wide array of consumer electronics such as digital cameras and advanced
applications especially in the laser field. As part of the integrated
educational effort the research will be used to motivate young scientists and
engineers through workshop-like demonstrations. Light interaction with materials
is relatively easy to demonstrate allowing the research to be brought to life
for diverse groups of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
&lt;br/&gt;The refractive index is one of the most fundamental optical
properties ? it controls the degree to which light is refracted by a material.
The refractive index of electrooptic materials can be controlled using electric
fields. Materials with high electrooptic response are already available, but
often the high fields and/or slow switching times required make them prohibitive
for many applications. This CAREER project will produce bulk heterostructures
from oxides with different properties in order to control optical properties
using small applied fields without compromising large electrooptic effects.
Judicious use of oxide mixtures (composites) can tune response producing more
versatile materials. The strategy is to consolidate oxide nanopowders into large
sized nanocomposites without losing the nanostructure. Some of the specific
scientific issues the research will elucidate are: the role of nanostructured
length scales (grain sizes) and dissimilar phases (interfaces) on transparency
and optoelectronic properties in bulk sized ceramics. If successful, these
materials will be used for optical beam deflection and generation of giant
optical pulses in devices ranging from consumer electronics to high powered
lasers. In addition there is a detailed plan to develop workshop-like
demonstrations for students who learn in different ways. These demonstrations
will be conducted in various venues including university dormitories and high
school classrooms in order to reach distinct student populations.