* 0956264
* Developing Resources for Research on Mollusks by Renovating Collection at Carnegie Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Timothy Pearce, Carnegie Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 07/31/2013
* USD 486,382.00

Research on mollusks relies on long-term access to collections such as those
maintained by the Section of Mollusks at The Carnegie Museum of Natural History
(CMNH). This project will significantly enhance present and future access by
improving storage of this research collection. To improve storage, this project
will move specimens from current perilous conditions, caused by normal acidic
off-gassing from wooden cabinets, into more accessible archival metal storage
cabinets with archival specimen boxes. This project will increase the present
and future availability of the collection and associated specimen data to
support collection-based research by biodiversity conservation organizations and
agencies at the federal, state, and local levels. This project will increase
public education by making specimens more readily available to science-based
public outreach programs, including tours, exhibits, and collaborative
activities with other museum components. The project will educate and train
volunteers and undergraduate work-study students, who are likely to include
members of underrepresented groups (the PI's 7-year track record shows that 20%
of 142 volunteers have been from underrepresented minority or ethnic groups, and
7% have had disabilities). The mollusk collection at CMNH is a major resource of
international significance, being the largest collection of northern Appalachian
non-marine mollusks and one of the top five freshwater mussel collections.
Historically significant, the collection vouchers 100 years of research.
Examples of recent collection use include molecular and morphological systematic
studies (including five by students), environmental monitoring, training for
mussel surveyors, and museum exhibits. Any thorough study of North American
mollusks would refer to this collection. Information on the CMNH Collection of
Mollusks can be found at http://www.carnegiemnh.org/mollusks/collection.htm.