* 0956189
* CAREER: Gravitational-Wave Science, from Macroscopic Quantum Mechanics to Strong-Field General Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Yanbei Chen, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2015
* USD 675,000.00

This research project in gravitational physics is largely in support of the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO). It will be
theoretical, although in many aspects closely related to experiments. In LIGO
instrumentation, this project seeks to finalize the optical-configuration design
of LIGO detectors after the successful initial operation of Advanced LIGO; it
will also critically evaluate optical configurations for third-generation
detectors, the next major upgrade to LIGO, while continue to generate new ideas.
This project will continue to study how gravitational-wave experiments will
probe quantum mechanical behavior of macroscopic objects. In gravitational-wave
data analysis, this project seeks strategies that enable fast detection of
compact binary systems (consisting black holes and/or neutron stars) by
incorporating advanced signal-processing techniques. In general relativity
theory, this project seeks to shed light on the dynamics of the highly curved
space-time of binary black-hole mergers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
increase the scientific output of gravitational-wave astronomy by contributing
to the short- and long-term improvement of instruments, by optimizing data
analysis strategies, and by improving understandings of gravitational-wave
sources. It will eventually lead to the experimental proof (or disproof) that
quantum mechanical laws also apply to macroscopic (human-sized) objects. This
project will also have the following broader impacts: (i) It will serve as a
training ground for young theoretical physicists, through solving a broad range
of problems. (ii) The PI will assume teaching responsibility at Caltech. He
plans to update the web-based course in gravitational-wave science that he
assisted Professor Kip Thorne in creating. This course has helped train graduate
students at Caltech and other universities and institutes, and has made
gravitational-wave science accessible to scientists and engineers throughout the
world. (iii) Through cooperation with Glendale Community College, results of
cutting-edge research in gravitational-wave science will be communicated to a
diverse student body; participation of research projects by students with
stronger math and physics background will encourage them to pursue a career in
science and engineering. Through web pages and demonstration programs,
gravitational-wave science will be communicated to a broader audience in the
general public. (iv) The PI will carry out research in collaboration with
scientists in Germany, Australia, Japan, and Russia. These collaborations will
strongly influence the design of the European third-generation gravitational-
wave detector, the Einstein Telescope, and maximize scientific output of
prototype detectors in Australia and Japan.