* 0956816
* STTR Phase II:   Active Fiber Optic Sensor Array for Cryogenic Fuel Monitoring and Management
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Philip Swinehart, Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 499,429.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will develop a
multi-functional active fiber Bragg grating sensor technology for the monitoring
and management of cryogenic fuel such as liquid hydrogen and liquefied natural
gas. The proposed technology uses in-fiber light to actively adjust sensor
temperature, which will drastically improve responsivity and sensitivity of
fiber sensors in the cryogenic environment. By coating fiber Bragg grating
sensors with functional films, liquid fuel levels, spatial distribution,
hydrogen concentration, and temperature can be simultaneously measured at
cryogenic temperatures. Active sensors to be developed in this program are
immune to electromagnetic interference and can be multiplexed in a single fiber,
which allows a one-fiber and one-fiber-feedthrough solution for the cryogenic
fuel management on the ground and in space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development of a prudent
sensing technology and system to improve the safety and reliability of the use
of both liquid hydrogen and liquefied natural gas fuels. As major alternative
fuels to power the U.S. economy for decades to come, they share a high economic
value that requires accurate and reliable metering and management. Having a
flexible, multi-use system available that can be installed with absolute
confidence to monitor and manage these fuels, as well as the health of installed
systems, will have a major impact on the acceptance of these volatile fuels as
safe alternative energy sources. The ability to multiplex many sensors on a
single fiber will enable safer and more economical penetrations in cryogenic
walls and the low corrosion potential of the fibers will enable sensors to be
placed along piping underground. The same basic active fiber sensor technology
has the potential to be extended to fuel flow and other economically useful
functions.