* 0956905
* SBIR Phase II:  Do-It-Yourself database-driven web applications from high level specifications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Kian Win Ong, app2you
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 577,649.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II proposal discusses the
continued commercialization and research & development plans of App2You, Inc.,
developer of a Web-based platform that enables non-programmers to rapidly create
and evolve fully custom hosted forms-driven workflow applications where users
with different roles and rights interact. Such a platform will have a broad
impact on organizations of all sizes by empowering nonprogrammer business
process owners to quickly and easily deploy applications that capture the
business processes of their organizations. Preliminary results from Phase I
engagements shows that the platform has the maximum impact on enabling
externally-facing Customer Relationship Management (CRM) for Small and Medium
Businesses (SMBs), which use the applications to facilitate and streamline
interactions with customers and partners, achieve lower process management and
customer/partner servicing costs, increase customer/partner satisfaction and
grow revenues.

App2You has the potential to operate as an equalizer between large companies and
SMBs with limited time and money available to for their IT infrastructure, since
it enables the latter to obtain applications for their processes despite limited
resources. Phase II will expand the impact by systematically reaching SMBs and
promoting the use of the platform, making its use even simpler, and also finding
additional verticals, such as forms distributorships and form abandonment cases,
where forms-driven workflows can generate values. Finally the Phase II project
will create enhancements that facilitate successful collaborations between
business process owners and ad hoc information technology staff. If successful,
the App2You platform has the potential to address an emerging and potentially
significant opportunity in the SMB space.