* 0956765
* SBIR Phase II:   Photon Enhanced SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopes) Platform for Nano-Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2013
* Thomas Moore, Omniprobe
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2013
* USD 448,001.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a platform for photon beam enhanced and electron beam induced nanoscale
processing. Focused electron beam induced processing is a nanoscale process
generally capable of about 10nm resolution and 1nm has been demonstrated.
However, materials deposited via focused nanoscale electron beam induced
deposition (EBID) contain significant amounts of residual contamination due to
insufficient by-product desorption from the precursor molecules. In addition,
electron beam induced etching (EBIE) is typically limited by desorption of the
resultant electron beam induced etch product, thus is prohibitively slow. This
project will address these limitations by developing an instrument capable of
delivering a pulsed photon beam to facilitate desorption of contaminate by-
products for the EBID process, and accelerate desorption of etch products during
the EBIE process. The objective is to design and construct a platform capable of
precise delivery of photons over a broad spectroscopic range for nanoscale
processing and simultaneous microscale imaging in standard scanning electron
microscopes (SEM) or dual ion and electron beam systems. Finally, requisite
pulsed electron-photon-mass transport synchronization strategies will be
developed for advanced nanoscale prototyping, editing, and sample preparation.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the development of a new
tool to enable improved rapid prototyping of nanoscale devices by offering a
cost-effective solution for nanoscale synthesis compatible with widespread SEM
and dual beam platforms. This will accelerate the research efforts on next
generation nanoscale devices with new and/or enhanced functionality, which is
expected to benefit many facets of society ranging from physical to life
sciences. This project may also improve the understanding of critical photon-
electron-substrate-vapor interactions which will ultimately lead to a directed
assembly approach capable of depositing 3-dimensional, complex and multi-
component materials with nanometer scale lateral resolution and atomic scale
z-dimensional control.