* 0956776
* New Methods for Incorporating Quantum Mechanics in the Treatment of Complex Reactive Dynamical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Donald Truhlar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2013
* USD 561,000.00

Donald Truhlar of the University of Minnesota- Twin Cities is supported by an
award from the Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop
methods for simulating complex, reactive dynamical systems in chemistry and for
applying these methods to diverse systems. A focus of the research is the
development of techniques to incorporate quantum mechanical effects in complex
system. A key issue that the research addresses is the interface of electronic
structure theory and dynamics. The PI and his research group are developing new
approaches for efficiently computing potential energy surfaces and coupling
terms in a manner that is practical for complex simulations. They are devising
many novel methods including new ways to combine quantum mechanics and molecular
mechanics, new methods for the diabatic representation of electronic states for
use in dynamics calculations on photo-induced processes, new approaches to
calculating the nuclear motion in coupled-state dynamics, new approaches to
fitting coupled potential energy surfaces, and novel ways to model the
participation of enzyme or other environmental coordinates in the reaction
coordinate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long range objectives of this research
involve (i) calculation of branching ratios for photochemical reactions, (ii)
simulation of atmospheric nucleation processes and (iii) calculation of the rate
constants, kinetic isotope effects, and temperature dependence of the rate
constants for reactions catalyzed by enzymes. These research areas are of
enormous technological importance especially for health, the environment, the
material needs of society, industrial competitiveness and defense