* 0956340
* Collaborative Research:   Collaborative Databasing of North American Bee Collections within a Global Informatics Network
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Douglas Yanega, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2014
* USD 442,376.00

Natural history collections contain millions of bee specimens documenting the
geographic ranges, temporal occurrence patterns, and floral associations of the
20,000 described bee species. This project will digitize and consolidate
specimen records from 10 bee collections across the United States. The
investigators will make or verify species identifications, capture full label
data, georeference and error-check localities, and upload this information to
publicly accessible databases. Web-based tools will be used to capture data
across collections efficiently, validate bee and plant names through automated
comparison with taxonomic authority files, and synthesize data on species pages
with images, digitized literature records, and other information about bees and
their host plants. Data will be uploaded to the Global Biodiversity Information
Facility and to Discover Life (www.discoverlife.org), a website that features
customizable global maps for all global bee species and dynamic identification
keys for North American species. To obtain information needed to conserve and
manage pollinators, the investigators will work with ecologists to model
geographic and temporal trends in bee populations in relation to environmental
variables. Bees are the most important pollinators of the approximately 1/3 of
crops that require animal pollination. Recent declines in honey bee populations
highlight the need to understand better the roles of native bees in agricultural
and natural systems. This project will help predict risks to bees and their
pollination services from climate change, habitat loss, and other factors. The
outreach program Bee Hunt (www.discoverlife.org/bee) will educate the public,
including students in underserved communities, about bee diversity and the
importance of pollination services. Using digital photography and rigorous
research protocols, Bee Hunt will empower people at biological field stations,
nature centers, parks, schools, and other sites to collect high-quality data to
augment information from specimen records.