* 0956615
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding the Epistemic Cultures of Transnational Field Sciences through an Ethnography of Andean Archaeology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Shannon Dawdy, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 14,400.00

This doctoral research explores international collaborations between field
scientists from North and South America - specifically Chilean, Bolivian, US and
Canadian archaeologists who work in Chile and Bolivia. The research methodology
involves ethnographic study of academic practices in labs, universities and
excavations. It aims to understand how scientific knowledge is generated and
used at international, nation and local levels, in the context of postcolonial
relations between North and South America, and a growing neo-indigenous
movement. Through an ethnography of collaborations between local Aymara
communities and international archaeologists, this project will determine how
field sciences challenge our models of how scientific knowledge is produced and
circulated. When the 'laboratory' is an unbounded space in the landscape, and
the 'scientists' include indigenous workers and untrained students, how are
scientific facts and data delineated as authoritative, independent, universal
knowledge? Furthermore, how are field sciences sustained in the rapidly changing
context of a postcolonial world, where both national governments and local
communities actively seek a stake in the production and products of their
research? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project looks beyond the traditional remit
of science studies, to ascertain whether the models of scientific knowledge
production developed in the natural sciences and in laboratories can be extended
to field sciences. It asks whether, precisely because of the conditions of its
production, field sciences are more open to challenges to their authority. As
international scientific research shifts towards greater inclusion of indigenous
peoples, questions of fundamental importance are raised about the implications
not only for the type of knowledge produced and how it is used, but also for the
rights of those that produce it. In addressing these questions, this
dissertation project will have an impact both on our knowledge of scientific
practice, and on debates within anthropology surrounding the role of scientists,
including anthropologists, on the international stage.