* 0956746
* SBIR Phase II:   Deep UV LED with High Quality p-AlInGaN Layers by Digital Doping Control
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Max Shatalov, Sensor Electronic Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 1,034,727.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop and
commercialize next-generation high-power deep ultraviolet light emitting diodes
(DUV LEDs) with high quality p-type doped AlInGaN layers via migration-enhanced
metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MEMOCVD). DUV LEDs operating in the
spectral region from 240 nm to 365 nm are of great importance for medical, bio-
analytical, sensing, and homeland security technologies. This project aims to
improve the LED efficiency and lifetime by improvements in the material quality,
doping, and device design. These enhancements will lay the groundwork for large-
scale penetration of high volume markets, such as global sanitation and
disinfection. This Phase II project will achieve efficient multiple pass
extraction in transparent epitaxial structures through use of high-quality
MEMOCVD doped p-AlInGaN top contact layers. Achieving an improved quality of
highly doped p-AlInGaN layers will allow creation of a low-cost, high power
semiconductor DUV radiation source with wall plug efficiency exceeding 5% and
operation lifetimes longer than 5,000 hours.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will originate from the
market penetration of DUV LEDs into existing markets that require compact and
environmentally friendly UV radiation sources. This project will also allow
penetration into new applications that were previously unattainable due to the
inherent limitations of existing UV lamps or lasers. The primary markets for
these devices include bio-medical and analytical instrumentation, fluorescence
sensing, ink curing, phototherapy and water/air disinfection. This new
technology for manufacturing high-efficiency and long-lifetime DUV devices will
allow these semiconductor light sources to have a price point which is
competitive with the mature UV lamp technology. This will allow the increased
use of an environmentally friendly, mercury-free UV technology for a variety of
applications, which will result in a reduction of toxic waste and in the costs
associated with mercury lamp disposal. The purification, sterilization, and
early warning applications enabled by these new DUV LED sources will also result
in an improved quality of life, particularly in the developing world.