* 0956614
* EAGER:   Studies of native grassland soil nematodes to develop genomic approaches to study community responses in non-model taxa
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Michael Herman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2011
* USD 40,000.00

The community of bacteria and microorganisms in the soil is fundamental to
ecosystem processing such a nutrient cycling, but has been hard to study in the
past because the organisms are so small. New technology in gene and genome
sequencing now permits detailed analyses of the sorts of genetic changes that
occur in microorganisms in response to human disturbance and climate change.
This project will investigate four species of soil nematodes, tiny worms that
eat bacteria, native to the Konza Prairie in Kansas. Each species of nematode
will be grown on each of four native species of bacteria to determine which
genes are most strongly expressed in the worms when they occur with each of the
bacteria. The data can be compared to detailed experimental data already
available for the well-studied model nematode worm species, Caenorhabditis
elegans.

By learning how particular nematodes respond to the bacteria that they contact
and consume, it will be possible to develop better models of how the soil
community responds to disturbance in both the short term and the long term. We
are only beginning to learn which soil bacteria, nematodes, and other
microorganisms are beneficial or harmful in particular situations, and what
their role is in helping to stabilize plant and animal communities. This project
will provide a uniquely detailed view of the interactions that occur among the
tiny denizens of the soil and will enhance scientific infrastructure through
provision of genetic data and analytical tools.