* 0956027
* Chemical Probes and Assessing Rab7 and Accessory Protein Function
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Larry Sklar, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,044,964.00

&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the research are in discovering how a
fundamental cell process works, coupled with the development of new chemical
agents and cutting edge technologies. Cells depend on cues that they receive
from the external environment to grow, divide and survive. Plant and animal
(including human) cells have evolved complex pathways for recognizing and
internalizing cargo molecules from the external milieu and shuttling the cargo
to various subcellular locations for processing. The pathways that govern the
handling of internalized cargo are present in all cells except bacteria and are
governed by evolutionarily conserved escort proteins. These regulatory escort
proteins function together as a molecular machine that must be dynamically
assembled and dissassembled according to the cargo and its subcellular
destination. The objective of the research is to unravel how a subset of
regulatory escort proteins in animal cells (Rab7 GTPase, MTMR13 lipid
phosphatase, hVps39 nucleotide exchange factor and TBC1D15 GTPase activating
protein) recognize one another and are assembled into a functional machine that
appropriately delivers its cargo. Failure of the machine components to work
together leads to a failure of the cell to survive. The research also develops
novel chemical probes, which is applicable to the study of a family of small
GTPases with &gt;100 members. The project combines state-of-the-art
visualization of cellular processes; chemical biology and novel compound
identification for pathway dissection; and quantitative biology for accurate
measurement all with the goal of acquiring mechanistic understanding of escort
proteins that are central to cell function and viability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad impact of the project is increased scientific
literacy and elucidation of processes that are fundamental to all cells; the
manipulation of which may have technologic advantage. The head of the program is
an experienced mentor, expert in cell biology, biochemistry and advanced
microscopic imaging and active in science education outreach to public and
secondary school students. She serves as a board member of New Mexico Academy of
Science, mentor on several grant funded training programs, director of science
teaching certificate program and a post-doctoral fellow training program. These
activities: 1) provide students and underrepresented minorities with hands-on
experience with cutting edge science that prepare them to assume productive
science and technology intensive careers, 2) increase public awareness and
understanding of current topics and debates in science ranging from stem cells
to evolution and 3) engage the next generation of young people to work as part
of an interdisciplinary team and invent new ways to tackle central problems in
biology. The pathway and Rab7 GTPase being studied is also relevant in plants
where it is related to plant growth, pollen production, fruit ripening and
nitrogen fixation. Thus, knowledge of these processes is also the underpinning
of agricultural technology development that seeks to manipulate the pathways for
increased crop production and environmental sustainability through biological
nitrogen fixation.