* 0956864
* Travel to the SuperComputing 2009 Conference (SC09); November 2009; Portland, Oregon
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Harvey Newman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Joseph Reidy
* 09/30/2010
* USD 14,984.00

The Caltech High Energy Physics (HEP) group is awarded supplemental funds to
partly support the HEP team's participation in SuperComputing 2009 Conference
(SC09) in Portland, Oregon. The requested funds will partially support the five
key team members from Caltech to participate in the conference, and continue its
demonstrations and development of state of the art networking as well as tools
and services used for data distribution and analysis in support of the US LHC
program and other major programs funded by the NSF. The two largest physics
collaborations at the LHC, CMS and ATLAS, each encompassing more than 2,000
physicists and engineers from 170 universities and laboratories, are about to
embark on a new round of exploration at the frontier of high energies, breaking
new ground in our understanding the nature of matter and space-time and
searching for new particles, when the LHC accelerator and their experiments
resume operation next Spring. In order to fully exploit the potential for
scientific discoveries, the data produced by the experiments will be processed,
distributed, and analyzed using a global grid of 150 computing and storage
facilities located at laboratories and universities around the world. The key to
discovery is the analysis phase, where individual physicists and small groups
located at sites around the world repeatedly access, and sometimes extract and
transport multi-terabyte data sets on demand, in order to optimally select the
rare "signals" of new physics from potentially overwhelming "backgrounds" from
already-understood particle interactions. These data will amount to many tens of
Petabytes in the early years of LHC operation, rising to the Exabyte range
within the coming decade. The HEP team hopes that the demonstrations at SC09
will pave the way towards more effective distribution and use for discoveries of
the masses of LHC data. In addition to benefiting the LHC and other programs in
data intensive science, the record- breaking results have help focused the
world's attention on the primary role of HEP in the development of
cyberinfrastructure, and applications for data transport and worldwide systems
monitoring, as well as worldwide collaboration (for example Caltech's EVO
system) with the potential of a broad transformative impact on research,
education and on our handling of information in our daily lives.