* 0956624
* Professional Development Fellowship: Mental Models Study of Perceptions of Audience in Science and Technology Communication
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Deborah Illman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 97,602.00

Abstract for Professional Development Fellowship: Mental Models Study of
Perceptions of Audience in Science and Technology Communication

This fellowship project draws upon methods of cognitive sciences and STS
studies to focus on how technical experts engage with communication
professionals in the public arena to translate new knowledge in science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) for diverse audiences. The project
consists of an educational component to provide preparation in mental models
research methods to the fellowship recipient and a research component in which
these methods will be used to study perceptions of audience and decision-making
of novices and experts in the communication of STEM content to general
audiences. The research targets the greatest barrier for STEM graduate students
to becoming more effective communicators: issues of audience, that is, use of
jargon, parroting technical explanations, inappropriate technical detail, and
inappropriate order of information. Many STEM graduate students have very little
contact with non-scientists on a daily basis and therefore little opportunity to
develop mental models of what is appropriate for general readers. This project
is aimed at eliciting the mental models of these students as a necessary first
step in designing educational interventions. Professional science journalists,
on the other hand, have an extensive working model of what audiences know and
don?t know, but the process by which these experts make decisions about content
and structure of writing for general audiences is essentially a ?black box.?
Mental models methods will be used to characterize the thought processes of a
group of experienced science journalists in order to compare them with those of
STEM graduate students and to identify educational interventions to help novices
advance to more expert levels. Based on the comparison of the expert and novice
models, two versions of a communication learning module will be developed and
pilot tested with STEM graduate students. This work should yield new
understanding that may transform how we teach STEM experts to communicate with
broader audiences. The results ultimately may enhance the interactions between
technical experts and groups such as policymakers and the press.