* 0956632
* EAGER:  Creating and Evaluating a Makery Cloud
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Neil Scott, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 176,352.00

Small businesses that produce innovative products are a key element for creating
new job opportunities. But the current generation of high school students is
poorly prepared to take advantage of these types of opportunities; the
elimination of wood shop and metal shop facilities from schools, the demise of
home workshops, and commercial pressures for off-shore manufacturing of low-cost
consumer products have conditioned young people to believe there is no longer
any need for them to know how to make things - they can just buy what they need
ready-made. An unfortunate consequence is that many students have no practical
grounding and appreciation for the relevance of applying science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and little motivation to learn these
topics. In prior work the PI developed the concept of a Makery, a self-contained
facility that offered a selection of hand tools, manually operated machines, and
modern computer numerically controlled (CNC) machines for working with wood,
plastic and metal. Makery activities were designed to reinforce theoretical
learning with practical skills such as visualization, computer aided design
(CAD), and a variety of manual and computer based fabrication techniques. A more
compact version, the Classroom Makery, enabled students to design and fabricate
objects within their own classroom rather than in a large-scale workshop
environment. The Makery and Classroom Makery prototypes allowed the PI to
demonstrate that students who learn to use modern CNC equipment become more
interested and more involved in STEM. Yet schools that are lucky enough to own
expensive CNC machinery often find teachers lack the time to learn how to use
and integrate it into their teaching.

The PI's goal in this exploratory research is to create and conduct an initial
evaluation of a Makery Cloud in an effort to overcome space and knowledge
limitations by enabling teachers, and eventually their students, to learn about
and use CNC machines over the Internet. The PI will seek answers to questions
such as the following. What telecommunication functions are required for
providing a meaningful learning experience when teachers and students are
learning to operate CNC machines remotely via the Internet? What additional
physical, electronic, and software interlocks and control functions are required
to cope with network latency and multiple control points, to ensure that CNC
machines can be safely accessed and used when remotely controlled over the
Internet? Does operating a CNC machine remotely via the Internet provide
learning experiences for teachers and students that are equivalent to operating
the same CNC machine directly, particularly with respect to safety and the
acquisition of practical skils? To address these issues, a four-node
collaborative network will be set up and operated on the Manoa campus of the
University of Hawaii (the lead organization for the project), at the Connections
Charter School in Hilo, at the West Hawaii Explorations Academy Public Charter
School in Kona, and at the Hawaii Academy of Arts & Sciences Public Charter
School in Pahoa. Project outcomes will include: Classroom Makeries will be
established in Hilo and Kona; specialized skills and resources will be developed
in Hilo (CNC Routing), Pahoa (CNC Turning), and Kona (CNC Milling); the existing
Makery Portal will be expanded to include interactive project planning and
management, resource location, instruction and production scheduling, distance
learning with multiple audio and video streams, file transfers, and real-time
control of CNC machines; two teachers from each school will be trained to teach
project management and CNC fabrication; students will be involved as required by
teachers to test remote teaching and experience-building strategies related to
using Makeries to design and fabricate components for projects relevant to their
class projects; exemplars of curricula and CNC projects for student and teacher
training; and recommendations for setting up systems that enable students to
fabricate parts for STEM-related projects by remotely controlling CNC machines
over the Internet.

Broader Impacts: The Classroom Makery was designed to provide students with a
practical grounding for their STEM studies by giving them basic design and
fabrication capabilities within individual classrooms. The Makery Cloud extends
this to enable teachers and students to fabricate objects that are too large or
too complex to be done in their own Classroom Makery, by enabling them to
control remotely located CNC machines. These capabilities will provide many
benefits to schools, particularly those located in remote and under populated
areas, including: collaborative hands-on training from highly qualified teachers
and industrial trainers regardless of location; sharing of specialized knowledge
and CNC machines among schools while still providing hands-on training and
experience for users; access to specialized CNC machines owned by external
organizations such as research laboratories and industrial partners;
participation in collaborative projects in which each school provides their
special CNC training and fabrication capabilities; and last but not least,
students and teachers at schools that have no physical fabrication facilities
will still be able to participate in projects that require design and build
capability. The research will identify and implement practical, safe procedures
for using the Internet to train teachers and ultimately, students, to use CAD,
CAM, and CNC machines either locally or remotely. It will also help quantify the
level of prior knowledge and experience teachers require for successfully
incorporating CAD/CAM/CNC into their teaching, and the level of ongoing Internet
support they will require.