* 0956877
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Novel Repellents for the Honeybee, Apis Mellifera
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Daniel Woods, Inscent, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2012
* USD 505,014.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project provides the
scientific foundation for a paradigm shift in insect pest control away from
traditional insecticides to products that alter insect behavior by manipulating
insect chemosensory proteins. We used rational design to isolate compounds that
bind to critical insect chemosensory proteins, and are isolating those compounds
capable of altering insect behavior. In response to citrus grower demand we have
isolated small molecules that have the potential to alter the foraging behavior
of the agriculturally and economically significant insect, Apis mellifera
(European honeybee). Our final products will be repellents capable of protecting
citrus from unwanted pollination. The technologies utilized here are applicable
to the development of control products for other insect pest species, including
insect carriers of human disease and insect pests of economic, agricultural, or
domestic significance.

The broader impacts of this research are avoiding the use of insecticides and
expanding our ability to control insect behavior. The initial insect targeted,
the European honeybee (Apis mellifera), provides essential pollination that adds
an estimated $14 billion annually in value to US crops. However, unwanted
honeybee pollination severely decreases the value of mandarin crops, leading to
the need for an effective bee repellent that is safe for bees and humans alike.
Similar approaches are currently underway to control other important
agricultural and public health pests. This project utilizes novel methods with
the potential to transform the way insect control products are designed and
utilized.