* 0956812
* A workshop on the Integration of Emerging Formal and Empirical Methods and Tools to Enhance Social Scientific Development
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Jim Granato, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,990.00

On July 9th and 10th, 2001, the Political Science Program of the National
Science Foundation convened a workshop to recommend ways to improve technical-
analytical proficiency in Political Science by bridging the divide between
formal and empirical analysis --- an NSF initiative now called the Empirical
Implications of Theoretical Models (EITM). The participants in the Workshop were
senior scholars with research in various technical-analytical areas and proven
track records in activities that have improved the technical-analytical
expertise in various sciences. While the participants were primarily from
political science, other disciplines were represented. These recommendations
resulted in a Dear Colleague Letter that was issued on July 26, 2001 that
provided funding opportunities for education (training and retraining), the
dissemination of knowledge (conferences and workshops), and research
(establishment of research work groups). Particular emphasis was placed on the
education component, the development of summer training institutes and a year-
long fellowship program. Both education programs targeted graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is now time to reassess these EITM
initiatives. The reassessment will begin with a day long workshop at the
National Science Foundation. Workshop participants will include a wide range of
scholars who have been either involved in EITM or have been recognized as
leaders in this area. Suggested participants include representatives from the
summer institutes and scholars of national, even international reputations, on
methodological challenges related to the goals of this
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will accomplish three things. The
first charge is to evaluate these education initiatives (with emphasis on the
summer institutes) and to determine their overall effectiveness. The second
charge is to discuss emerging trends in training and methodology and the
impediments to implementing new training initiatives. The final task is to
recommend initiatives that not only account for impediments to methodological
innovation, but also seek to create the foundation for a multidisciplinary
movement that more readily adapts these scientifically justified improvements to
the social sciences. A report will be generated from this workshop that will be
used to provide guidance to the Political Science Program Officers as well as
the Division Director.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop and the subsequent
report are the initial steps in creating a set of multidisciplinary initiatives
that will advance social science methodology. These improvements in social
science methodology will not only provide improvements in basic research, but
will also aid in applied research for policymakers.