* 0956921
* New Organic Radical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Dennis Curran, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2013
* USD 538,450.00

Proposed work and Significance: N-heterocyclic carbene boranes (NHC boranes)
have been shown to have weak B-H bonds and accordingly behave as radical
hydrogen atom donors in xanthate reductions. A new class of boron radical, the
NHC-boryl radical, has been demonstrated to be an intermediate in these
reactions. This early work raises many questions: What are the best NHC-borane
reagents for radical reactions? Can NHC boranes replace tin hydrides as the
long-elusive "ideal" mediators of radical reductions (inexpensive, low molecular
weight, green, easy to separate, etc.)? What are the structures and reactivities
of the new boranes and especially the new boryl radicals? These and other
fundamental questions will be addressed by synthesizing diverse new NHC-boranes
with assorted NHC and boron substituents and characterizing their structures and
reactions. The most promising compounds will be used as reagents for radical
reductions of xanthates, halides and pseudohalides, for new radical
hydroborations, and as coinitiators in radical polymerizations. The structures
of the most important radicals will be probed by electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) spectroscopy, which will also be used along with other tools for kinetic
measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Societal benefits from this
project accrue over the long term in two areas. First, organic synthesis is a
central discipline that contributes to the development of most biological and
physical sciences by providing new molecules and materials for study and sale.
The concepts and methods of this work deepen and broaden the discipline of
synthesis and help it in its quest to provide the needed reactions and
technologies for other fields that rely on it to progress. Second, there is a
strong coupling on this project of advancing the frontiers of science while at
the same time promoting teaching, training and learning of the diverse group of
undergraduate students and graduate students who do the day-today research work.
They move into the workplace to become the human capital that drives progress in
many areas that are vital to the health of our citizenry and the economy of our
nation. The project also regularly uses cutting edge technology like
videoconferences to manage the intercontinental collaborations. These
collaborations expand the teaching/training impact of the proposal from
Pittsburgh to Paris and Mulhouse in France, St. Andrews in Scotland, and Tokyo
in Japan.