* 0956589
* Women and Minority Astronomers Strategic Engagement with Distributed, Multi-Disciplinary Collaborations and Large Scale Databases
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Sharon Traweek, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2012
* USD 303,000.00

Increasingly, research in science and engineering is conducted in
multidisciplinary distributed teams enabling greater access to a variety of
resources. As cyberinfrastructure becomes integrated into research, there are
accompanying changes in work practices, requisite skill sets, organizing
structures and career trajectories. Research on these concomitant changes is in
its earliest stages so it has focused predominantly on commonalities among the
majority of scientists. However, previous literature has determined that there
is often considerable variation in the ways that majority and minority groups
within a field experience scientific work. Very little is know about the
different experiences of minority group members working in multi-disciplinary,
distributed collaborative research teams or about their distinctive work
practices within those collaborative projects. As scientific and engineering
research moves toward this new cyber-enabled collaborative model, understanding
both majority and minority member experiences will be crucial to the design,
development and deployment of appropriate cyberinfrastructure support tools and
will have important implications for increasing participation among members of
underrepresented groups. This research is a first step in identifying best
practices in use so that all groups can be fully supported in scientific and
engineering research collaborations.

This project investigates how women scientists engaged in collaborative,
multidisciplinary research build and use interpersonal relationships and the
effects of these relationships on their careers. Using ethnographic methods and
narrative analysis, the research team will conduct a pilot study of researchers
using large-scale databases in astronomy to identify everyday research
practices, the organization of work, planning, career trajectories, and the
transmission of knowledge to the next generation of scholars. They will focus on
collaborative work practices, the design, maintenance, revision and
interpretation of large-scale databases, their career strategies, and on
mentoring activities. Further, it will shed light on whether underrepresented
groups are more likely to succeed in new fields or using new methods and are
more likely to engage in interdisciplinary research. If so, they may be a
crucial asset in innovation and transformative science.

This research has important implications for both theory and practice. It
investigates an area related to cyberinfrastructure use and team science and
engineering that is currently understudied: How do minority group members use
cyberinfrastructure and the emergent team science structure to achieve success?
How can this information inform the development and refinement of the next
generation of cyberinfrastructure? What steps can be taken to improve
participation by members of underrepresented groups? New cyberinfrastructure
tools have enabled transformative changes for some areas of science and
engineering, but little is known about which of these changes differ for various
groups and how each achieves success. Results of this project could enable us to
design collaborative science and engineering projects that increase the
participation of underrepresented groups and provide valuable information for
the development of appropriate cyberinfrastructure to support a variety of work
practices. Identifying the experiences of minority group members will enable
funding agencies to better understand how to support and nurture the work
required to meet future scientific and engineering challenges and improve
national competitiveness.