* 0956490
* Doctoral Dissertation Proposal: Benjamin Wang: Contamined Landscapes: Explosive Remnants of War in Sudan
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Sara Pritchard, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 12/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

This doctoral dissertation examines how local populations, nongovernmental
organizations, the United Nations and other development groups, and policymakers
physically construct and conceptually understand environments contaminated by
explosive remnants of war (principally landmines) in Sudan. Other explosive
remnants of war include unexploded rockets and mortars in the ground that can
explode long after being fired. The presence of latent explosives in civilian
areas long after a conflict ends significantly alters the local environment and
the interactions communities have with that environment, as well as how the
explosive technologies and landscapes are understood. Through historical and
ethnographic methods, this dissertation seeks to unmask and make visible the
processes of perception, interaction, and management within a contaminated
landscape, particularly by local communities in Sudan. This study is thus in
part a response to the existing body of literature on global scale responses to
contaminated landscapes. While such literature rightly points to the profusion
of landscapes contaminated with explosive technologies that result from
conflict, the local knowledge in a contaminated landscape becomes abstracted,
thus obscuring the context of knowledge production as well as local meanings and
experiences.

This project makes several contributions. First, it aims to address the lack of
scholarship on the environmental impacts of explosive technologies in Sudan,
especially away from the Darfur states. Second, it connects the analytical
dynamic between environmental history and science and technology studies to
contemporary policy decisions, particularly those pertaining to development.
These research findings will be relevant to academic researchers, policymakers,
and nongovernmental activists. This study will examine the archives at the
Modern Military Records unit of the National Archives, the UN Archives, the Mine
Action Information Center at James Madison University and the Geneva
International Centre for Humanitarian Demining in Switzerland. Oral histories
and ethnographic observation will be conducted at the headquarters of an NGO
dedicated to clearing landmines and in affected states of Sudan.