* 0956233
* Equivariant cohomology classes in quiver theory and statistical mechanics, and, a more geometric foundation of intersection theory
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Allen Knutson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 12/31/2009
* USD 216.00

A common feature of my proposals is the use of algebro-geometric degeneration to
study an interesting irreducible variety in terms of the many components it
breaks into in a limit. Such degenerations are usually very destructive of the
geometry, but the original and limiting schemes may define the same
(equivariant) cohomology class in some ambient space. The degenerations I intend
to study are (1) of moduli spaces of representations of quivers, where the type
A case has become well understood in the last three years but types D,E are
totally open; (2) of nilpotent orbits in Lie algebras, to the normal cones of
their upper triangular part. The homology of the upper triangular part carries a
(Springer) representation of the corresponding Weyl group; the normal cone I
study has more components and, in the example I can compute so far, carries a
representation of a richer algebra; (3) of subvarieties of projective space to
reduced schemes with finite maps to projective space, where the degree of the
map carries the information more usually seen in the nonreduced structure of the
limit subscheme.

If we replace a polynomial equation, like xy = zw, by one of its monomials, like
xy = 0, the locus of solutions can often be made to retain the same volume even
as it breaks into pieces. Where xy=zw has interesting nonflat geometry, but
cannot be factored into pieces, xy=0 has interesting discrete structure (it has
two pieces, x=0 and y=0, which intersect one another) even though each piece is
flat. In the general setup, we have many polynomial conditions to begin with,
and each is degenerated" to a simpler polynomial containing only some of the
original monomials; a complicated condition guarantees that the dimension and
volume of the solution set remains constant. In my work I study these
degenerations where the ambient space is a space of (lists of) matrices, and the
original equations are natural matrix conditions like "matrices whose square is
zero". The difficulty comes in finding degenerations that preserve the dimension
and volume, and then studying the resulting equations to understand the simpler
pieces into which the degenerate locus factors. The resulting discrete structure
is then of great interest combinatorially, and sheds light on the (topologically
important) volume of the original locus.