* 0956740
* RUI: Catalytic Hydrolysis of Phosphonothioate Toxins by Molybdocene Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Louis Kuo, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 04/30/2014
* USD 180,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Louis Y. Kuo of
Lewis and Clark College in the study of phosphonothioate hydrolysis using
molybdocene complexes in the presence of either gold or silver nanoparticles or
polymer resins. This project focuses on improving the turnover of
phosphonothioate hydrolysis while developing an understanding of the
stereochemical, electronic and steric factors associated with selective P-S
scission and the rate acceleration provided by the molybdocene catalysts. The
structures of the various molybdocenes are compared with their catalytic
activities to determine the important relationships that impact reactivity and
selectivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The detoxification of phosphonothioates,
compounds found in insecticides and chemical weapons, is of practical
importance. The molybdocene compounds used in this study are among the first to
destroy these potential environmental poisons, in water and under very mild
conditions and temperatures. The experiments included in this program are well-
integrated into the undergraduate curriculum. Several of the molybdenum
complexes and nanoparticles are synthesized either in the general chemistry
laboratory or by the upper level inorganic chemistry students. Professor Kuo
participates in the award-winning "Saturday Academy", a program that enables
high school students to conduct summer internships in his research group.