* 0956309
* Affect and Global versus Local Information Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Linda Isbell, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 05/31/2014
* USD 350,000.00

The goal of this research project is to examine the ways in which people's
feelings (i.e., affect) influence their thoughts, judgments, and behavior. Many
theories of affect and cognition suggest that specific feelings lead individuals
to process information either globally (with a focus on the big picture) or
locally (with a focus on details). A large body of research suggests that
happiness is tied to global processing, whereas sadness is tied to local
processing. The current research challenges the notion of a dedicated link
between particular feeling states and global versus local processing. This
project advances a theoretical framework that suggests that the impact of
feelings on information processing is highly malleable and depends significantly
on the context in which the feelings are experienced. The research tests this
framework in three key social psychological domains that are of both theoretical
and real-world importance: the self, impression formation, and perceptions of
groups.

Four sets of two studies will examine the impact of feelings and global versus
local processing inclinations when generating information about the self
(Studies 1-2), when forming impressions of others under typical experimental
conditions (Studies 3-4) and under more real-world decision-making conditions
(Studies 5- 6), and when forming perceptions of groups members (Studies 7-8).
Studies 5-8 are also designed to extend the proposed framework to more real-
world judgment contexts (hiring, voting) where individuals actively seek out
information about others to form a judgment and to situations in which
individuals can engage in meaningful real-world behaviors (i.e., helping group
members, voting). This research project will advance our theoretical
understanding of the affect-cognition relationship while advancing knowledge in
key social psychological domains. Knowledge gained from this research will shed
light on how real-world judgments and behaviors are influenced by feelings. This
project will also provide scientific training and educational opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students, some of whom are members of
underrepresented groups.