* 0956131
* CAREER: Nanoscale Capillary Dynamics of Interfacial Films
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Oleg Shpyrko, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 02/28/2015
* USD 550,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Award
supports a project aiming to investigate the relationship between dynamical,
mechanical, and structural properties of nanoscale-thick films. Understanding
the relationship between structure and function of materials such as biological
membranes and polymer films at nanometer length-scales is crucial for many
disciplines ranging from condensed matter and biological physics to chemistry,
biology, engineering and nanotechnology. The proposed research will utilize
novel synchrotron-based x-ray scattering in combination with light scattering
and microscopy techniques uniquely suited for investigations of the fundamental
physics of capillary phenomena in surfactant monolayers (single layers of
molecules that lower the surface tension) self-assembled at the liquid-air
interface as well as the behavior of thin nanopatterned or laterally confined
polymer films at a solid-air interface. This research will improve our
fundamental understanding of the relationship between structure, dynamics and
function of thin films and ultimately improve technologies that make use of the
unique properties of thin films at nanoscale, such as the use of surfactants,
nanoimprint lithography, self-assembly and flexible electronics. The educational
component of this project will develop and coordinate a Young Physicist Program
(YPP) - an outreach effort focusing on middle- and high-school students from the
greater San Diego area. The undergraduate and graduate students involved with
the project will receive scientific training at the national x-ray synchrotron
sources and will learn skills that will prepare them for careers in academia as
well as in industrial or government laboratories. The training will also foster
a new generation of scientific users of national synchrotron
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** &lt;br/&gt;This
Faculty Early Career Award supports a project aiming to reveal questions about
the physical mechanism of reversible collapse, buckling and wrinkling of
surfactant monolayers self-assembled at a liquid-air interface, and providing an
accurate measurement of nanoscale structure, capillary dynamics and surface
energy of these films. The project will also investigate the Rayleigh
instability and capillary fluctuations in laterally nanopatterned polymer films
at a solid-air interface, a topic that is important for manufacturing of novel
nanoscale materials, structures, and devices via a nanoimprint lithography
approach. The properties of films at liquid-air and solid-air interfaces will be
studied by surface-sensitive synchrotron-based x-ray scattering techniques.
These measurements will be supplemented by visible light microscopy and laser
scattering (Dynamic Light Scattering) measurements. Graduate and undergraduate
students will play crucial roles in the project and will receive training in
laboratory research, including training at the state-of-the-art synchrotron
facilities at U.S. National Laboratories. Additional educational efforts will
coordinate and develop a Young Physicist Program (YPP) at UC San Diego, focusing
on middle- and high-school students from greater San Diego area.