* 0956196
* RCN-UBE Incubator:  Trial network to bring music  to the study of biology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Wendy Silk, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 09/30/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Planning will be supported for a Research Coordination Network centered on the
use of music as a tool for engaging undergraduate student interest and learning
in biology. Initial tests of having students write and perform songs to
reinforce learning of science concepts were received enthusiastically by
students. Results of these tests suggest that this may be an effective way of
engaging students, including non-science majors, in science classes and of
increasing retention of course content. Improving science literacy among non-
science majors would be a significant broader impact and address an important
national need.

This project will support communication among scientists, teachers, and
songwriters with interests in developing this pedagogical approach. A project
website, Undergraduate Biology Education - Songs for Teaching (UBEST), and a
Facebook page will be created to support communication among participants and
sharing of materials developed by the project. A key activity of this planning
project will be to recruit experts in learning at the interface of arts and
science. The goal of the project will be to develop a full RCN-UBE proposal that
will support a broader network of scientists, teachers, and songwriters, and
that will support testing of the most effective ways to use music to increase
understanding of scientific concepts and natural history.

This project is supported jointly by the Biological Sciences Directorate and the
Division of Undergraduate Education.