* 0956006
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Magnetic Resonance Properties of Spin1/2 Heavy-atom Nuclei
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2010,12/31/2015
* Cecil Dybowski, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2015
* USD 382,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Dybowski and his students from the University
of Delaware will refine methods for calculation of NMR parameters of compounds
of heavy metals such as lead, mercury, and thallium, all spin-Â½ nuclei using
ZORA-DFT calculations on models that mimic the local environment of solid
compounds, as well as measure these parameters for materials that represent
various chemical environments. These heavy metals are essential to technologies
as diverse as car batteries, semiconducting devices, and high-temperature
superconductors, and the means to identify the chemical structure, such as NMR,
provide information on them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integral part of analysis
with NMR is the use of sophisticated computational methods to infer the
electronic structure (the basis of the chemistry), particularly from proton and
carbon NMR spectra. The connection of the NMR spectroscopy of heavy metals such
as lead, mercury, and thallium to the electronic state, although theoretically
understood, is much less well developed. The proposed calculations require one
to deal with large numbers of electrons and the electrons must be treated as
relativistic particles - tasks that tax even the ability of modern computers.
Graduate and postdoctoral students who work on these tasks will be developing
the next stage of analysis with NMR spectroscopy, a skill that will allow them
to widen the use of NMR spectroscopy to problems of materials science underlying
much of modern technology.