* 0956809
* SBIR Phase II: Learning About Complexity through Programming Modular Robots
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2010,06/30/2012
* Eric Schweikardt, Modular Robotics Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 518,906.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project investigates
end-user programming for ensembles of robots. The project focuses on the
development of an accessible end-user programming environment so that middle and
high school students can create their own custom ensembles or blocks of robots
and observe how the blocks' behavior affect an entire robot. Building powerful
and correct intuitions about the behavior of complex systems is important for
scientists and engineers, but with today's technologies it is difficult for
children to acquire and integrate these ideas into their mindset. Through
exploratory play with the proposed robotics construction kit, which embodies a
distributed processing scheme for embedded microprocessors, children can build
and observe complex systems acting in the real world. Although end-user
programming environments exist for software systems, and even for a few robotics
toys, no competing approach to end user programming tackles distributed
processing for modular robotics. The project aims to build three experimental
systems: a text-based environment, a visual programming language, and a
'cellular automata' interface. Testing with local middle school students will
determine the benefits and drawbacks of each approach.

The broader/commercial objective of the project is to give children a vehicle to
explore how complex global behaviors emerge from local effects. Designing and
building complex systems exposes children to a variety of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) concepts. The programmed kit, without the
end-user programming component proposed here, already introduces these important
concepts. The addition of an intuitive, low-threshold, high-ceiling approach to
reprogramming individual modules will add extensibility to this already powerful
model of complexity. A commercial version of kit will be released in three
phases: to science centers and children's museums initially, to a core community
of technically savvy enthusiasts, and finally to the public through retail
channels. Several science centers have expressed serious and persistent interest
in acquiring initial versions of the kits and incorporating them into robotics
education programs and exhibits. In addition to the project's primary objective,
the design and testing of end-user programming for distributed embedded
computing can inform other applications of this technology in the rapidly
growing area of modular robotics.