* 0956819
* CAREER: Advancing engineering education through learner-centric, adaptive cyber-tools and cyber-environments
* ENG,EEC
* 10/15/2009,04/30/2016
* Krishna Madhavan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 04/30/2016
* USD 637,231.00

This CAREER project poses the fundamental question of how can cyber-tools and
cyber-environments better enable learning in the engineering disciplines. The
theoretical framework for this work is a synthesis of situated learning theory
and theories of semantic web (a new and evolving area of study in computing that
has major implications for future cyber-tools and cyber-environments). While
situated learning theory focuses on the student experience, theories of semantic
web design focus on the process of characterizing and creating cyber-
environments. The specific goals of this project include: (1) understand
educators' expectations of cyber-tools and cyber-environments as engineering
teaching tools; (2) characterize how undergraduate learners interact with the
current generation of simulation tools online; (3) investigate the influence of
learning styles on undergraduate students' use of simulation tools; and (4)
create and validate a learner-centric semantic schema- also called ontology - to
form the foundation for the creation of future simulation cyber-tools.
Integration of research and education occur will through the development of an
online "Guide to using cyber-environments in the undergraduate engineering
curriculum". This research will lead to the creation of highly adaptive and
customizable learning experiences when using cyber-tools and cyber-environments
as part of the engineering curricula.