* 0956610
* Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Probing Nonadiabatic Dynamics in Polyatomic Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Vincent McKoy, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2014
* USD 255,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Vincent McKoy and his research
group at the California Institute of Technology will develop quantum mechanical
methods for simulating femtosecond time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (TR-
PES) data. TRPES is a technique that can reveal the internal dynamics of a
molecule, including the motion of atoms and changes in electronic structure when
the molecule is excited by light. The focus of this research will be on non-
adiabatic dynamics, especially conical intersections responsible for internal
conversion and photodissociation. Because photoionization amplitudes vary
rapidly with the nuclear coordinates near conical intersections, calculations
that track this geometry dependence are essential to extract the wave-packet
dynamics from measured energy- and angle-resolved photoelectron distributions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research to be undertaken bears directly on
understanding the dynamics in polyatomic molecules, including such important
issues as the photostability of the DNA nucleobases and the mechanisms by which
light-sensitive proteins function. Besides aiding in the design and
interpretation of related experiments, therefore, this research also has wide
biophysical and biomedical implications. Detailed knowledge of photon
interactions with biomolecules may in the long run assist in developing, for
example, biomimetic photosensitive systems or genotoxic phototherapies for
cancer. By providing a context for training younger researchers in theoretical
molecular photoelectron spectroscopy, moreover, this research project addresses
a critical need, since there are very few theorists worldwide to support the
many experimental groups active in this field. The research will be carried out
within longstanding, productive, and mutually beneficial collaborations with
research groups in the U.S., Japan, Canada, and Brazil.