* 0956381
* SBIR Phase II:   Fast-Response, High Sensitivity MEMS based NOx Emission Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Richard Mlcak, BOSTON MICROSYSTEMS INC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 552,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
nitrogen oxide (NOx) sensor for diesel engine and other lean-burn combustion
systems. This innovation combines unique SiC-based piezoelectric bimorph
microresonator chemical detection technology with NOx sensitive materials, to
develop an emissions control NOx sensor capable of operating in harsh engine
emissions environments. The feasibility of the NOx sensor was demonstrated in
Phase I by assembling a preliminary prototype, testing it in environments
characteristic of hot engine emissions, and demonstrating 1 ppm NOx detection
with 1 second response times and stable operation at 400?aC. The Phase II
research objectives are to refine the sensor, including the bimorph resonator,
NOx sensitive coatings, packaging and control electronics, to achieve higher
temperature operation, 5 year lifetime, and reliable detection of 1 ppm NOx in
the presence of varying concentrations of other exhaust gases. Extensive
stability and life testing will be performed to identify and address potential
degradation mechanisms such as poisoning, fouling, carbon deposition and
materials inter diffusion. The prototype, including integrated heater,
temperature sensor, control electronics and power/ data interface, will be
operated in engine test stands to demonstrate performance in actual exhaust
environments.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in its ability to
accelerate the adoption and use of automobiles that use clean diesel and
renewable diesel fuels, which is a low-risk and high-impact way of reducing both
polluting emissions and US dependency on foreign energy supplies. Diesel engines
typically produce up to 20% less greenhouse gas emissions than a comparable
gasoline powered vehicle. However, they also produce a significantly higher
amount of nitrogen oxides (NOx), a pollutant that causes smog and acid rain.
Although the technology exists to treat and eliminate this NOx pollution, it
requires a high temperature compatible sensor with sensitivity and response time
that does not exist commercially today. This NSF SBIR Phase II program will
develop a NOx sensor capable of meeting the needs of the automotive industry for
a diesel engine emissions sensor for both real-time on-board diagnostics and
emissions reduction, bringing vehicles into compliance with new environmental
regulations coming into effect in 2013. Enabling the wider adoption of clean
diesel engines will reduce both greenhouse gas emissions and dependency on
petroleum, as consumers increasingly choose these greener and more cost-
effective vehicles.