* 0956495
* EAGER:  An Investigation of the Partial Degrees in Which Logics Can Recognize Their Own Consistency and the Potentially Broad Inter-Disciplinary Implications of These Effects
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Dan Willard, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

Goedel's Incompleteness Theorem is essentially a 2-part result, whose second
facet establishes that all conventional axiom systems are unable to prove a
theorem corroborating their own consistency. This latter effect, called the
Second Incompleteness Theorem, is quite counter-intuitive because human beings
seem to implicitly believe that their cogitation processes are consistent (in
order for them to gain the needed motivational energy for cogitation). Yet quite
surprisingly, the Second Incompleteness Theorem has demonstrated that
conventional logics cannot corroborate such a seemingly very natural consistency
assumption.

The main goal of Willard's research project will be to explore to what extent a
logic formalism can wiggle around the Second Incompleteness Theorem and
formalize a type of at least partial instinctive faith in its own consistency.
Willard has already published several articles exploring boundary-case
exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem and generalizations of it, thus
establishing the basic foundational concepts for this quite unorthodox research
approach

Willard's planned investigation will have an inter-disciplinary emphasis, being
germane to computer science, mathematics, the cognitive and information
sciences, philosophy and linguistics. It will show that while self-justifying
axiom systems have a very unconventional outer shell, they do retain an ability
to simulate most of the practical computer-oriented knowledge of the data needed
by any arbitrary logically valid axiom system. It will also show how
computerized floating-point real number arithmetics behave very differently from
integer arithmetics and how self-justifying formalisms retain an ability to
expand their knowledge base by hopping and skipping form one formal self-
justifying axiom system to another (via the use of Mind Change Theory and sundry
trial-and-error experimental methodologies).

The Second Incompleteness Theorem is sufficiently robust that its evasion is
feasible only in a limited context, where the specified logic possesses a
component that is unconventional in a nontrivial way. The reason that such
unconventional logics are of interest is that human beings evidently possess
some type of innate instinctive understanding of their own self-consistencies
(at least under some formal definitions of consistency). It is therefore
desirable to understand what type of algorithmic processes and foundational
precepts from symbolic logic can simulate a Thinking Being's conception of its
own consistency (in either a full or partial sense). The goal of this research
project will be to investigate the nature of and the potential uses and
implications of logics that possess some type of well-defined partial knowledge
of their own consistency.