* 0956069
* EAGER: Developing bioinformatics tools for the application of next-generation sequencing technologies to phylogeography.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Prosanta Chakrabarty, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2013
* USD 225,394.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the 37 years since the DNA sequence
of a gene was first identified, biologists have benefited from several waves of
technological advancement in sequencing technologies. The latest of these,
sequence-by-synthesis, offers dramatic improvements to both the amount and
quality of data collected, and allows biologists to generate genomic data in
non-model organisms for the first time. The greatest impediment to the adoption
of the novel technology is computational; particularly software for post-run
bioinformatics processing. This proposal will develop software that facilitates
investigations into the genetic diversity within and between species. Software
will be tested on next-generation sequence data collected to augment existing
projects in the labs of the principal investigators; these projects seek to
understand the process of speciation in organisms from North and South
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will serve as a catalyst for the
adoption of next-generation sequence data in phylogeography and will also
benefit evolutionary biology, ecology, and conservation biology. The proposed
research will provide training and valuable experience for a female
bioinformatics graduate student, and will enable other researchers to utilize
next-generation sequencing technologies.