* 0956750
* International Cyber-bullying Scholars Collaboration Meeting
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Sheri Bauman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 02/28/2011
* USD 46,762.00

Cyberbullying -- harming others using technological communication methods -- is
a recent addition to the arsenal of bullies, and it is predicted to increase
internationally as availability of technology expands. Researchers around the
world have begun to investigate this phenomenon in order to understand its
prevalence, dynamics, relationship to conventional bullying, differences among
gender and ethnic groups, and characteristics of those involved in cyberbullying
as bully, victim, or both. The research to date has suffered from the absence of
a common definition of cyberbullying. Without a consistent definition, findings
from one study cannot be compared to those of other studies. In addition, there
are no standardized measures used by researchers to collect data. Finally, the
lack of a 'best practice' standard for research methods in this field means that
individual researchers or research groups may be approaching the problem in less
productive ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund an international
meeting of cyberbullying scholars to address three basic issues: definition,
measures, and methods of conducting research on cyberbullying. The event will
bring together prominent researchers from the United States, Canada, Europe, and
Asia to collaborate and focus on these important questions. With a common
definition, sound measurement practices, and established methods for future
research, the field of cyberbullying will advance more quickly. A thorough
understanding of the problem is a necessary foundation upon which to build
effective prevention and intervention programs, and this conference will
establish the groundwork for research to construct that understanding. In
addition, the United States (a latecomer to bullying research) will establish
itself as an important leader in this emerging field.