* 0956438
* EAGER:  Heterogeneous Sensor Network Design and Information Integration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Qilian Liang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

Intellectual Merits: The objective of this project is to develop information
theory and signal processing-based algorithms for Heterogeneous Sensor Networks
(HSN) that jointly addresses sensor adaptation and data fusion in the presence
of a combination of stationary or non-stationary heterogeneous sensors in
constrained environments. Two research thrusts will be investigated: 1)
information theory for HSN design; 2) signal processing for HSN information
integration. Current research on the theory and algorithms of HSN is very
limited. There exist a number of fundamental problems that have never been
addressed, yet they are critical to the HSN. To tackle these problems, novel
approaches and methodologies that will incorporate techniques such as
information theory, network science, collaborative signal processing, estimation
theory, statistical approach, and optimization will be studied and therefore has
the potential to inspire transformative methodologies that could be applied to
many domains. The proposed theories will lead to practical methodologies,
algorithms and design tools with performance robust to uncertainty and adaptive
to variations in dynamic operating conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project will make a significant contribution to the applications
of HSN and will have a broad and deep social impact. Because of the vast amounts
of real-time information coming from many widely distributed sources in homeland
security and defense, HSN is needed to collect and process threat-related
information to insure that it is not overlooked. A carefully developed,
research-centric education plan is also proposed. Under-represented and female
students will be recruited from different societies for this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;