* 0956371
* Collaborative Research:  BiSciCol Tracker:  Towards a tagging and tracking infrastructure for biodiversity science collections
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Norris Williams, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2016
* USD 475,238.00

Scientific specimens, typically found in museum collections, serve as the anchor
for an expanding array of information that grows and changes over time. This
information, about specimens and the species that the specimens represent, is
often scattered geographically across institutions and across independent
computer systems, making it difficult to access or synthesize. The goal of this
project is to develop a two-way system of linking and tracking scientific
specimens and specimen-related data across biological collections, and to make
this system widely available to the scientific community and the public. This
system would employ globally unique identifiers, or GUIDs, to tag and update
information associated with specimens, allowing communication between end users
and collections. This project will improve data quality and quantity for non-
scientists and scientists, and will actively engage use communities through
training workshops, summer student internships, and community BioBlitz
enhancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to integrate specimen data and
associated information across biological collections will enable critical
studies related to systematics, biogeography, and changing species
distributions. These in turn have implications for climate change, changing land
use, and other questions key to understanding the past, placing changes in an
historical context, and predicting the future of species and environments. This
project is part of a 10-year effort to digitize and mobilize the scientific
information associated with biological specimens held in U.S. research
collections. The images and digitized data from this project will be integrated
into the online national resource as outlined in the community strategic plan
available at
http://digbiocol.files.wordpress.com/2010/05/digistratplanfinaldraft.pdf.