* 0956474
* RUI: Chemical Investigations into the Bioactivity of the DNA Lesion 8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Michelle Hamm, University of Richmond
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/28/2014
* USD 244,000.00

The oxidatively damaged 2'-deoxyguanosine (dG) derivative
8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (OdG) is one of the most prominent DNA lesions and has
been linked to ageing as well as several diseases including cancer. Unlike dG
which base pairs only with 2'-deoxycytosine (dC) in DNA, OdG can pair with both
dC and 2'-deoxyadenosine (dA), thus allowing for mutations during replication.
Due to its prominence and promutagenic character, cells have evolved three
different repair mechanisms that help lessen the impact of OdG on cells. With
the support of this RUI Award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program,
Professor Michelle Hamm of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Richmond will continue her research to better understand the exact steric and/or
electronic properties that dictate the bioactivity of OdG. Her lab synthesizes
nucleotide analogues on the spectrum between dG and OdG, incorporates them into
DNA, and uses them in biochemical experiments focused on the base pairing,
replication, and repair of OdG. By comparing the activities of the synthesized
analogues to dG and OdG, the exact atomic factors that influence the bioactivity
of OdG, and why it differs so strongly from dG, can be isolated. Only by
understanding the specific properties and interactions that dictate the activity
of a compound can one fully understand its role within the cell. This research
will involve undergraduate students at a primarily undergraduate institution and
provide training in the synthetic and biochemical techniques used in the
proposed studies. The researchers will also learn important skills including
time management, critical thinking, experimental design, and verbal and written
communication. These activities will prepare them for research in academic or
industrial settings, sparking interest in further study at an advanced level.