* 0956051
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education in Earthquake Triggering and Non-Volcanic Tremor
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Zhigang Peng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2016
* USD 574,514.00

This CAREER proposal seeks to make fundamental contributions in our
understanding of earthquake interaction and fault slip behaviors through
systematic analysis of earthquake triggering and "non-volcanic" tremor, based on
the large seismic data collected from the EarthScope experiment and other
permanent seismic networks in the US, and permanent and temporary seismic
deployments in East Asia. The project will prepare next-generation seismologists
to be capable of analyzing large seismic data through various training courses
and research projects. The research results will be dissimilated to general
public through sonification and visualization tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed tasks include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Early aftershocks. The researcher will
detect and locate missing aftershocks immediately after the 2008 Mw7.9 Wenchuan
earthquake in China, and several recent large earthquakes in California and
Japan, using a waveform matched filter technique. The newly identified events
will be used to test whether aftershocks are triggered by static or dynamic
stresses, or other time-dependent mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;2. Remote triggering: a
systematic survey of remotely triggered seismicity in active regions in the
Western US, and relatively stable intraplate regions such as Continental China
and the Central and Eastern US. I hope to identify necessary conditions and
constrain physical mechanisms for remote triggering in active and intraplate
regions.&lt;br/&gt;3. Non-volcanic tremor: a systematic study of non-volcanic
tremor, focusing on California and Taiwan. The obtained results will be used to
better understand the physical mechanisms of tremor generation and how
accumulated strain is released in seismic/aseismic events. &lt;br/&gt;4.
Training next-generation seismologists. The researcher will provide many
undergraduate research opportunities through summer internship programs, and
collaborations with researchers in undergraduate institutions. He will develop
an online tutorial and training material for Seismic Analysis Code (SAC) and
data management, which can be used to train senior undergraduate and incoming
graduate students in Georgia Tech and other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;5.
Sonification and visualization of seismic data. Research results on earthquake
triggering and non-volcanic tremor will be made accessible to general public
through sonification (i.e., making sounds from seismograms) and visualization.
In addition, the PI will work with IRIS Education and Outreach (E&amp;O)
specialists to generate sounds and animations for significant events based on
seismic data archived at the IRIS Data Management Center (DMC).