* 0956265
* Collaborative Research: Development of song culture in zebra finches - vocal and sensory changes over generations
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2010,10/31/2010
* Santosh Helekar, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 10/31/2010
* USD 330,000.00

Culture consists of traits transmitted through social learning. One example for
social learning is the acquisition of song by songbirds: During a sensitive
period early in life, young males learn to imitate their father's song.
Songbirds provide tractable models of culture: Members of a species show
individual variation in song, and geographically separated groups have local
song dialects, i.e., a local song culture. How does song culture develop over
multiple generations? In zebra finches, birds kept isolated during the sensitive
period develop an abnormal (isolate) song. Interestingly, in an isolated colony
founded by an isolate, "normal" songs with species-typical features emerge
within 3-4 generations, due to biased imitation that gradually transforms the
isolate song into the species-typical song. Understanding how song develops in
individual birds and how song culture develops in a community might require
knowledge not only about the vocal, but also about the sensory-perceptual
development across generations, as well as the social interactions which
accompany it. This project is a combined study of social, vocal, and sensory
aspects of song development. The investigators will design controlled social
environments to examine dynamically how song is acquired and how song culture
emerges. They will combine the continuous analysis of vocal changes and social
interactions with non-invasive functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of
the brain to investigate how auditory brain responses to songs develop, and how
they drive cultural changes. Moreover, these researchers will test if
developmental changes in brain architecture correlate with observed vocal and/or
sensory changes using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).

This research will provide a bridge between studies of vocal and sensory changes
and ethology studies of cultural changes in vocal communication. This project
will contribute to the training of three graduate students, and provide
scientific education and research training to undergraduate students as well as
middle and high school students in the community.