* 0956025
* Protonation and proton transfer studied with cluster-ion infrared spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Michael Duncan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 03/31/2013
* USD 442,266.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
of the Chemistry Division, and the Office of International Science and
Engineering, Professor Duncan frm the University of Georgia will study
protonated molecular ion clusters produced in the gas phase as model systems for
proton binding and proton transport processes. These processes are central in
electrochemistry, in photosynthesis and in the operation of hydrogen fuel cells.
The structures of protons attached to key molecules and the bridging structures
that are intermediates in proton transfer are the focus of this project.
Complexes containing a proton bound to one or more small molecules are produced
at low temperature in a molecular beam environment with a pulsed-discharge
supersonic nozzle source, so that the intrinsic structures of these systems
unperturbed by their environment may be studied. Protonated complexes are size-
selected with a mass spectrometer and their structures are investigated with
infrared laser spectroscopy. This work focuses on small molecular carbonyls,
amino acids and carbocation species, investigating the monomer structures
resulting from protonation, their symmetric and asymmetric proton-bound dimer
units, and their behavior upon stepwise solvation with water. Using the expanded
frequency coverage of new infrared lasers, characteristic vibrational patterns
are measured for each molecular unit present, including the critical low
frequency region of the spectrum where proton vibrations occur. The shift in
vibrational bands for protonated versus free molecules provides a diagnostic for
charge-induction effects, while the proton stretching and bending vibrations
provide direct access to the proton-transfer potential energy surface.

These experiments provide specific new chemical insights about selected proton
transfer reactions. They also produce benchmark data for comparison to the
results of computational quantum chemistry which attempts to calculate proton
transfer dynamics. Vibrational signatures measured for protonated organic
molecules known as carbocations may be useful for infrared astronomy of
interstellar gas clouds. Equally important is the training of undergraduates,
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in the methods, techniques and
instrumentation of modern physical chemistry. Ongoing collaborations include a
non-Ph.D. granting institution (Kennesaw State University) and two international
labs (Chemistry Dept., Nottingham, UK and Fritz Haber Institute, Berlin).