* 0956466
* Selective Detection and Quantification of DNA Lesions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Marc Greenberg, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2014
* USD 480,000.00

Oxidative DNA damage is a biologically important and chemically complex process.
A large variety (&gt;50) of chemical modifications (lesions) are produced when
DNA is exposed to oxidative conditions. DNA lesions are associated with aging
and the development of disease. Consequently, they are of interest as
"biomarkers" to help predict the onset of disease and progression of the aging
process. The goal of this project is to develop facile, sensitive chemical
methods for detecting lesions in cellular DNA. In addition, the PI will create
chemical methods for lesion detection that will be employed by other scientists
using commonly available instrumentation and reagents that can be produced by
other laboratories and/or commercial suppliers. This chemistry will also enable
a determination of whether there is a correlation between specific DNA damage
and mutational hotspots. It is particularly challenging to detect specific
lesions in telomeres or at exact positions in cellular DNA, because unlike
single nucleotide polymorphisms it is not possible to produce more of DNA
containing a lesion using the polymerase chain reaction. Hence, a very sensitive
detection method is required. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Cell biologists,
toxicologists, pharmacologists, and medicinal chemists will use the reagents
developed during the course of this research. In addition, the potential use of
such tools for identifying DNA lesion biomarkers would benefit society directly
by potentially detecting genetically based diseases, such as cancer at an early
stage where it is most treatable.&lt;br/&gt;The undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows participating in this research will receive
broad training in biochemistry, synthetic organic, physical organic and
analytical chemistry. In addition, they will be exposed to biochemically
important problems through their reading of the background literature related to
DNA damage and the significance of its detection.&lt;br/&gt;The PI is actively
involved in broadening the participation of groups that have traditionally been
underrepresented in chemistry. He has been involved in creating a new
undergraduate major in Chemical Biology at Morgan State University, and
participates in a variety of undergraduate research symposia (e.g., Annual
Biomedical Research Conference for Minority Students) where members of these
groups are well represented.