* 0956655
* New Hybrid Materials based on Organosilicon and Organoboron Polymeric Scaffolds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Frieder Jaekle, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 05/31/2014
* USD 425,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, John Sheridan and Frieder Jakle of Rutgers
University at Newark will explore how scorpionate-type ligand modified polymers
can be prepared and used to make assemblies of macromolecules with complex
architectures and functions. The approach is to synthesize monomers that contain
bidentate and tridentate ligands based upon neutral organosilicon and anionic
organoborate scorpionate structures. The direct polymerization of these monomers
will be studied, and polymer postmodification approaches will be examined as
well. The resulting macromolecules will be complexed to metal ions and metal
complex fragments to create a range of new structures with potentially
interesting electrochemical, thermal, and optical properties. The broader
impacts involve dissemination of research results via publications and seminars
at conferences, training graduate students and postdoctoral researchers,
participation in Project SEED, and continued development of a high school
outreach program on polymer and materials chemistry.

This work will enhance our fundamental understanding about how to prepare
polymers that contain metals. The results of these studies could have many
important long term impacts on solar energy, biomedical, and sensing
technologies.