* 0956546
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Economic Crisis and its Social Impacts through Postdoctoral Fellowships
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Erik Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/2015
* USD 256,742.00

Abstract SES-0957962 Karen S. Cook David Grusky Stanford University

SES-0957200 Victor Nee Kim Weeden Cornell University

SES-0957900 Paul DiMaggio Princeton University

SES-0957923 Bruce Western Harvard University

SES-0958093 Neil Fligstein University of California-Berkeley

SES-0956546 Erik Wright Joel Rogers University of Wisconsin-Madison

The United States and the world economy are currently experiencing the most
extensive and intense downturn since the Great Depression. A six-university team
hosted by Centers for the study of economic sociology and social inequality
associated with the Sociology Departments at Cornell, University of California
at Berkeley, Harvard, Princeton, Stanford and the University of Wisconsin that
share outstanding reputations and strong track records in economic sociology and
related specialties will complete research on the causes and consequences of
this historic economic crisis. The recession itself presents a fundamental
challenge to the economic sociology of efficient markets and to conventional
understandings of concepts like risk and trust that are central to all of the
social sciences. It is also likely to have important effects on social
inequality -- not just inequality in income, but in economic behaviors like
savings, job-hunting, and investments in education, as well as such outcomes as
health and wellness, fertility and divorce, and criminal victimization. The
project will support twelve postdoctoral research fellows who will work with
faculty at the six universities to complete independent research while receive
training and mentoring, that will cast light on the causes of the crisis and its
impact on social inequality and on U.S. institutions.

Broader Impact: The research will help to inform our understanding of the social
consequences of the recession. Specifically, the project will bring a
sociological perspective to three pressing questions: (1) how did the financial
crisis happen, (2) what are the social consequences of the recession, and how is
its impacts distributed, and (3) what are the policy responses to the economic
crisis and what are their consequences? The project will also provide a career
development opportunity for a diverse set of new Sociology Ph.D.s at a time of
declining endowments in the private university sector and declining tax revenues
in the states. By providing a footing for a group of young scholars and enabling
them to contribute to our understanding of the very crisis that has challenged
the labor market into which they are moving, the investigators hope to prevent
the loss of talent that the field has experienced in previous severe recessions,
and to ensure that graduate-training institutions have a robust and consistent
pipeline of new talent as faculty hired in the 1970s and 1980s move towards
retirement.