* 0956907
* STTR Phase II:  High-Strength Low-Cost Fiber Via Multi-Component Nanofiber (MCN) Spinning
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Philip Brown, 3F, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 705,506.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project has the
overall objective of developing a multi-component melt spinning approach to
produce a new family of high performance fibers using standard low-cost
polymers. The new high-strength and/or high-modulus polymeric fiber is to be
made using cutting-edge but commercially available spinning technology and an
innovative and previously unexplored set of spinning process parameters. The
resulting new fiber will be comparable in performance to other high-performance
fibers on the market today, but will cost significantly less. Spinning
experiments will be conducted at both the laboratory/bench scale, and at the
pilot line level. Experimental fiber spinning lines will be modified to enable
consistent fiber manufacturing. Produced fibers will be characterized using a
variety of tools (focused ion beam, scanning and transmission electron
microscopy, X-ray, tensile, lateral compression, density, differential scanning
calorimetry, and dynamic mechanical analysis) to understand the new mechanisms
that lead to improved strength and/or stiffness. The spinning conditions which
enable these mechanisms will be optimized to meet target strength and/or
stiffness goals. The possibility of introducing UV-resistant additives and/or
other application-specific components, and any corresponding effects on
performance, will also be studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is based on achieving a performance
goal for the new fibers of tenacity &gt; 15 gf/denier and/or an initial modulus
of 400 gf/denier or greater. Given the anticipated capability for low-cost high-
volume production, these new fibers will have a cost approaching that of
standard high tenacity industrial fibers (~ $7/lb) as compared to the typical
&gt;$20/lb for specialty high performance fibers such as aramids and high-
performance polyethylene (HPPE). The new fiber products will be designed to have
a performance above current high-tenacity industrial fibers (HT polyester and
nylon) but below current specialty high-performance fibers (aramids, HPPE). The
reduced cost for these fibers will result in lower costs over a variety of
applications, which will benefit society (for example, by the greater
proliferation of cut-resistant apparel and other safety/protective devices). In
addition to these economic benefits, the proposed work will provide extensive
characterization of nano-scale fibers that will contribute to the scientific
understanding of polymeric fiber structure and behavior.