* 0956010
* INTEROP:  International Network of Arctic Knowledge
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Peter Pulsifer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

Award: 0956010 PI: Mark Parsons Project Title: Community-based Data
Interoperability (INTEROP)International Network of Arctic Knowledge (INAK)

Rapid Arctic change has critical implications for global climate, biodiversity,
geopolitics, international transportation, and local society. To understand and
respond to this change and its implications, it is necessary to understand the
Arctic as a system. The International Polar Year (IPY) was a huge international
effort to improve our interdisciplinary understanding of the Arctic and Polar
Regions, how they are changing, and their impact on the Earth system and human
society. IPY produced a large, diverse array of data that increases the
challenge of interdisciplinary data discovery and use. The data is enriched, but
the challenge is increased, by the explicit inclusion of social science research
and local and traditional knowledge of the Arctic. Yet, IPY and the rapid change
in the Arctic have generated considerable international resolve and formal
collaboration that can be harnessed to improve the semantic understanding and
interoperability of Arctic data.

NSIDC, working with domain and community-building experts at the Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute and elsewhere, use the opportunity of IPY and the
developing Polar Information Commons to improve the knowledge and
interoperability of sea ice and related Arctic data through the extension and
enhancement of an international data management network. Through focused
workshops and broad community interaction, a formal, sea-ice ontology, and an
expansive interdisciplinary knowledge framework for the Arctic are developed.
Proven and maturing semantic web methodologies and ontology creation tools,
including visual tools like concept maps, are used to develop the underlying
infrastructure. The support and ongoing evolution of this infrastructure relies
on the engagement of the people and communities who use, enhance, and maintain
that infrastructure?the INAK. The need for interdisciplinary understanding of
the Arctic system (driven by the profound changes in the Arctic) motivates the
network, and the occasion of the IPY provides a unique opportunity and mechanism
to develop the network, but ultimately, the network is sustained when members
see how their network activities benefit their immediate scientific and
practical science needs. The project engages the diverse Arctic community,
including Arctic residents and indigenous people, to contribute to and use the
INAK. Ultimately, the ontologies go beyond direct data user needs and grow the
INAK and Arctic semantic insights into the future.