* 0956247
* A Greener Herbarium for the Botanical Research Institute of Texas Herbarium (BRIT-SMU-VDB): Compactorization for Generations to Come
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2011
* Amanda Neill, Botanical Research Institute of Texas
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 05/31/2011
* USD 499,574.00

An award to the Botanical Research Institute of Texas (BRIT) will support the
purchase and installation of mobile storage units and herbarium cabinets for the
BRIT-SMU-VDB Herbarium, which contains over one million specimens representing
much of the Earth's plant diversity. These specimens are widely used by students
and professionals as well as the general public. Compactorization of the
collections with modern storage equipment will allow the incorporation of a
large backlog of boxed specimens of great scientific value and will provide a
safe environment for their preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
this project include greatly improved accessibility to BRIT's collections for
the scientific community and students, as well as new opportunities to engage
the public. Expanded educational programs and rotating exhibits will illustrate
the value of systematic herbarium collections. The expansion of the herbarium
made possible by the construction of BRIT's new, "green," LEED-certified
building will facilitate long-term growth of the collections and create a
superior environment for herbarium research, education, and outreach. A fully
compactorized herbarium, with a smaller footprint, using recycled steel and
manual power, is a "green" herbarium. This award presents a timely and relevant
opportunity to engage the public and increase appreciation for science in the
service of conservation of biodiversity and natural resources.