* 0956382
* NSF Workshop on Distributed Processing over Cognitive Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Ali Sayed, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

NSF Workshop on Distributed Processing over Cognitive Networks



The emerging interest in cognitive networks, smart grids, and self-organizing
networks is motivating heightened research on distributed and collaborative
signal processing strategies that enable networks to adapt and respond to
information in real-time. Cognitive networks consist of spatially distributed
nodes that are linked together through a connection topology. The nodes are
generally isotropic without any particular node taking a central control role.
The nodes cooperate with each other and adapt their states in response to both
local data collected at the nodes and data received from their immediate
neighbors. Information arriving at any particular node creates a ripple effect
that propagates throughout the network by means of a diffusive process. The
diffusion of information results in a form of collective intelligence as
evidenced by improved adaptation, learning, tracking, and convergence behavior
relative to non-cooperative networks.



The purpose of the workshop is to bring together research experts from various
modalities to brainstorm on the challenges and opportunities of cognitive
networks. The workshop recognizes the high potential for cross-fertilization of
ideas among different fields involving signal processing, estimation and
algorithms, adaptation, system theory, biological and social sciences, computer
science, and economic and public policy. The meeting will provide a forum for
researchers to discuss the theory, algorithms, and challenges involved in the
development of reliable cognitive networks. The workshop will help define a
research agenda for the design of adaptive networks for distributed processing
and estimation, and will produce a report that can serve as a guide to the
research community. Research considered by the workshop will motivate and
support development of enabling technologies for various areas including
environmental monitoring, distributed event detection, distributed resource
monitoring, distributed estimation and target tracking, cooperation among
cognitive radios searching for spectral resources, distributed processing and
control over smart grids, contributions to swarm theory, animal flocking
behavior theory, etc.

