* 0956393
* RUI: Exploring Mechanistic Parameters Regulating Bond-Activation in the State-Specific Reactions of Gas Phase Transition Metal Ions with Halogenated Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* William Taylor, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2014
* USD 173,413.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor William Taylor of the University
of Central Arkansas and his undergraduate research team will examine the
activation of sigma bonds in halogenated molecules by metal ions. The reactions
of interest will be carried out in the gas phase using a selected ion drift cell
reactor which will generate transition metal ions in both ground and excited
electronic states using a sputtering glow discharge source. These ions will then
be mass selected via a quadrupole mass filter and introduced into a drift cell
containing low pressures of helium and the neutral reactant molecule of
interest. Subsequent analysis of reaction products will be carried out using a
second quadrupole. This instrument will also be used to characterize the metal
ion electronic state distributions via electronic state chromatography (ESC).
ESC will also be used to determine the state-specificity of reaction products.
Neutral reaction species will include various halogenated methanes (CH3X, CF3X,
where X =Cl, Br and I), SF5Cl and SF5Br, and others. The experiments are
designed to reveal the dependence of reaction outcome (e.g., halogen or halide
abstraction, HX elimination) on various parameters, including the electronic
state of the metal species as well as structural characteristics of the reactant
neutral. Temperature dependent kinetic studies of selected reactions will be
aimed at identifying likely transition states. These experimental efforts will
be complemented by ensity functional calculations of reaction potential energy
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Transition metal ions have the ability to break
sigma bonds, and this property is most useful in converting hydrocarbons to
other, more useful compounds. Understanding the mechanism of this process will
allow design of new and better catalysts for use in chemical synthesis and the
petroleum industry. In addition, the project will provide research opportunities
to undergraduates in an area which they might not otherwise be exposed to.
Undergraduates participating in this work benefit from a valuable research
experience which serves them well in a variety of subsequent career choices
including graduate/professional programs and science-related jobs.