* 0956634
* EAGER: Building Tools for Creating Coherence Across Evaluations of Schoolyard LTER Programs
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Steven McGee, The Learning Partnership
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2011
* USD 99,715.00

For the past eleven years, the Division of Environmental Biology has provided
supplemental funds to each of the 26 Long-Term Ecological Research sites to
support the Schoolyard LTER. Each site designs their own The Schoolyard LTER
program, which has fostered tremendous creativity in approaches but has made it
challenging to draw general conclusions about the Schoolyard LTER program as a
whole. The Learning Partnership will develop and pilot test a technological
infrastructure called the Learning Monitor to support drawing general
conclusions about the program as a whole. The Learning Monitor will allow for
evaluating the unique characteristics of each site and then aggregating the site
specific results across the Schoolyard LTER network. The focus of this one-year
effort will be building the infrastructure to measure the impact of the
Schoolyard LTER programs on K-12 students and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting infrastructure will provide a searchable
catalog of LTER programs that can be maintained by each site as well as a suite
of pilot-tested instruments. The sites would be able to manage the data
collection for their programs. This proof of concept could support future work
to implement a full-scale evaluation of the Schoolyard program, enhance the
capabilities of generating ad hoc reports about individual sites and the network
as a whole, and develop tools for incorporating the unique aspects of LTER
research into performance assessment questions.