* 0956430
* SBIR Phase II:   Self-Aligned Miniature External Cavity Tunable Laser from Blue-Violet to Infrared
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Christophe Moser, ONDAX INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 03/31/2012
* USD 499,943.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on the
development, manufacturing and commercialization of a novel miniature self-
aligned tunable diode laser. The tunable laser platform offers two major
advantages compared to currently available products and technologies: (1)
passive optical alignment and assembly; and (2) extremely broad spectral
coverage from visible (375nm) to the infrared (4,000nm). The self-alignment
feature translates to much simpler and efficient manufacturing, and the optical
design enables the new platform to be two orders of magnitude more compact than
commercially available tunable diode lasers. These features combine to
considerably lower the labor costs associated with assembly and packaging. The
research objectives are to determine the parameters of the passive cavity that
enable (1) stable single frequency operation, (2) a linewidth less than 30KHz,
and (3) less than 1MHz wavelength drift. It is also critical to develop methods
to tune the output to a specific target wavelength. Prototypes of the tunable
laser will be built for three wavelength groups: blue (400-415 nm) ? Red
(635-660 nm) and near-infrared (760-790 nm). This novel laser platform will
enable a broad range of technology areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project has direct links to
commercial applications that decrease energy use or promote renewable energy
implementation. Specifically, this laser technology can assist the reduction of
carbon emissions by monitoring and optimizing efficiencies in combustion
processes such as engines and coal plants (via gas sensing with infrared tunable
lasers). The technology will help accelerate the deployment of environmental
sensing stations by providing the key optical source for sensing systems at a
fraction of today?s cost. A second role would be to provide athermal operation
of lasers, which could significantly reduce the energy consumption in
telecommunication systems by eliminating the requirement for cooling the
lasers.&lt;br/&gt;A third application would be improving the efficiency of
renewable wind power (via wind sensing with blue-violet lasers) by enabling
?smart? wind turbines. A laser-based wind sensor would provide each ?smart?
turbine of a wind farm with the ability to preemptively assess and accurately
predict the wind load far in advance, helping improve overall turbine efficiency
and utilization. This information is critical to the planning of energy supply
into the power grid. All of these applications have immediate commercial
potential to help reduce the World?s dependence on fossil fuels.