* 0956166
* CAREER: Investigations on the elastic and vibrational properties of mantle silicates and oxides
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Jennifer Jackson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2016
* USD 524,611.00

Inferences of the mineralogy and chemical composition of Earth's deep interior
depend on comparing accurate laboratory-measured properties of candidate phases
with geophysical and geochemical observations, because our ability to directly
sample the deep Earth is severely limited. This CAREER award investigates the
effect of iron and aluminum on the elastic and vibrational properties of lower
mantle silicates and oxides using national synchrotron facilities. Under the
mentorship of the PI, students will use established synchrotron methods of micro
x-ray diffraction and nuclear resonant inelastic x-ray scattering to obtain
equations of state for mantle phases at unchartered pressure-temperature
conditions. Typically, few students are able to experience research projects at
such facilities due in part to limited accessibility and space constraints.
Under the initiatives of this project, we will create a virtual beam-line by
building on existing remote infrastructure at the synchrotron. Caltech's Summer
Undergraduate Research Fellowships (SURF) program introduces students to
research under the guidance of experienced research mentors at Caltech and the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Undergraduate students from all over the country
participate in a 10-week long SURF program over the summer. At the conclusion of
the program, they submit a technical paper and give an oral presentation at SURF
Seminar Day, a symposium modeled on a professional technical meeting. The
proposed research agenda with its virtual beam-line offers a unique opportunity
for an extended array of undergraduate and graduate students under the
mentorship of the PI to apply state-of-the-art experimental techniques at multi-
scale facilities and apply their results to geophysical phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort to understand the origin of recently observed
seismic complexities requires new and more accurate measurements of candidate
lower mantle materials and is an active area of modern cross-disciplinary
research. Typically, models of the deep Earth have been made by extrapolating
mineral properties to relevant pressure-temperature conditions and comparing
them with seismological determined compressional- and shear-wave velocities and
density. However, several properties of deep mantle materials remain widely
unknown due to experimental challenges. In an effort to overcome these
obstacles, undergraduate and graduate students will use established synchrotron
methods engaged with diamond anvil cells and laser heating technology to obtain
equations of state for mantle silicates and oxides under relevant conditions.
With the density determined from x-ray diffraction for these materials, the
aggregate compressional and shear wave velocities, as well as the adiabatic bulk
and shear moduli, will be determined from the measured partial phonon density of
states. By creating a virtual beam-line to provide remote access to the proposed
synchrotron experiments, more undergraduate and graduate students at Caltech
will have access to synchrotron experiments. The students will publish their
results in scientific journals and present their findings at national meetings.
The data obtained will permit the evaluation of the effects of iron and aluminum
on the sound velocities and elasticity of these materials in a previously
unexplored pressure-temperatures sector and will put constraints on geodynamic
simulations and whether observed seismological lateral variations are due to a
chemical origin.