* 0956909
* SBIR Phase II:   High Permeability Thin-Film Nanocomposite Membranes for Reverse Osmosis Desalination
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Jason Holt, NanOasis Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2012
* USD 507,530.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to further
the development of nanomaterials-based, high permeability, energy-efficient
membranes for desalination of water. Membrane-based reverse osmosis (RO) is the
dominant desalination technology in many parts of the world, although it
provides just a small fraction of potable water demand. This is in large part
due to the energy intensiveness of the technology. It is widely acknowledged
that improvements in membrane permeability can bring about significant
reductions in the energy requirements for seawater RO of between 30-50%. The RO
membranes developed under Phase I demonstrated significant improvements in
permeability over state-of-the-art membranes, while maintaining a high salt
rejection. Phase II aims to scale the process developed in Phase I to produce
spiral wound cartridges of an industry standard form factor. The membranes then
will be tested to determine their future performance in a large-scale municipal
desalination plant.

The broader impact/commercial impact of this project is that the technology is
expected to bring RO desalination closer to cost-parity with existing methods of
water production. Also, the superior membrane performance achieved in Phase I
demonstrates the promise of nanomaterials in RO membrane development. Scaling
this process up to the pilot scale will help demonstrate the commercial
viability of the technology. In addition, this project is expected to enhance
the understanding of the science behind water and ion transport through
membranes on the nanometer-scale, an area of current academic interest.