* 0956197
* EAGER: Initiation of a pH/pCO2-sensing mooring platform on the Oregon coast
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Bruce Menge, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2012
* USD 179,963.00

Ocean acidification (OA), the progressive decrease in ocean pH as atmospheric
carbon dioxide (CO2) dissolves in sea water, is a looming issue with impacts
that are still uncertain, but may disrupt ocean ecosystems. This project will
deploy accurate and precise in-situ sensors that will begin the development of
pH and pCO2 time series off the central Oregon coast - a region that is amongst
the mostly strongly impacted by corrosive upwelled waters within the California
Current system. These sensors, in conjunction with lower-frequency ship-based
calibration as well as horizontal and vertical samples, will provide a detailed
and integrated look at the scope and impacts of accelerated biogeochemical
changes in a coastal inner-shelf ecosystem that is currently unmonitored for
carbonate chemistry shifts.

Intellectual Merit: Coastal waters in upwelling regions will experience some of
the earliest and most severe onsets of ocean acidification. Already, limited
field surveys suggest that the portions of the California Current system (CCS)
are experiencing low pH conditions during the summer upwelling season.
Determination of the direct and indirect impact of ocean acidification on marine
calcifiers and other pH or pCO2 sensitive organisms depends critically on
accurate assessments of both current OA stress regimes and the likely scope of
future biogeochemical change. To date, we have virtually no such time series in
the inner-shelf waters of upwelling shelves where the combined burdens of CO2
increase from anthropogenic and respiratory sources are maximal. This
observational gap is a severe impediment to progress in the study of this major
consequence of global climate change and its ecological consequences. This is
due largely to the lack of accurate and reliable sensors that can be deployed in
the field in inner shelf waters.

Recently, sensors for pH and pCO2 have been developed that are capable of
providing the required accuracy, precision and reliability needed in instruments
deployed in the challenging and dynamic environments of the inner shelf. For
systems where biogeochemical signals are spatially heterogeneous, an important
criterion for developing time series data is the ability to resolve spatial
variations that are ecologically important and/or crucial for controlling for
potential aliasing effects. OSU-PISCO (Oregon State University, Partnership for
Interdisciplinary Studies of Coastal Oceans) has acquired funds for one sensor
array, and in July 2009, will deploy the array on a mooring to begin the first
pH and pCO2 time series in the inner shelf waters of the northern CCS. This
EAGER project will allow deployment of a second sensor array.

The project has three goals: documenting spatial differences between pH and pCO2
between the two coastal sites, providing a contrasting monitored site for
organismal and ecological impacts studies, and providing a regional "back-up"
site in case of loss or failure of the first instruments. The expanded regional
sensor array in Oregon will be linked to arrays at Bodega Marine Lab and in
southern California to form the first stage of what we expect will be a west
coast network of ocean acidification sensors. These will provide the first
datasets available for establishing the contextual environmental information
necessary for research on the ecological consequences of ocean acidification.

Broader Impacts: Ocean acidification is a timely and important concern and there
is a need for immediate and concerted focus by scientists, economists, policy-
makers, managers and the public. To interpret and evaluate lab and field studies
of OA impacts on the marine biota accurate data on pH levels and variability in
the natural environment are essential. This project will have a major impact on
building research capacity in this area by adding another observation site at a
critical location where there is intense upwelling. This site will add to a
network of other monitoring and research sites in the California Current system.
Information about this project will be communicated via educational and outreach
activities through the PISCO policy program and instructional activities of the
PIs and colleagues.