* 0956565
* Doctoral Dissertation Research - Information Values in Translation:  An Ethnography of Free and Open Source Software in Vietnam
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Leah Lievrouw, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 05/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This study examines how free and open source software (FOSS) change as they are
designed and implemented in different countries. Recent studies describe how
FOSS has emerged as part of a long history of 'democratizing' technologies.
These studies show how FOSS has been designed as the technological extension of
particular political values and thus represent a very specific configuration of
American libertarian culture and politics. As FOSS is implemented in countries
without this political cultural history, however, we can anticipate these
technologies to change and even clash with existing values. In turn, this study
examines how these values change as FOSS migrates into new countries.

Internationally, FOSS is increasingly deployed in direct association with
government policy intervention. Government involvement with FOSS has led
advocates to decry such activities as antithetical to the very spirit of FOSS
itself. Given this conflict in values, this study asks: (1) How does government
policy shape FOSS' design and implementation in Vietnam?; (2) How do the values
of openness, freedom, and democracy change as FOSS moves into new countries?;
and (3) What other actors and organizations are involved in FOSS' design and
implementation and what kind of say do they have in these processes? This
dissertation improvement grant will fund fieldwork for one year of two free and
open source organizations in Hanoi, Vietnam, one for-profit and one non-profit.
This fieldwork will consist of participant observation of software development
work in both these organizations and semi-structured interviews with their
employees as well as with members of the wider FOSS community.

The proposed research will contribute to a broader understanding of the meanings
attached to a technology as it travels to new countries and contexts. Given the
particularities of the Vietnam context, the proposed research will also
contribute to a broader understanding of how cultural values can cause
technologies to change as well as what happens with a technology clashes with
existing values.