* 0956244
* Worshop on LIDS 2010: Paths Ahead in the Science of Information and Decision Systems To be Held at MIT Stata Center on November 11-13, 2009
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Munther Dahleh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2010
* USD 30,000.00

Objective

The science of information and decision systems encompasses a substantial and
exceptionally pervasive set of interrelated disciplines, ranging from signal and
image processing; to embedded control systems; to the analysis, design, and
optimization of complex distributed systems and networks. Thanks both to the
richness of the challenges throughout engineering and the physical, biological
and social sciences and the continuing developments of the foundations of our
disciplines, the information and decision sciences stand today as an exciting,
continually evolving, and critical domain of intellectual inquiry. We are
excited to propose a major event, a workshop aimed at articulating a picture of
the challenges and ideas that will shape the future directions and potential
areas of impact of research in the science of information and decision systems.

Intellectual Merit

This meeting will bring together leading researchers from all around the world
who have been influential in shaping the vision of and leading this field. The
community of leaders whom we intend to invite will include many of the most
recognized names in the field, as well as some of the rising stars in our field.
This event will be open to the broad national and international community. The
meeting will consist of several keynote addresses, providing context and a sense
of history as well as some views toward the challenges of the future. Sessions
to be held will focus on core disciplines, including Systems and Control;
Networks and Networked Systems; Estimation, Inference and Learning; and
Optimization and Decision Sciences. The workshop will include several panel
discussions aimed at articulating paths ahead and major practical and societal
challenges that are driving and will drive our field in the future.

Broader Impact

This meeting will be a first of its kind bringing together researchers from many
disciplines in order to articulate the challenges emerging in information
systems. As a particular outcome of the workshop, we will invite some of the
participants to produce a handful of position papers. These papers will address
new and exciting formulations and highlight the practical relevance of
information systems in engineering, biology, social science, and other related
disciplines. We intend to make these papers, together with all the
presentations, publicly available to our community. More so, we will encourage
and partially support the participation of students from all institutions. In
addition, Industrial partners and government agencies will be asked to provide
their inputs and perspectives to guide the panel discussions and to influence
the position papers. These position papers will have a far reaching effect to
researchers beyond the attendees of the workshop.