* 0956908
* SBIR Phase II:   Batteryless Wireless Smart Labels with Embedded Non Volatile Memory
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Navid Yazdi, Evigia Systems Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2012
* USD 463,803.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project continues the
development of a new class of wireless miniature smart sensor labels that
continuously track and record exposure to the environmental conditions, and
directly store the sensed data in digital CMOS non volatile memory (NVM) without
requiring any battery. These CMOS-sensor chips are able to track temperature
(-50°C to 70°C), humidity (5% to 100% RH), and shock/impact (50g to 250g), in a
total volume of less than 1.5mm x 1.5mm x 0.7mm. The CMOS-sensor chip can be
embedded in a standard passive radio frequency identification (RFID) inlay to
form a fully integrated multi-sensor environmental condition tracking wireless
device that is able to be deployed in a scalable RFID network. A multi-faceted
innovative approach in MEMS devices and digital non-volatile memories enables
the proposed CMOS-sensor chip. The temperature and humidity sensors fabricated
and micropackage processes developed in Phase-I successfully demonstrate the
technical feasibility and commercial viability of the proposed wireless smart
sensor labels. The outcome of the proposed effort meets the form factor,
functionality, and price-point requirements of embedded and widely-dispersed
sensing, in a broad range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is on several existing industries,
larger and more significant impacts on new markets and industries to be formed
around this innovative and powerful technical ability. We believe that the
existing live/bio material delivery segment can generate up to $500 million
yearly sales for Evigia based on our technology directly reducing up to $1.4
billion of vaccine potency destruction each year, and saving up to $150 million
yearly of blood plasma being destroyed during transportation. Commercial
delivery logistics of sensitive/high-value goods and fresh produce is another
large existing market where we can bring direct benefit up to $5 billion yearly
in the US based on our smaller, lower cost, batteryless solution being included
to monitor shipping quality in a far larger fraction of all packages being
shipped in the US. The underlying technology of the proposed effort could be
also potentiality employed in development of a broader family of advanced
systems including improved diagnosis and treatment of mild traumatic brain
injury (TBI) which affects millions of Americans annually through sports and
other accidental injuries.