* 0956011
* CAREER: Energy Storage and Conversion- Coupling the Direct Electrodeposition of Crystalline Intermetallics with Targeted Outreach to Elementary Schools
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Amy Prieto, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2016
* USD 607,712.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program will develop direct
electrodeposition of crystalline transition metal antimonides, a class of
materials that exhibit a wide range of physical properties critical to many
advanced technologies. A central focus of this work is on developing robust
preparations of materials for high capacity anodes in Li-ion batteries. The
high-temperature methods traditionally used to synthesize the target compounds
are plagued by lack of control over the stoichiometry of the final products.
Electrodeposition, in contrast, is a low-temperature method, which will lead to
greater control over the stoichiometry and hence, improved physical properties.
The ultimate goal is the direct electrodeposition of a range of anode materials
from water at room temperature. The resulting films and nanowires will be
directly deposited onto a current collector with no need for binders prior to
battery testing. The outreach portion of this proposal will focus on adding
renewable energy (in the context of transportation) to the popular Harry Potter
based outreach shows that the undergraduate Chemistry Club at Colorado State
University has already developed. By building on a wildly successful program,
the proposed outreach will reach a wider range of students with an approach that
promises to have high impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research program is the
development of robust synthetic methods for materials with applications as
anodes in Li-ion rechargeable batteries. The synthetic approach chosen,
electrodeposition, is amenable to industrial scale production, is inexpensive,
and can be performed in nontoxic solvents such as water. The direct result of
the integrated research and teaching goals proposed will be manifested in the
quality of training that graduate and undergraduate students obtain, both in the
synthesis and characterization of materials critical to state-of-the-art energy
research and in curriculum development and mentoring in the context of the
proposed outreach shows. State-of-the-art research is crucial for recruiting and
retaining a talented, diverse group of students. The shows described in the
education section of this proposal will be used to increase the knowledge base
of and excitement for science and renewable energy for fourth and fifth grade
elementary school children throughout Colorado. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;