* 0956230
* Workshop: The future of Intelligent Transportation Systems and its Implication with Regard to Mobility and Sustainability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Umit Ozguner, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,965.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this workshop is to
convene experts from government, non-profit, industry and academic organizations
to explore various aspects of the potential afforded by ITS technologies as they
relate to improvements in vehicular traffic, sustainability, and policy making.
The expertise of the participants will cut across traffic and transportation
systems, automotive engineering, energy systems, economics, consumer behavior
and acceptance, and policy making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vehicular transportation
is responsible for a significant fraction of the energy consumed in the world,
second only to electricity generation. It is clear that as demand for personal
mobility continues to increase in developing economies, the demand for energy
will grow with it. The use of ITS technologies in a broad sense must therefore
be coupled with a deep understanding of the energy implications of different
modes of transportation and with the introduction of alternative energy
supplies, other than petroleum-based fuels. In this context, the introduction of
PHEVs is an example of the clear ntersection between energy and environmental
issues with ITS, given that a successful transition to electricity as an
alternative fuel will require significant capabilities for route prediction and
planning in PHEVs. The impact of ITS technologies on energy consumption is
clearly not limited to PHEVs. In addition to the technology aspects, the scale
of the problem and its dependence on infrastructure makes it necessary to also
consider consumer behavior, policy making, and economic aspects related to the
introduction of these technologies. The integrative nature of all the above is
extremely important and also imply the need for investigations of large,
complex, connected dynamic systems that need to be considered as Cyber Physical
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide an opportunity for
interaction among experts at the intersection of several broad areas that are of
strategic importance to the nation: complex systems, cyber-enabled discovery and
innovation, dynamic systems and control, networked systems, energy systems, and
others. The Broader Impact of this workshop will consist of taking a first step
towards establishing a research agenda capable of leading to transformational
changes in the transportation system