* 0956135
* CAREER: Large focal plane array development for CMB polarization studies with the South Pole Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Nils Halverson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* joan wrobel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 875,145.00

This proposal will fund the development of detector arrays and analysis software
for a new scientific instrument that will be used on the NSF-funded South Pole
Telescope. Undergraduates, graduate students, and a post-doctoral researcher
will work on different facets of this research and instrumentation project.
Observations of the cosmic microwave background with this instrument promise to
provide insights into the physics of inflation and will help us understand the
reionization history of the universe. Another component of this award will
develop a data analysis pipeline for the aforementioned instrument. Such a
pipeline is a critical component of modern astronomical instruments since it can
be used to test the robustness of scientific results. This is especially
important for catching errors in the low signal-to-noise data that is expected
from the observations made by the instrument.

The broader impacts of the award are centered on the restructuring of a graduate
level course titled "Observations, Data Analysis, and Statistics". In addition
to modernizing the course through the use of peer instruction and new techniques
like clicker questions, the PI will incorporate real-world analysis of the
Cosmic Microwave Background into the lessons. The proposed coursework will help
develop the core skills that are used throughout the career of a research
scientist. Materials developed for this course will be made available on the web
so they can be used in other courses. Dr. Halverson and his team will also
present public lectures at Fiske planetarium and other venues.