* 0956631
* SBIR Phase II:   Shear Stress Sensor Based on Optical Micro-Spring Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Vadim Stepaniuk, Lenterra Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2012
* USD 494,861.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is aimed at
the&lt;br/&gt;development of a wall shear stress sensor based on micro-optical
resonators. The core element of the sensor, the micro-optical stress gauge
(MOSG), consists of a micro-optical spherical resonator and optical fibers
through which tunable laser light is coupled into and out of the sphere. By
monitoring shifts of the resonator spectrum, that are a function of the
deformation of the sphere, forces can be measured over more than four orders of
magnitude with minute deformation of the resonator (&lt; 1 nm). This capability
allows a&lt;br/&gt;MOSG to be incorporated within a shear stress sensor in which
the motion of a floating element in contact with the fluid is minimal. In Phase
I, a breadboard version of the sensor was fabricated and successfully tested in
a model flow between two parallel plates, where measurements were in close
agreement with computational predictions. Phase II research will focus on
advancing the technology by improving measurement rate, sensitivity, and dynamic
range, along with decreasing vibration susceptibility, and&lt;br/&gt;improving
robustness. Sensor prototypes will be tested on high shear industrial mixers
with the aim of commercialization for the process mixing
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will include the advancement of the understanding of the fundamental
processes occurring in boundary layers of flows. For non-Newtonian or otherwise
rheologically complex fluids, wall shear stress cannot be reliably calculated
or, especially for non-transparent flows, measured. The proposed sensor fills a
need for shear stress measurement in the fields of fluid dynamics, aerodynamics
and medical research. The largest impact is expected to be in the chemical and
pharmaceutical industries that are suffering from an inability to scale and
predict processing equipment performance. Knowledge of wall shear stress will
provide means to improve process control, quality and throughput of products
including drugs and other pharmaceutical products, foods, paints, inks and dyes,
cosmetics, and many others.