* 0956129
* RCN-UBE: Advancing Integration of Museums into Undergraduate Programs (AIM-UP!)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Scott Edwards, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2016
* USD 485,648.00

AIM-UP! (Advancing the Integration of Museums into Undergraduate Programs) is a
research coordination network that produces new ways of incorporating the
extensive archives and cyberinfrastructure of natural history museums into
undergraduate education under five primary themes. These themes explore complex
biotic associations across space and time, geographic variation, evolutionary
dynamics of genomes, biotic response to climate change, and coevolving
communities of pathogens and hosts as related to emerging diseases. AIM-UP! is
refining existing efforts and developing new integrated approaches to
collections-based training in large-scale questions using the combined and
broadly-based expertise of educators, curators, collection managers, database
managers, and scientists whose teaching and investigations span across various
disciplines and relate to topics covering a wide spectrum of time and space. The
network is 1) developing teaching and analytic tools in training students in the
emerging fields of climate change, evolutionary genomics and molecular ecology;
2) developing of instructional tools for museum databases, such as ARCTOS, that
are freely available to the public, teachers, and scientists via the AIM-UP!
website; 3) developing an integrated network of educators working on specimen-
based questions; 4) including diverse collaborators, including minority and
female scientists, federal agency biologists, academics, international
participants, and museums with large public audiences; 5) training undergraduate
students in museum-based field and laboratory research; and 6) conducting
outreach efforts targeted especially to underrepresented students with an
emphasis on issues relevant to their communities. Network participants
communicate through 1) an annual three-day all-hands working meeting at field
stations and participating institutions; 2) workshops at scientific meetings; 3)
frequent interaction via interactive internet services (e.g., video
conferencing, Wiggio, AIM-UP! blog, ARCTOS blog); 4) short-term exchanges of
museum educators for intensive content development; 5) a short course (two
weeks) for undergraduate students at 1 host institution to beta-test new
approaches, and 6) a fall semester seminar course at the University of New
Mexico (available via webcasting to all network participants). While AIM-UP!
began as a collaboration between the University of Alaska, Harvard University,
the University of California at Berkeley, and the University of New Mexico as a
way to integrate expertise and experiences across these institutions, it is
currently being expanded to other educational institutions, federal agencies,
and a large museum-based genetic consortium in Canada.

This project is supported jointly by the Biological Sciences Directorate and the
Division of Undergraduate Education.