* 0956847
* STTR Phase II:  Real-time Analysis and Feedback during Colonoscopy to improve Quality
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2012
* Wallapak Tavanapong, EndoMetric, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 565,735.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will develop an
assistive software tool for endoscopists to have real-time feedback of objective
quality for colon and potential polyp region examinations. The technology is
aimed to reduce polyp miss rates during colonoscopy. Colonoscopy has contributed
to a marked decline in colorectal cancer related deaths. However, recent data
suggest that there is a significant miss rate for the detection of even large
polyps and cancers. Studies suggest that polyp detection rate may be related to
the duration of the withdrawal phase of the procedure and cancer miss rate is
related to the identity of the endoscopist performing the procedure. This tool,
which will provide video stream analysis and feedback during live colonoscopy,
is made up of novel middleware software to ensure high performance execution of
video analysis on an affordable workstation, and are generic, reconfigurable
with new task allocation that support time-constraint video analysis. Objective
metrics for real-time feedback are derived from real time analysis that will
address complexities arising from blurry frames, stool, camera movement
patterns, and regions of appendiceal orifice and polyps. Technical insights
learned from development of this tool for colonoscopy may be applicable to new
research on quality control using videos generated in other areas of medicine,
such as bronchoscopy, cystoscopy, arthroscopy and laparoscopy.

The broader/commercial impact of this project, if successfully implemented in
large-scale day-to-day medical settings, will be higher quality of care for
patients undergoing colonoscopy procedures with real time objective quality
assessment, which is currently not feasible. Over 14 million colonoscopies are
performed annually in the US. This assistive tool will stimulate high quality
inspection, while documentation is done. That will mean that endoscopists will
be able to spend more time on performing the colonoscopy and less time on
documentation. Hospital/clinic administrators will be able to run endoscopic
facilities more efficiently. Insurance companies may benefit from better
documentation and lower costs since fewer patients will require extensive cancer
treatment as the frequency of missed polyps and early cancers declines. This
assistive tool is also expected to contribute to medical education, research,
and practice by providing automated feedback during teaching and training of
novice endoscopists or continuing education for experienced endoscopists.