* 0956229
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Socioeconomic Differentiation, Leadership, and Residential Patterning at an Araucanian Chiefly Center (Isla Mocha, AD 1000-1700).
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Marc Bermann, Roberto Campbell will explore
residential variability within and among settlements and how this variability
relates to processes of political leadership and community integration on Isla
Mocha, Chile. Isla Mocha, an island located 30 kms from the Chilean coast, was
during most of its prehistory a part of native Araucania, with a significant
occupation dating to after 1000 AD. In 1550 AD, Araucania experienced European
arrival but, contrary to most native societies of Latin America, the Spaniard's
advance had been successfully repelled by the Araucanians by 1602, and a "free-
Indian" nation persisted there and on the adjacent mainland until 1882. Yet
while indigenous sociopolitical structures persisted until that late date,
remarkably little is known about late prehispanic and early historical native
sociopolitical organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the main sources to
reconstruct the native sociopolitical organization and dynamics have been
European chronicles and limited archaeological research. Each of these has
tended to focus on chiefs and their activities. Therefore, they have failed to
provide a fuller picture of the social variability that existed within the wider
society. This research will investigate by means of intensive surface collection
and limited excavation a 6 square km area. Mr. Campbell will attempt to
reconstruct residential density, economic practices, wealth accumulation,
patterns of consumption, status, and ceremonial practices. The fieldwork will
provide data for: (1) understanding how communities were integrated economically
and socially in both vertical and horizontal terms; and (2) identifying
processes underlying social authority and regional social integration. The
surface collections and excavations will recover ceramics, lithics, bones and
shells (food remains and artifacts) and macrobotanical
remains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also have broader impacts. First,
it is expected that the project will stimulate further projects and help to
develop a patrimony consciousness in the local community. The project will
impact current and planned development plans by underscoring the relevance of
the Isla Mocha's archaeological record. It will further training of archaeology
students in basic fieldwork techniques and more advanced material analysis
training, encouraging them to approach archaeological research from a
anthropologically and problem-oriented perspective.