* 0956517
* EAGER:   Fast and Accurate Nonnegative Tensor Decompositions:   Algorithms and Software
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Barry Drake, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2012
* USD 116,874.00

EAGER: Fast and Accurate Nonnegative Tensor Decompositions: Algorithms and
Software During the past decades, numerous efficient and effective data analysis
algorithms have been designed where data sets are represented as two dimensional
arrays, i.e., matrices. However, matrix based methods have limitations since
modern data sets are multi-scale and multi-dimensional. In numerous
applications, data sets are more naturally represented as tensors than matrices
including image analysis, climate modeling, chemometrics, genome signal
analysis, and biometric recognition. In this project, the mathematical
characteristics of tensor decompositions will be studied. Algorithms will be
designed for large scale data analysis that can reveal complex relationships
among many dimensions which matrix based methods often cannot. Computations on
tensors are expected to extend many of the advantages that the matrix based data
analysis methods have offered. Tensor-based methods can be utilized for data
compression, modeling, regression, and fusing of information obtained from
different sources and scales. Tensor based methods are relatively new in many
application areas and theoretical and algorithmic developments, especially for
large scale problems, have been slow even in the areas where they have been
heavily utilized. The key goals of the project include extension of the matrix
decomposition techniques such as the SVD to higher order tensors and develop
efficient algorithms for large scale analysis of multi-dimensional data and
design their higher-order extensions, development of algorithms for the
computation of various nonnegative matrix factorizations (NMF) and nonnegative
tensor factorizations (NTF) and study of the mathematical properties of the
algorithms, such as robustness, efficiency and accuracy, and implement them in
publicly available software. This research will substantially improve the
possibility of detailed study of larger scale multi dimensional data sets in
numerous application areas including text mining, biological network analysis,
and medical examination and diagnosis.