* 0956600
* III: Travel Support for U.S.-Based Graduate Students to Attend the 26th IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE 2010)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Vassilis Tsotras, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 30,000.00

This travel support enables U.S.-based graduate students to attend the 26th
International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), held in Long Beach,
California, USA, March 1-6, 2010 (http://www.icde2010.org/). The ICDE conference
has established itself as one of the prominent data and information engineering
meetings. It addresses research issues in designing, building, managing, and
evaluating advanced data-intensive systems and applications. As a leading
international forum it provides for researchers, practitioners, developers, and
users to present and explore cutting-edge ideas, exchange techniques, tools, and
experiences and disseminate innovative, practical development experiences. The
ICDE conference covers all aspects of data and information engineering that
include, but are not limited to: query processing and optimization; data
integration and interoperability; indexing and storage; systems and
architectures; distributed, mobile and sensor databases; data and knowledge
discovery; web applications; semi-structured data; social networks; privacy and
security; scientific and spatio-temporal databases; etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference seeks to continuously advance the state of-
the-art in data engineering and broaden its impact. This grant provides partial
travel support and registration for 20 qualified U.S. based graduate student
participants. The students will greatly benefit from attending this conference,
as they will be able to present their work and make research collaboration
connections. Work presented at ICDE gets high visibility; as the ICDE
Proceedings are published by IEEE. The total number of ICDE participants in the
past has been in excess of 500, with a majority of the participants from the
U.S., then Europe and Asia. A strong representation of U.S.-based graduate
students at ICDE is useful in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in these
important research areas. &lt;br/&gt;