* 0956171
* CAREER: Graphene Nanomesh: Band Gap Engineering in Single Layers of Carbon
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Xiangfeng Duan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 02/28/2015
* USD 545,001.00

Technical: The research program of this CAREER award focuses on a new graphene
nanostructure, graphene nanomesh, which can effectively introduce lateral
quantum confinement into a large piece of graphene to form a uniform
semiconducting nanomesh thin film. Using block copolymer lithography or nanodot
lithography, graphene nanomeshes are fabricated with variable periodicities and
neck widths down to the sub-5 nm regime, and hence to fine tune the degree of
lateral quantum confinement and the size of the band gap. The nanomesh
structures are characterized using scanning probe microscopy and transmission
electron microscopy. In addition to fundamental materials science research, the
project includes electrical transport studies in order to determine the critical
material parameters including the band gap and carrier mobility, theoretical
calculations carried out through collaborations to understand the fundamental
band structure of this new graphene nanostructure and to guide experimental
optimization, and fabrication of testing top-gated graphene nanomesh devices.
Non-technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance. The success of the project
is expected to have impacts on the further advancement of nanoelectronics and,
in general, nanoscience and nanotechnology. The research and education programs
of the project are integrated. The research program provides graduate students
with an education and training opportunity that is broadly based and goes beyond
traditional educational boundaries. Underrepresented groups are actively
recruited to participate in the research program. A partnership with industry
for education is developed for students to gain first-hand experience in
industry and to better prepare them as the future workforce for emerging
technologies. The materials and methodologies developed in this project are
integrated into graduate and undergraduate courses to broaden the education
experience beyond the PI's lab; and are used to train high school teachers and
design experimental kits for high school science classes to reach the local
communities beyond the university. Together, these efforts contribute
significantly to train and supply a steady and diversified source of highly
qualified individuals for emerging technologies, and contribute to maintain the
competitive advantage of America's technology.