* 0956828
* SBIR Phase II:   Compliant Jack Spring Actuators for Lower Limb Mobility
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Kevin Hollander, SpringActive, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 853,091.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
novel, spring-based, adjustable stiffness actuator, that will power future
wearable robots and exoskeletons. The actuator will be integrated into a powered
prosthetic ankle which will meet the demanding requirements for lower limb
mobility. Its unique ability to tune stiffness allows it to be customized to an
individual, a significant impact in the wearable robotics field. It will meet
the demanding design requirements that include the tradeoffs between high power
need, low energy usage, compliance, robust sensing of forces, and high cycle
demands. The end result is a powered ankle?]foot prosthesis that will provide
near able?]bodied function to a lower leg amputee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it will restore
normal walking function to below?]the?]knee amputees. Such a device will
increase symmetry and duration of walking. In fact, a below?]the?]knee amputee
wearing a passive prosthetic device typically uses 20?]30% more energy to walk
than an able bodied walker. Asymmetry in an amputees gait leads to joint pain,
arthritis, and back pain. Because of the difficulty to walk, their conditions
often lead to a more sedentary lifestyle decreasing their already limited
mobility. It is documented that decreased mobility increases health risks.
Elderly or overweight individuals may benefit from the technology as well.
Adaptation of the technology to the powered orthosis market will expand its
benefits to weak and disabled populations. In general, these groups have a more
sedentary lifestyle and sometimes rely on the use of powered scooters. Because
of the growing population of people with diabetes, elderly, and individuals with
reduced walking ability, powered lower?]limb robots will have a significant
societal impact improving health by supporting an active lifestyle.