* 0956852
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Eukaryotic Membrane Protein Overexpression System
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Hiep-Hoa Nguyen, TransMembrane Biosciences
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2012
* USD 556,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project concentrates on
creating a novel, economical and powerful production technology for eukaryotic
membrane proteins, a group of proteins that remain intractable yet are of
tremendous medical and scientific importance. A majority of membrane proteins
are very difficult to obtain in any significant quantities, even at milligrams
scale since their natural biosynthesis levels often are very low and currently
available production methods are not effective for membrane proteins. This
research project will utilize a versatile and easy-to-cultivate microorganism
that can generate proliferated membranes under certain conditions to host the
recombinant membrane proteins. The efficiency of various strategies will be
evaluated through activity assays and direct protein isolation.

The broader impact of the technology are new generations of efficacious
medicines in virtually all therapeutic areas including infectious diseases,
cancer, genetic diseases due to genetic defect in membrane proteins, central
nervous system diseases, cardiovascular system diseases, digestive system
diseases and many others. The impact of this technology in science, in medicine
and in society will be very significant. The technology can be utilized to mass-
produce a very large number of membrane proteins, especially surface membrane
proteins for applications in structure-based drug design, in protein
engineering, in protein therapeutics, and for the development of diagnostics and
vaccines against infectious diseases and cancer. These efforts will not only
provide new scientific understandings of very difficult-to-study membrane
proteins but also eventually transform the current landscape of diagnostics and
therapeutics for human diseases and illnesses.