* 0956792
* STTR Phase II:  Tunable RF Front Ends for Wireless Devices
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2012
* Arthur Davidson, Carley Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2012
* USD 559,195.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project addresses the
creation of tunable radio frequency filters for future wireless devices. The
proposed approach combines research on advanced magnetic materials with research
on nano-structuring of magnetic and non-magnetic materials with the goal of
achieving an order of magnitude or more increase in quality factor (Q) and
maximum value of inductors (Ls) used to implement tunable inductor capacitor (C)
filters at frequencies up to 5GHz; specifically Ls &gt; 50nH, Qs &gt; 100, and
self-resonance frequencies &gt; 3 GHz. The approach is to economically deposit
oriented high-moment magnetic materials in a non-magnetic matrix to achieve high
permeability while avoiding eddy current losses at high frequencies through the
use of nano-structuring. In addition, this research will explore novel circuit
design techniques for radio front ends that will exploit inductors fabricated
using the proposed structures to implement tunable radio frequency filters
suitable for advanced wireless devices. Novel circuit design approaches must be
developed because the LC filters built using the proposed technology will have
significantly lower Q than existing surface acoustic wave filter technology; but
will offer new advantages of tunability, circuit topology flexibility, and
amenability to fabrication over integrated circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it would contribute
to making ?cognitive radios? practical. Cognitive radios are ones that can
opportunistically seek out portions of the frequency spectrum that are currently
unused in their local vicinity and then use them for communications,
dramatically reducing congestion in the airwaves of major cities by allowing
aggressive reuse of frequency spectrum. Cognitive radios have the potential to
increase the aggregate data rate available in dense urban environments by more
than an order of magnitude. Today, such radios are economically unattractive
because the RF front end filters would have to be implemented using one fixed
surface acoustic wave filter for every possible band. However, the tunability of
the proposed enhanced LC filters greatly facilitates the creation of low cost
cognitive radios. In terms of commercial impact, the proposed tunable LC filters
would revolutionize how RF front end modules for cellular radios (a &gt;$7B/year
market) are designed. Translating this into societal impact, the proposed
technology has the potential to increase the data rate with which the population
at large can access data stored on the network using wireless devices in the
mobile internet by more than an order of magnitude.