* 0956338
* Hormonal Interactions in a Vertebrate Forebrain Pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* George Bentley, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 525,000.00

The overall aim of this project is to advance the understanding of the neural
and molecular mechanisms underlying seasonal changes in neuroplasticity (changes
in brain structure and function), that influence learning and behavior in
vertebrates. More specifically, this project will yield an understanding of the
mechanisms of action of the hormone melatonin in a forebrain vocal control
circuit of the songbird brain. This will be achieved by identifying the
locations of specific melatonin receptor subtypes via molecular and histological
techniques in the European starling. These experiments will also identify the
neuroanatomical specificity of the regulation of melatonin receptor subtypes,
and investigate the probability that different subtypes have different functions
in the song circuit. It is unclear how hormones interact with one another in the
brain, and this project utilizes an integrative approach aimed at enhancing
understanding of how hormones of different classes (melatonin, testosterone) can
interact to exert direct and indirect effects on neural structure and function,
and subsequently impact learning and behavioral output. All vertebrates studied
possess melatonin receptors, and all vertebrates utilize steroid hormones in the
development of their nervous systems. Thus, understanding the basic cellular
mechanisms of the interactions of these hormones and melatonin receptors is
universally beneficial. Not only will these experiments enhance our
understanding of hormone action in the brain, but it will also provide unique
training opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students and a postdoctoral
fellow in laboratories in the USA and the UK.