* 0956818
* Two-Year Colleges and the Invention of Nano-Labor: Between Promise and Possibility
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2010,10/31/2012
* Amy Slaton, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2012
* USD 325,000.00

Two-Year Colleges and the Invention of Nano-Labor: Between Promise and
Possibility

Amy E. Slaton, PhD Associate Professor, History, Department of History and
Politics, Drexel University

Mary F.E. Ebeling, PhD Assistant Professor, Sociology, Department of Culture and
Communications, Drexel University

As heavy industry and even newer service sector jobs contract in many parts of
the United States, regional schemes for economic redevelopment turn toward high-
tech areas, including the many scientific and engineering specialties included
under the term ?nanotechnology.? In southeastern Pennsylvania, a partnership
among schools, industrial firms, and government agencies has emerged in the last
decade to prepare a new workforce for this nanosector. This study considers the
goals and content of certificate and associate?s degree programs among the 22
two- and four-year colleges involved in the Pennsylvania Nanofabrication
Manufacturing Technology Partnership (PaNMT). Many PaNMT partners see widening
opportunities in nanomanufacturing, in much the same way that enthusiastic
planners embraced computing technology in the 1960s and biotech initiatives in
the 1990s. Today, proponents forecast nanoindustries as likely to provide both
steady corporate expansion and means of economic uplift for disadvantaged
citizens. These outlooks have in part been accurate, but in part overly
optimistic, as nanomanufacturing grows slowly and continues to employ primarily
those with doctorates.

Combining methodologies of the sociology and history of science, this project
examine examine the hiring and bench-level practices in use by PaNMT?s 30
partner firms in nanomanufacturing, positions intended to employ those who
undertake associate's-degree training in nanofabrication. The expectations and
experiences of students form a significant focus for the ethnographic research.
Finally, the study examines the goals and practices of private organizations and
local and state governments that have lent support to the PaNMT. Research
questions include: ? How well do educational practices fulfill the workforce
needs of regional nano-based industries? ? To what degree do industrial
expectations about technical skill and mobility determine the nature of two-year
degrees? ? Are optimal practices, for students or industrial employers, likely
to result from these, or from other practices? ? Do educators, employers,
planners, and students see these matters in the same way?

The outcomes of this study will include a book aimed at social scientists
interested in science and technology, and associated articles and presentations
on workforce planning and technical education. This study will provide
suggestions that may lead to more efficacious workforce training policies and
practices. Because two-year technical training programs have historically
engaged a disproportionate number of economically disadvantaged and minority
students, this project should also shed light on longer patterns of occupational
equity in high-tech engineering fields.