* 0956630
* SBIR Phase II:   Novel Low-Cost Electric Motors for Variable Speed Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Charles Flynn, QM Power, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2015
* USD 958,194.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project furthers the
research and development of a completely new low cost high efficiency electric
motor for use in HVAC compressors and transportation (electric and hybrid
electric) power trains. Parallel Magnetic Circuit (?PMC?) technology is a
breakthrough magnetic force control technology that is applicable to any
electromagnetic device. Unlike alternative existing/conventional electric
motors, which use series magnetic circuits limited by the flux density of the
most powerful single magnet element, PMC moves flux from multiple permanent
magnets and field coils into a coherent and additive geometry - dramatically
increasing both efficiency and power density. The increased power density,
efficiency and operating speeds intrinsic to PMC designs are enabling
performance characteristics for HVAC and transportation systems providing lower
cost, smaller, lighter weight, faster and more reliable alternatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
to improve the efficiency of over $500 billion a year in electricity usage by up
to 10% or more, the potential reduction of over 20% of the world?s coal fired
electricity generation and the potential elimination of up to 30% of global CO2
emissions. Higher energy prices and usage have accelerated the growing global
demand for lower cost energy efficient products. Since over 50% of all global
electricity is consumed in electric motor systems and over 26% of fossil fuels
are used in transportation applications, it provides a significant opportunity
to reduce energy costs, pollution and national security concerns. PMC motors can
be used to significantly increase the efficiency and lower the cost of all
electric motor driven systems including electric and hybrid electric vehicles,
HVAC systems, industrial, consumer, military applications.