* 0956501
* EAGER: Game and Teaming Strategies for Networked Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Marwan Simaan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 199,949.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical and computational investigations
will be launched to address fundamental issues associated with analysis,
control, and design of networked physical systems forming an autonomously
cooperative team in the presence of another team of adversaries. The goal of the
present work is to expand the scope of the theory that was developed earlier for
the specific applications scenarios to wider set of dynamic applications where
game theory (and control) potentially has a role to play. The range of such
potential applications is are very broad including robotics, modeling of
economies, energy distribution and biomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As for the
technical contributions of this exploratory work one can expect results from
several different perspectives. The first point of departure from traditional
game theory namely that of the study of dynamic processes rather than the study
of equilibria has been already mentioned. Second point of departure is that
while optimal control and system theory had indeed made use of game theoretic
techniques in the past, this body of literature was largely limited to linear
processes. The present investigation will be far more general to include
nonlinear, as well as hybrid (i.e., mixed continuous, discrete), and
asynchronous systems as well. Thus, while guided by applications, developing a
general theory would be expected outcome of the proposed research. A third point
of departure is while earlier theories focused on obtaining analytical
solutions, the results from present investigation (since it involves nonlinear
processes) will of necessity be computational or algorithmic in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential societal implications of the proposed
theoretical/computational work is great ranging from economics, biomedicine to
defense applications. Since the PIs are in close contact with application
domains and the industry the potential for transfer of innovative methods and
tools to applications is tremendous. The PIs also plan to educate graduate
students as well as undergraduate students on related
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;