* 0956327
* Collaborative Research:  CalBug, an Interactive Database Using Arthropods to Examine Impacts of Climate Change and Habitat Modification
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Andrew Cline, Sequoia Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2015
* USD 218,054.00

Habitat modification and climate change are occurring at unprecedented rates
globally. While tools to predict future environments have become increasingly
sophisticated, there is little understanding of how biodiversity will respond to
novel environments. The current proposal represents collaboration among eight
entomological collections in California to digitize specimens and thus allow
assessment of how distributions of organisms have been modified through
environmental change. It makes use of a long history of entomological collecting
in the state to develop a database of approximately 1 million georeferenced
specimens collected at focal localities over the last century. The specimen data
will be used in geospatial analyses to understand the relationship between the
distribution of species and the type and extent of habitat modification. The
project will serve as a model for integrating data across multiple institutions
and incorporating the combined data within a geospatial framework. Human-driven
environmental change has already caused huge impacts on biological systems. To
understand how biodiversity will respond to environmental change in the future,
we must learn from their responses in the past. A large amount of data is
available on organisms that existed in environments before and after habitat
modification over the last century; however, much of this information is hidden
within museum collections, held on labels among millions of specimens. The
proposed digitization and georeferencing of these collections will transform
research capability and access to information by both scientists and the public.
It will result in a fully georeferenced database of target taxa from natural
reserves throughout California that will be searchable and available on web-
accessible maps. The proposal includes entomological museums of all sizes and
audiences in California and provides education of graduate and undergraduate
students in taxonomy and systematic, coupled with the use of bioinformatics and
geospatial modeling as applied to habitat modification and climate change.