* 0956543
* Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices:  Current Knowledge and Research Needs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 263,500.00

The Warning, Alert, and Response Network (WARN) Act of 2006 established the
Department of Homeland Security's Commercial Mobile Alert Service (CMAS) to
enable a national capability to deliver alert messages to mobile devices for as
much of the population as possible. This award funds a workshop to be hosted and
managed by the National Academy of Sciences focused on understanding the state
of the art for mobile emergency warning and to develop a research agenda to
address intellectual gaps in the current understanding. Although alert and
warning issues have been extensively studied for some time, relatively less is
known about the opportunities and challenges associated with using cellular
phones and other mobile communications devices, including the challenges of
effectively communicating warning information using very brief text messages.
Developing a fuller understanding of these issues and framing future research
needs involves research, expertise, and practical knowledge from multiple
disciplines. The proposed workshop would provide a forum for such a
multidisciplinary exploration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discussions at the
workshop and the material presented in the report will contribute to a better
understanding of how the public will respond to alerts and warnings delivered
over mobile devices. This understanding can inform the Department of Homeland
Security?s implementation of the CMAS program and influence how messages are
crafted (including what needs to be provided to the public in terms of education
and training) and other facets of CMAS implementation and operation. &lt;br/&gt;