* 0956347
* Safeguarding Our National Biodiversity Heritage:   An Infrastructure Upgrade for the Marsupial Collection at the American Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Darrin Lunde, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 05/31/2013
* USD 338,249.00

The American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) has the largest and most heavily
used collection of marsupials in the world, comprising 17,000 specimens obtained
by dozens of privately and publically financed expeditions to Central and South
America, Australia, and New Guinea. Thousands of pages of technical publications
spanning >100 years of museum scholarship have been based on this material,
which includes many endangered and/or extinct species. Although some parts of
the collection (notably the type specimens and fluid-preserved material) are in
good housing, most of the skins (about 11,000 specimens) remain in substandard
cabinetry, discolored by dust and urban soot and at risk from insect pests.
Overcrowding has resulted in mechanical damage to some specimens, skins are
stored on acidified paper trays with brittle glue joints, and the electronic
specimen database has never been proofed for accuracy against drawer contents.
This award provides funds to demolish old cabinetry, to renovate collection
spaces, to purchase new specimen cases and other archival-quality curatorial
materials, and to make other improvements necessary to preserve this important
heritage collection for future generations of scientific researchers. The AMNH
marsupial collection is widely used by scientists to study biodiversity in many
parts of the world currently threatened by habitat destruction. For example,
AMNH specimens document the former presence of many endangered or extinct
opossums, bandicoots, and kangaroos in places where they no longer exist. These
specimens are also sources of DNA for evolutionary studies, they are used to
illustrate guide books that help conservationists and ecotourists identify
animals that they see in the field, and they provide material for educational
public exhibitions that are seen by millions of museum-goers every year. Funds
from this grant will be used to further the preservation of this irreplaceable
heritage collection for future generations. Information on the AMNH mammalogy
collection can be found at http://research.amnh.org/vz/mammalogy/collection-
information.