* 0956091
* CAREER: Acid-Transforming Polypeptides as Stimuli-responsive, Efficient, Biocompatible, and Tunable Nonviral Gene Carriers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Young Jik Kwon, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2015
* USD 560,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0956091 PI: Kwon, Young Jik ORG: University of
California-Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Acid-Transforming
Polypeptides as Stimuli-Responsive, Efficient, Biocompatible, and Tunable
Nonviral Gene Carriers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Synthetic gene
carriers (or nonviral vectors) that efficiently deliver genes to desired
biological targets with high biocompatibility and versatility are a technology
in high demand in basic and translational gene therapy research. The extra- and
intracellular performance of nonviral vectors remains relatively poor compared
to viral vectors, which, though proven to be very efficient, are often
immunogenic and difficult to modify in order to vary their structures and
functions. The proposed CAREER research will synthesize novel, stimuli-
transforming polypeptides that complex nucleic acids with a cationic arm under
neutral pH, but which, upon hydrolysis in a cellular compartment, are converted
to neutral, naturally occurring polypeptides, thus destabilizing the complex and
releasing nucleic acids. Specifically, the project will investigate novel
biomaterials that incorporate ketalized serine (kSer) residues, which are
analogous to lysine (Lys) but which transform into serine (Ser) upon acid-
hydrolysis. The kSer residues will be used along with lysine residues,
polyethylene glycol (PEG) and other functional polypeptides to create versatile
polymeric non-viral vectors. Preliminary in vitro studies have shown that
poly(kSer-Lys)/DNA polyplexes and PEG-poly(kSer)/DNA micelles significantly
enhanced gene delivery efficiency via several improved intracellular pathways.
The PI proposes to develop these novel acid-transforming polypeptide
(ATPP)-based gene carriers by better understanding key extra- and intracellular
gene delivery pathways. He will (1) investigate hybridization of ATPPs with
fusogenic and nuclear localization signal peptides in order to improve
targeting, (2) explore the effects of stimuli-sensitive linkages between ATPPs
and functional peptides and/or PEG that can be severed by such stimuli to
improve efficacy, and (3) optimize the ATPP-containing polymers to improve DNA
complexation, cellular internalization, intracellular targeting, DNA release,
and transfection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Efficiently delivering
therapeutic genes, especially using nonviral methods, is of great interest not
only in the clinic (e.g., gene therapy) but also in the genetic manipulation of
biological phenomena (e.g., reprogramming somatic cells to be induced stem
cells) in biocompatible and versatile ways. The novel biomaterials developed
from this research will be available to undergraduate and high school students
for a hands-on research experience and for a summer research program. The
proposed project will motivate undergraduate students to think creatively and
independently and give them a chance to test their hypotheses with the PI. The
outreach program aims to stimulate interest in scientific and engineering
careers among participating high school students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups in nearby urban areas. The proposed research will be
translated to classrooms and beyond through undergraduate students' direct
participation in the CAREER research and an outreach research program. A new
undergraduate course will introduce basic concepts of gene delivery using
stimuli-responsive polymeric biomaterials; it will then challenge students to
develop creative ideas on the CAREER research. Students with the most innovative
suggestions will be invited to test their hypotheses in the PI's laboratory and
will assist high school participants in a summer research program on gene
delivery using the acid-transforming polypeptides. This outreach program will
grow out of the PI's lectures in combination with hands-on experiments at local
high schools in socio-economically disadvantaged areas. The most motivated high
school students will participate in a summer research program, followed by
developing a science fair project under the mentorship of the undergraduate
student mentors. Impacts of these educational activities will be assessed by
students' publications and presentations and by their choice of professional
careers in science and engineering.