* 0956383
* Cyberization of the Louisiana State Arthropod Museum Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Victoria Bayless, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2014
* USD 423,010.00

This award will support databasing and imaging at the Louisiana State Arthropod
Museum (LSAM) and consolidation of data from five additional arthropod
collections. Products will include an online database of arthropod diversity
that will serve as a taxonomic identification tool useful throughout the
southern United States. Data representing ~500,000 specimens will become
available online via SilverCollections software. SilverCollections harvests data
from the LSAM Specify database and posts it to the internet in a DarwinCore-
compliant format. Features include a taxonomy, checklist and image browser,
autocomplete smart filters, real time search engine, biodiversity comparison
charts, Google distribution maps, and BioGeomancer approximations. Data entry
and imaging will be accomplished by undergraduates trained by a Research
Associate and Principal Investigators. The workflow procedure is a lockstep plan
that permits simplified training, data entry, and quality control. Taxonomy,
locality, and collection event data are entered, and images are produced by
different students responsible for those tasks. Products are checked and
integrated into Specify before being posted online. Migration of data to the
internet enables the global community to benefit from the wealth of data
contained within the LSAM. Our system puts arthropod names and images on the web
and makes taxonomic, geographic, and habitat information instantly available.
Having these materials available online will save thousands of work-hours in
problem diagnoses. Interacting with the public and other user groups through a
database rather than the time-consuming method of finding specimens and checking
labels makes fiscal sense. Louisiana has a rich mosaic of natural ecosystems,
many of which are threatened or have undergone dramatic declines. Data
concerning the state?s fauna and habitats will transition from obscurity to
universal accessibility through implementation of an interactive, web-based
inventory. Funding provided by this grant will educate students in curation,
web-based data management, and the science of entomology. The Louisiana State
Arthropod Museum can be found at http://www.entomology.lsu.edu/lsam/.