* 0956719
* Quasi-free electron energy in near critical point atomic and molecular fluids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Gary Findley, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2013
* USD 457,000.00

This project, supported by a grant to Professors Cherice M. Evans (Queens
College - CUNY) and Gary L. Findley (University of Louisiana at Monroe) from the
Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms Program of the Division of
Chemistry, explores the interactions between solutes in a near critical point
supercritical fluid (SCF). The experiments will employ a synchrotron radiation
source (e.g., University of Wisconsin Synchrotron Radiation Center) to measure
the ionization energies of dopant molecules within the fluid at various electric
field strengths and fluid number densities. The results from these studies will
yield the minimum energy of the conduction band, which will be compared to
predicted values obtained from the local Wigner-Seitz model. Monte Carlo and
molecular dynamics simulations will also be used to investigate the energy of a
trapped electron in these same near critical point fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The use of supercritical fluids and near critical point fluids as a
highly tunable solvent for the synthesis of high purity nanoparticles and
pharmaceuticals is an emerging area of technology. This research will advance
our understanding of critical point fluids in general and, therefore, will
provide insights for those who seek to develop chemical reactions in near
critical point SCFs. The research program will engage both graduate and
undergraduate students at CUNY and ULM. A Research Experiences for Undergraduate
(REU) activity will be integrated into the synchrotron radiation facility
experiments.