* 0956880
* STTR Phase II:  Smart Antenna Systems for Unlicensed ISM-band Public Safety and Remote Meter Reading Data Networks
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Robert Conley, LHC2 Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 467,766.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project will
develop high performance, low-cost, interference filtering smart-antenna
prototypes, anticipated to improve Signal to Interference Ratios (SIR) by up to
12dB. This results in improved wireless data rates by up to a factor of 4 or
expands coverage by up to a factor of 16, dramatically reducing system costs.
Private wireless broadband networks, deployed by municipalities and utilities
are used for public safety, public Internet access, and energy and water
management. These networks are experiencing dramatic growth in both size and
number. This growth, along with expanding enterprise and consumer use of
overlapping devices and Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs), continue to
exacerbate performance reducing interference problems. This interference has
forced many municipalities to double their investments in infrastructure
equipment or to increase transmitter power to overcome interference, thus
producing even more interference. Phase II objectives are to demonstrate
technology effectiveness and conduct customer trials. Tasks include; antenna
structure refinement, transceiver design, smart antenna algorithm development
and packaging for customer trials. Customer trials will be performed in one or
more of the target markets. Full commercialization of resulting low cost smart
antenna systems is targeted for Phase III.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to ultimately save lives, reduce
suffering and save taxpayer/ratepayer dollars through efficient and reliable
wireless data communications. For example, public safety and first responder
personnel need detailed information such as, interactive live video, voice and
vitals monitoring allowing emergency room physicians to interact with disaster
victims and their caregivers at the scene and during transport. Utilities must
respond, along with emergency personnel, to secure downed power lines, broken
gas and water lines and restore physical communications networks. Outage and
leak information is increasingly transmitted over critical wireless
infrastructure. Public safety networks, based on the WiMAX standard, are
expected to surpass $3B in sales by 2013. ?Smart Meter? networks are also
projected to grow to over $3B in sales by 2013. This unique smart antenna
technology will restore otherwise non operating or degraded networks to
operational status and help insure that private municipal wireless networks
provide reliable high data rates that continue to meet performance goals as the
frequencies they use become more crowded. This project will increase the
research capability of the partner university?s antenna laboratory and
engineering science will be advanced through developing a unique smart antenna
radiated measurement instruments.