* 0956899
* SBIR Phase II:   Highly Ordered Membranes for Molecular Separation
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Susan MacKay, Cerahelix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 838,074.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a ceramic nanofiltration membrane with highly uniform pores oriented
perpendicularly to the membrane surface using DNA as a template in a silica sol-
gel. This membrane will be optimized to perform molecular separation and
purification of fuels and chemicals from cellulosic biomass. The research
objectives are to create a membrane with the desired pore size and orientation
features. A prototype membrane will be produced and tested for its ability to
dewater biofuels by pervaporation. It is anticipated that the selective ceramic
membrane layer will provide efficient separations and have high temperature and
chemical tolerance. The membrane will have applications for a range of
industrial markets including wastewater purification and desalination.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of an
innovative membrane technology that will contribute significant energy savings
to the production of alternative fuels from cellulosic biomass. Potential end
users will include biorefineries that convert cellulosic biomass to fuels and
chemicals. A great advantage of molecular separations by membranes rather than
distillation is the 40- 50% savings in energy. If successful, this project would
lead to a new class of high-throughput ceramic nanofiltration membranes that
will have applications to other industrial sectors, including wastewater
purification, natural gas purification, and coal gasification. This project
promises to contribute significant energy savings to the production of
alternative fuels from renewable resources.