* 0956653
* Unraveling Reactions Mechanisms on Au-titania Nanostructures:  Probing Interface Effects
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Cynthia Friend, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 02/28/2014
* USD 543,019.00

Professor Cynthia M. Friend of Harvard University is supported by the Chemical
Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry to explore the role of the
interface in hybrid Au/TiO2 on the catalytic oxidative transformations of
organic species on these hybrid catalysts. Oxygenates will specifically be
investigated because of their prevalence in important chemical processes,
including production and processing of alternative fuels. The experimental plan
is designed to test the hypothesis that the transfer of active oxygen across the
metal oxide-metal interface may be an important step in this process. Molecular-
scale imaging using STM will be employed to characterize the surface, and
product distributions and reaction temperatures will be used as a probe for the
migration of active oxygen across the Au/TiO2 interface. The electronic
structure of sites near the Au-TiO2 interface will be probed with theoretical
DFT methods. The project will tackle a key fundamental issue in heterogeneous
catalysis: the effect of metal-metal oxide interfaces in determining the
efficiency and selectivity of catalytic processes of significance to alternative
energy research. The educational activities include a renewed commitment to
recruit future generation of scientists from members of traditionally
underrepresented groups into the research program, and a renewed focus on
educating the public on energy-related issues.