* 0956603
* Mechanisms of signal reliability and assessment
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Philip Stoddard, Florida International University
* Continuing grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 04/30/2016
* USD 580,000.00

Dishonest communication is widespread throughout in the animal kingdom,
including humans, but mechanisms that produce dishonest signals are poorly
understood. Likewise, researchers do not clearly understand how honest and
dishonest communication coexists stably in communication systems, including our
own. The central question in this study is how dishonesty alters the meaning of
communication signals. To address this question, the project focuses on (i) how
signal dishonesty and the physiological costs of signaling alter the reliability
and meaning of communication signals, and (ii) how listeners assess the quality
of signalers who inaccurately convey their particular qualities. This project
investigates signal exaggeration by electric fish, an ideal model system because
their signals can be quantified with unusual accuracy and manipulated
pharmacologically. Methods will include electrophysiology, measurement of
energetic output, endocrinology, and behavioral experiments. This project (1)
quantifies three mechanisms that signalers use to control signal strength, (2)
determines the behavioral meaning and reliability of signal strength under
different social contexts, (3) determines how receivers assess and use
information that has been altered by exaggeration, and (4) uses this information
to address and revise theory of how communication systems can persist in the
face of dishonesty and unreliability. The resources of this research project
will be used to foster science education. This goal will be approached by
assisting middle-school science teachers in devising a more engaging hands-on
curriculum and by providing opportunities for direct mentorship of minority
college and high school students.