* 0956569
* Workshops on Distributed Infrastructure for Security Monitoring and Intelligence Extraction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Anupam Joshi, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 09/30/2011
* USD 49,830.00

This project will support participant costs for two workshops on Distributed
Infrastructure for Security Monitoring and Intelligence Extraction. The first is
a five-day workshop held in India involving researchers invited from the United
States and India held 9-13 January 2010 on the campus of Indian Institute of
Science in Bangalore, India. The goal is to establish new collaborations between
the United States and India in cutting-edge research and technology development
and knowledge transfer focused on areas of real-time security surveillance and
extraction of actionable intelligence for both critical physical infrastructure
and their associated computing and communication components. The research is
expected to be of direct benefit to both the United States and India and to
result in techniques for better management of public safety and security
resulting from natural disasters and terrorist events. The workshops will also
help strengthen existing partnerships between the United States and India
in&lt;br/&gt;related fields as well as promote new ones. A second, two day
follow-up workshop will be held in Spring 2010 in the United States, probably in
the Washington DC area. The net result of these workshops will be a large scale
research proposal for which funding will be requested from appropriate agencies
from both US and Indian sides.