* 0956714
* Membrane Dynamics Underlying Kv2.1 Cluster Formation
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Michael Tamkun, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 12/31/2013
* USD 453,565.00

In this project the PIs will study the regulation of Kv2.1 channel clusters that
may play several important biological roles in the brain. Currently, the
mechanism by which clusters Kv2.1 are regulated and maintained is unknown. The
project focuses on the biophysics of Kv2.1 voltage-gated K+ channel cell surface
dynamics with particular emphasis on cytoskeleton-membrane interactions in live
cells. The overall goal of the research is to improve our understanding of the
mechanism by which the cortical cytoskeleton functionally forms a diffusion
limiting fence that selectively corrals a sub-population of Kv2.1 channels. The
specific research aims are: (1) characterize the dynamics of clustered and non-
clustered channels within various surface regions of cultured neurons, (2)
measure the influence of the cortical cytoskeleton and raft microdomains on
Kv2.1 channel dynamics, (3) build a microscope to implement high-speed particle
tracking and optical tweezers, and (4) determine the mechanism that forms Kv2.1
clusters on the cell surface. This experimental work will lead to unique
insights in the molecular mechanism of membrane protein dynamics. The project
focuses on investigating Kv2.1 clustering regulation, dynamics and interactions
with the cytoskeleton which may lead to improved treatments for acute ischemic
stroke through enhanced neuro-protective approaches. The research program will
be integrated with an educational component by building an optical tweezers
setup for educational purposes. Under-represented students will be recruited at
minority meetings and through a Women & Minorities in Engineering Program at
Colorado State University.

The project is jointly sponsored by the Physics and the Molecular Cell Biology
Divisions at NSF.