* 0956053
* CAREER: Quantum Fluctuations, Entanglement and the Casimir Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Israel Klich, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research that draws upon methods of
mathematical physics and field theory to address fundamental features of quantum
fluctuations in condensed matter physics and their interplay with geometry. The
research intersects condensed matter physics, mathematical physics, and quantum
information theory.

The research has three main thrusts, each of which involves developing new
methods and ideas:

1) The entanglement structure of many-body states with a special focus on
condensed matter systems, such as topological insulators and quantum Hall
states. This includes entanglement scaling and spectrum.

2) Quantum fluctuations and their interplay with boundaries through the Casimir
effect. This includes research into the role of matter radiation entanglement
and the direction of Casimir forces in the presence of dissipative materials.

3) Topological states and their interplay with fluctuations. Such a study is of
great interest for its crucial importance to the idea of topological quantum
computation.

The scientific broader impact of the proposed research is to advance integration
between branches of theoretical physics such as quantum field theory,
statistical mechanics, and quantum information theory with mathematically active
areas such as topology and functional analysis in order to enrich both
disciplines and to unravel the connections between them. Furthermore, the
research is related to ongoing experimental efforts at the forefront of modern
physics. For example, the study of Casimir forces is projected to be of
fundamental importance when designing nano-mechanical structures. Topological
phases have potential application in topological quantum computing and are
expected to exist in fractional quantum hall systems.

The educational component involves introducing graduate students to modern
problems in theoretical condensed matter through the introduction of new and
exciting problems and techniques. The PI will write an upper undergraduate to
graduate level textbook on the Casimir effect from a condensed matter
perspective.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research that draws on advanced physical
and mathematical concepts and theoretical methods to advance our understanding
of (i) topological insulators, which are materials that cannot conduct
electricity in their interior but allow movement of charges on their edges or
boundaries, (ii) Casimir effect, a quantum mechanical effect that leads to
attraction between two very closely spaced metallic plates in vacuum, even
though they have no electric charge, and (iii) topological phases, which are new
states of matter which may hold the key to making a fault-tolerant quantum
computer expected to be much faster than its classical counterpart. This
research is connected to ongoing experimental efforts at the forefront of modern
physics. For example, Casimir forces are expected to be more important as the
physical dimensions of devices and mechanisms approach dimensions some 100,000
times smaller than a human hair.

The educational component involves introducing graduate students to modern
problems in theoretical condensed matter through the introduction of new and
exciting problems and techniques. The PI will write an upper undergraduate to
graduate level textbook on the Casimir effect from a condensed matter
perspective.