* 0956563
* RAPID: Astrochronology of the Middle to Late Devonian platform margin strata from the Canning Basin, Australia and implications for timing of Middle-Late Devonian events
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Jessica Whiteside, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

RAPID: Astrochronology of the Middle to Late Devonian platform margin strata
from the Canning Basin, Australia and implications for timing of Middle-Late
Devonian events

Jessica Whiteside Brown University EAR-0956563

ABSTRACT Middle-Late Devonian age strata in the Canning Basin reef complex,
northwestern Australia, record numerous lithological cycles and an extensive
extinction among reef formers and invertebrates across the Givetian/ Frasnian
boundary. This proposal seeks to develop a geochemical proxy set consisting of
13Corg and biomarker lipids from two locales along the Lennard Shelf with
organic rich-facies to assess the timing and duration of this mass extinction.

The goals of this research are three-fold:

1. Assess the detailed Milankovitchian characters of Menyous Gap and within the
Pillara Quarry with respect to modern astronomical theory and to discuss the
results with respect to timing of the coral extinction events: Was this
extinction protracted or relatively sudden?

2. Reconstruct paleoenvironmental change in marine productivity (13Corg) and
terrestrial ecosystem conditions (leaf wax-derived n-alkanes).

3. Produce better correlation both within the basin and to similarly aged strata
elsewhere using secular trends and low-frequency orbital cycles in 13Corg and
n-alkanes.

This research is urgent because of the limited time left within the existing
larger Canning Project that combines magnetostratigraphy, conodont
biostratigraphy, conodont Sr isotope chronostratigraphy, and biomarker analysis
to investigate Middle-Late Devonian paleoenvironmental and biotic change.
Gathering these data adds a new dimension (cyclostratigraphy) outside the scope
of, but complementary to the existing Canning Project.