* 0956273
* EAGER:   Finance Sector Income Distribution Dynamics: An Application and Test of Rent Theory
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Donald Tomaskovic-Devey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2012
* USD 144,599.00

EAGER: Finance Sector Income Distribution Dynamics: An Application and Test of
Rent Theory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using Current Population Survey and National
Income and Product Accounts data this project examines the employment and income
distribution consequences of finance sector deregulation, the stock market and
real estate bubbles of the 2000s, and their subsequent collapse. Theoretically
the project approaches the accumulation of income in the finance sector as an
example of economic rent creation and the collapse of the financial bubble as a
potential moment of rent destruction. Empirically the project examines the
distribution of income from this rent accumulation process to owners and
employees, and among employees by region, occupation, education, sex and race.
Particularly interesting is documenting which industries lose the most as a
result of the financial collapse and if there is continuing evidence of post-
crisis rents relative to the rest of the economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual contribution to the project is to sociological theory of income
rents and rent destruction and to document long term income trends in the
finance sector. Rent theory has typically been used post hoc to explain wage
distributions. The current financial collapse, following increased incomes
associated with both the financial and real estate bubbles and long term
institutional power in the securities industry, allow a much more dynamic,
contextualized and precise set of hypotheses to be examined. The broader impact
of the project will be to inform policy discussions of finance sector regulatory
reform, tax and income policy.&lt;br/&gt;