* 0956232
* Conference Plant Vascular Biology 2010 held July 24-28, 2010 at Ohio State University Columbus, OH.
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2010
* David Hannapel, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Robert Slocum
* 12/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

The requested funds support the International Conference on Plant Vascular
Biology (PVB2010) to be held July 24-28, 2010 on the campus of The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio, which is co-chaired by Biao Ding (The Ohio State
University) and David Hannapel (Iowa State University). PVB broadly includes
studies on the formation, structure and function of transport systems in plants,
under conditions of normal plant growth and development as well as of plant
interactions with pathogens. The transport systems cover the xylem, phloem,
plasmodesmata and vascular cell membranes. The PVB concept emphasizes the
integrative nature of the transport systems and approaches to investigate them.
PVB2010 will bring together researchers from around the world to share the
latest research findings, develop collaborations and identify new directions of
research. These will be achieved through formal oral and poster presentations,
informal discussions during various breakouts and social interactions. The
scientific exchanges will promote further studies to understand the mechanisms
that regulate plant growth and development, adaptation to the environment as
well as biomass production. Such understanding will be crucial for developing
technologies to improve food, medicine and energy production for the benefits of
mankind in long terms. The conference strongly supports participation of
underrepresented groups such as minorities and women.