* 0956059
* RCN-UBE: Rocky Mountain Sustainability and Science Network:  Enhancing undergraduate student learning of biological concepts
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Gillian Bowser, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 02/28/2015
* USD 583,265.00

There is an urgent need to develop experience-based learning opportunities for
undergraduate students that will invigorate their interest in science, biology,
and global sustainability. In the intermountain west, the impacts of climate
change are manifest through large scale phenomena such as the pine bark beetle
outbreak, increased wildland fire, long-term drought, and invasive species. All
these issues, many of which interact with changes in land use, are impacting
communities that depend on natural resources for recreation, jobs, and economic
stability. How can we prepare the next generation of public land stewards with
the multidisciplinary skills needed to address impacts of climate change? The
Rocky Mountain Sustainability and Science Network (RMSSN) will combine real-
world careers and biological education using field experiences to address
critical issues for the sustainability and ecological integrity of public lands.

The broader impacts of this network focus on undergraduate understanding of
biological and sustainability concepts and their application to land
management.The RMSSN strives to increase the representation of the multicultural
demographic of the western states through active engagement of minority serving
institutions and purposefully outreach. The RMSSN has four principle goals.
First, identify and assess opportunities for students to develop their
understanding of sustainability and biological sciences through experiential
learning. Second, build partnerships among federal agencies, non-profits, and
academic institutions to address issues of sustainability and student
development. Third, build a model of experiential science learning and design
assessment tools which will facilitate the application of the RMSSN learning
model to other experiential learning programs throughout the country. Fourth,
establish a diverse next generation of land stewards who excel in the sciences
required to address sustainability issues in the rapidly changing and
multicultural intermountain west.

This project is supported jointly by the Biological Sciences Directorate and the
Division of Undergraduate Education.