* 0956454
* Phage-encoded Shiga Toxin as a Bacterial Defense Against Predation: Shiga Toxin Induction, Uptake and Toxicity in Tetrahymena Thermophila
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Gerald Koudelka, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2015
* USD 846,186.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Exotoxins of bacteria are among the most deadly
substances known. These exotoxins kill eukaryotic cells by inactivating factors
and/or pathways that are universally conserved among eukaryotic organisms. When
studied in the context of mammals, these toxins cause diseases ranging from
cholera to diphtheria to enterohemorrhagic diarrhea. The genes encoding these
toxins are usually encoded by viruses of bacteria (bacteriophages).
Environmental DNA sequencing (metagenomic analyses) indicates that ~15% of all
bacteriophage (both free and incorporated into bacteria) encode an exotoxin
gene. With approximately 106 bacteriophages /mL of seawater and 108
bacteriophages/gram of sediment, the frequency of occurrence of the genes
encoding any particular exotoxin gene in bacteriophage far exceeds the number of
potential animal hosts. Moreover, these bacteriophage-encoded exotoxin genes are
found at high frequency in phages isolated from environments where the
corresponding human diseases are not prevalent. These observations suggest the
hypothesis that humans and other susceptible mammals are neither the original
nor primary targets of these toxins. Hence any anthropogenic effects on the
evolution of these toxins may not be as significant as those that occurred
before the dawn of man and other multicellular organisms. &lt;br/&gt;If not
mammals, then "who" are the true targets of the ubiquitous exotoxins. A major
source of bacterial mortality is consumption by single-celled eukaryotic
predators, such as ciliates and other protozoa. Bacteria have evolved many
different methods to fend off these predators, including becoming oversized and
fleeing at high speeds. Coordinated release of phage-encoded exotoxins, either
at the pre- or post-ingestional states via lytic induction of lysogenic
bacteriophage comprises another possible antipredator defense strategy. Protozoa
are phagocytotic cells and they share many features with mammalian phagocytes,
especially macrophages. The phage-encoded exotoxins like the well-studied Shiga
toxin (Stx), kill eukaryotic cells by attacking features and pathways that are
common to all eukaryotes both, uni- and multi-cellular. Since predation by
eukaryotic predators (e.g., ciliates and other protozoa), is a major source of
bacterial mortality, these observations suggest that exotoxins may have arisen
as part of an antipredator, (antiprotozoan) defense strategy. Thus the evolution
of these toxins may have occurred before the appearance of multicellular
organisms. Hence humans may be innocent bystanders in the evolutionary battle
between protozoans and their bacterial prey.&lt;br/&gt;Using a naturally
occurring predator-prey interaction, the studies in this project explore aspects
of how bacteriophage-encoded exotoxins like Shiga toxin are used as part of the
bacterial anti-predator arsenal. These studies will provide the molecular
details of the bacterial response to predation by determining 1) how T.
thermophila signals bacteria that are lysogenic for toxin-encoding phages to
produce Shiga toxin and 2) how this exotoxin enters and causes cytotoxicity in
these ciliates. Some of these mechanisms are apparently unique to the ciliates
and others may be conserved in higher eukaryotes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide a hypothesis-
driven research experience to both graduate and undergraduate students at the
University at Buffalo institution and through collaborations, undergraduate
students at Mercyhurst College, a small, liberal arts college located in Erie,
PA. In the Koudelka lab, students have learned how to ask important biological
questions and used their observations to make important contributions to
scientific understanding. Dr. Koudelka has supervised &gt;22 undergraduates and
high school students in the last 15 years, &gt;50% of which were members of
underrepresented minority groups or women. All of the PI's trainees have gone on
to successful careers in research or medicine. The results of these studies will
help &lt;br/&gt;define how predation and bacterial responses to it, influence
the evolution and structure of microbial communities.