* 0956447
* Metal-Catalyzed Diradical Reactivity: From Fundamental Thermal- and Photo-Chemistry to Novel Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Zaleski, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2013
* USD 408,500.00

This award in the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program supports work by Professor
Jeffrey M. Zaleski at Indiana University to probe the geometric and electronic
factors that control metal-catalyzed and photochemical diradical generation by
Bergman cyclization. The unusual diyne-ene chemical functionality undergoes
cyclization to form a highly reactive diradical intermediate that can trigger
and participate in polymerization reactions, as well as undergo radical
reactions with chemical substrates. The reactions can be controlled by choice of
metal catalyst and structure of the bound enediyne motif, or by the nature of
the chromophore used to trigger the reaction with light. Four chemical systems
that span different architectural classes of molecules from large porphyrin
chromophores to small inorganic molecules and coated nanoparticles will be
prepared and their reactivities examined. The structures of complexes and their
electronic properties will be correlated with the activation energy required to
generate potent diradicals. Parameters from the most facile systems will then be
used to screen their reactivities against chemical
substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results may ultimately contribute to
applications of radicals in synthetic chemistry as well as advanced chemical
reagents for magneto- or phototherapy in hypoxic environments. The project is
also multifaceted in synthesis and spectroscopy, and thus develops undergraduate
and graduate students on both preparative and mechanistic chemical foundations.