* 0956321
* From Stereotype Threat to Stereotype Threats: Testing a Multi-Threat Framework
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2010,02/28/2017
* Jenessa Shapiro, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 02/28/2017
* USD 413,494.00

This research project builds upon recent advances in stereotype threat research
by investigating a Multi-Threat Framework that distinguishes between different
forms of stereotype threat. Situational aspects of academic and organizational
environments, such as filling out demographic information immediately before
taking a test, being the only woman in an engineering firm, or being the only
racial minority in an upper division course at an elite university, can make
salient negative stereotypes that elicit a cascade of distracting thoughts and
concerns. Stereotype threat research reveals that these concerns ultimately
create disparities in cognition, motivation, and performance in stereotype-
relevant tasks and fields. This work focuses on the psychological experience of
stereotype threat and helps to explain why women, racial/ethnic minorities, and
other commonly stereotyped groups are under-represented in many fields.

The proposed experiments will test the differentiability of the stereotype
threats, drawing from well-established cognitive tasks and traditional
stereotype threat paradigms. The first set of experiments explores the different
stereotype threats that emerge in different situations. The second set of
experiments explores the different stereotype threats that are likely to emerge
between and within negatively stereotyped groups. The third set of experiments
will employ the Multi-Threat Framework to test interventions designed to reduce
the different forms of stereotype threat. Ultimately, this research can enhance
our knowledge of who is at risk for stereotype threat, when they are at risk,
why they are at risk, and how to reduce that risk. In addition, given that the
topic of stereotype threat is of interest to undergraduate and graduate
students, this research will facilitate hands-on research training as well as
conference participation and publications.