* 0956123
* CAREER:Language Brokering and Child Adjustment in Mexican American Children
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2017
* Su Yeong Kim, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 05/31/2017
* USD 479,962.00

In this NSF CAREER award, Dr. Kim will examine the academic and socio-emotional
development of language brokers (i.e., children who act as translators for their
parents), in Mexican immigrant families. Close to 90% of children in immigrant
families perform a language brokering function in their family's resettlement
process, taking on the task of translating between the heritage language and
English for parents with limited English-speaking skills. However, scholars have
thus far paid little attention to the developmental consequences of being a
language broker. This project on Mexican American families will explore the
language brokering experience from multiple perspectives (target child, mother,
father). The goal is to illuminate how language brokering impacts parent-child
relationships and, more importantly, how it affects children's adjustment in
terms of both academic and socio-emotional outcomes. Three hundred fifty Mexican
American families will be recruited for the project, from schools with a wide
range of Latinos in the student population. The study has three research aims:
1) to understand how child language brokering affects parent-child
relationships, including any differential effects for mothers and fathers; 2) to
investigate how parent-child relationships may be linked to child adjustment in
terms of both socio-emotional development and academic outcomes; and 3) to
explore how adolescent gender and schools'/neighborhoods' density of Mexican
immigrants may influence aims 1 and 2. This project has the potential to bring
to light the effects language brokering may have on the adjustment of the
children of Mexican immigrants, the largest and fastest growing minority group
in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will examine
developmental outcomes for children of Mexican immigrants, a high-risk
population with high rates of poverty and low levels of educational attainment.
The project aims to understand the mechanisms involved in improving the academic
performance of children of immigrants, a growing and significant percentage of
America's children, who represent the future of the U.S. workforce. It also
focuses on the developmental period of adolescence, a period of transition in
which children are susceptible to developing socio-emotional problems that can
compromise school performance. This research has the potential to identify risk
factors that can be used to inform future preventive intervention work with
children of immigrants. Finally, this project will train undergraduate and
graduate students who have been traditionally under-represented in the sciences,
particularly those of Mexican origin; deliver a curriculum to educate students
about the role of immigration, ethnicity, and race in informing child
development; and provide workshops, training sessions, and newsletters to
educators on the role of language brokering in children's academic functioning.