* 0956888
* SBIR Phase II:   Development of a Human Liver Platform for High-Throughput Screening of Drug-Induced Liver Injury and Drug-Drug Interactions
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Okechukwu Ukairo, HEPREGEN
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is aimed towards
development of a human micro-liver platform and assay technologies for cost-
effective, high-throughput, and quantitative screening of drug-induced liver
injury (DILI) and drug-drug interactions (DDI) following chronic exposure to
pharmaceuticals. While primary human hepatocytes isolated from the liver are
widely utilized in the pharmaceutical industry for drug screening, these cells
rapidly (hours) lose phenotypic functions under conventional culture conditions.
Recently, a human liver tissue model with defined microscale architecture has
been developed that maintains phenotypic functions of primary hepatocytes for
several weeks in vitro (micro-livers). This project proposes to develop assay
technologies (gene expression, reporter-based, and high content imaging) with
micro-livers in a high-throughput multi-well format for DILI and DDI screening
in early drug discovery.

The broader impacts of this research are novel approaches for the development of
high-throughput, physiologically-relevant platforms for assessing the potential
of compounds to cause adverse effects on organs. The liver platforms developed
here may enable the elimination of drugs with problematic toxicity profiles much
earlier in the drug development pipeline towards substantially reducing the cost
to develop a successful drug ($1 billon per drug), increasing the likelihood of
clinical success, and limiting human exposure to unsafe drugs. In the future,
these platforms may be useful for evaluating the injury potential of
environmental toxicants, in fundamental investigations of liver physiology and
disease, and for personalized medicine.