* 0956755
* RUI: Measuring and Modeling the Chemical Shift Anisotropy in Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Robbie Iuliucci, Washington and Jefferson College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2014
* USD 328,493.00

This award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program of
the Division of Chemistry and co-funded by the Office of International Science
and Engineering, supports Professor Iuliucci from Washington and Jefferson
College to use nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to better characterize
novel materials. The development of new materials continues to improve our daily
lives, and it is often at the molecular-level that one finds the most important
behavior of these materials. Increasingly, scientists produce novel materials
for which it is not possible to obtain structures utilizing traditional
diffraction methods. Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) has become a
premier tool for structure determination in these cases. The chemical shift, a
property describing the electronic environment of molecules, is a key feature of
NMR spectroscopy. By measuring and modeling the chemical shift anisotropy, NMR
spectroscopy becomes a more powerful tool in explaining the structure of
materials. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Professor Iuliucci will be exploring the
relationship between complex quantum mechanical calculations and chemical-shift
anisotropy measurements. With the use of a database of experimental chemical-
shift anisotropy measurements, calculations of the shift can be calibrated
enabling a precise knowledge of the relationship between molecular structure and
the NMR spectrum. The creation of new experimental databases of accurate
anisotropy measurements is necessary to expand this structure-shift relationship
to functional materials. This research thus aims to make solid-state NMR an
accessible and realiable tool for analysis, allowing scientists to develop new
materials with predictable properties and applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
key focus of this endeavor is the training of students for careers in the
physical sciences. Research experience augments the undergraduate's education
and exposes the student to cutting-edge scientific areas of study. While most
work will be conducted at Washington and Jefferson College, a primarily
undergraduate institution, students will also have the opportunity to use top-
notch resources through collaborations with research institutions (high-field
NMR at Pennsylvania State University, computer clusters at the University of
Utah, and micro-scale NMR probes at Radboud University Nijmegen, the
Netherlands). Such experiences will enhance the undergraduate's education,
allowing them to participate in the international scientific community.