* 0956358
* Protein Dynamics and Chemical Reactivity in Microbial Hemoglobins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Syun-Ru Yeh, Yeshiva University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2013
* USD 530,000.00

This award in the Chemistry of Life Processes program of the Chemistry Division
is co-funded by the Biomolecular Systems Cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences. The award supports work by Professor Syun-Ru Yeh at
the Albert Einstein College of Medicine to carry out comparative studies of five
novel hemoglobins from three microorganisms, Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
Campylobacter jejuni and Escherichia coli. Although hemoglobins are commonly
perceived as oxygen carriers, the target globins have been implicated in defense
mechanisms against nitric oxide, a key bactericidal agent of the innate host
immune system, by utilizing molecular oxygen. The objective of this project is
to determine the functional properties of these intriguing oxygen-utilizing
globins and to define the mechanism by which these properties are dictated by
the protein matrix housing the prosthetic heme group in each globin. To achieve
the goal, a complementary set of spectroscopic and rapid-kinetic techniques,
combined with biochemical and computational methodologies will be developed and
employed in an iterative fashion. The successful completion of this project will
better define the physiological roles and functional mechanisms of the bacterial
globins that is lacking in the field, thereby advancing fundamental knowledge in
the structure-function relationships of heme-proteins. The knowledge thus
derived will offer valuable guidelines for the design of efficient blood
substitutes carrying molecular oxygen or competent artificial enzymes performing
oxygen chemistry for pharmaceutical applications. The multifaceted approach is
expected to provide unique training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate
and high school students, thereby enhancing the PI's continuing efforts in
recruiting, educating and mentoring young scientists, especially women and
under-represented minorities.