* 0956500
* Ab-Initio Molecular Dynamics: Novel Developments with Application to H Bonded Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Roberto Car, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Roberto Car of Princeton University is supported by an award from The Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program to develop new theoretical and
computational enhancements of ab-initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations
with special focus on applications to water and hydrogen-bonded systems. The PI
and his research group focus on a four-pronged strategy: (i) simulations based
on more accurate electronic density functional with inclusion of dispersion
forces will be made possible, (ii) the potential experienced by the protons
participating in hydrogen bonds will be unearthed by utilizing a novel
theoretical concept that allows unprecedented comparison of quantum simulations
and deep inelastic neutron scattering data, including already performed and
newly planned experiments, (iii) a new real space scheme will be implemented to
compute core and valence electronic excitations with accurate many-body methods
(e. g. the GW approximation and the Bethe-Salpeter equation) for systems with
hundreds of atoms at selected snapshots of AIMD simulations, boosting comparison
with experiments (X-rays, UV and optical spectra) and their interpretation, and
(iv) the affinity of hydrophobic interfaces for water ions will be computed with
thermodynamic integration techniques, advancing the understanding at the
molecular level of processes of great scientific and technological
relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the scientific
infrastructure with new algorithms for molecular simulation and spectral
calculation, which will be made available to the wider science and engineering
community through the open software platforms Quantum Espresso and Car-
Parrinello Molecular Dynamics. The educational component of this project is well
integrated with the proposed research.