* 0956167
* Workshops on  Cyberscience Grand Challenges and Implications for Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* J. Tinsley Oden, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,999.00

0956167&lt;br/&gt;Oden&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support a preliminary and a
final workshop on Cyberscience Grand Challenges and Implications for
Cyberinfrastructure. CyberScience is a revolutionary new approach to scientifc
discovery that begins with the development of quantifable models, and then
develops the algorithms, software, and simulation tools required to provide
unique insights into problems in science and engineering. Experiment and theory
are then complemented in a novel and essential way by computational modeling and
simulation. Advances in cyberscience, accelerated by advances in
cyberinfrastructure, have the potential to usher in a new age of scientifc
discovery that will greatly aid in the solution of many of the important Grand
Challenge Problems facing our nation. There is an urgent need to take stock of
the state of modern cyberscience, to assess the needs, barriers, and
opportunities associated with the Grand Challenges problems facing humanity over
the coming decade,and define the resulting implications for next-generation
cyberinfrastructure, including hardware,networking, storage, software,
algorithms, data, visualization, and educational programs. The pair of one-day
workshops that will bring together leading figures in the U.S. computational
science and engineering community, with the ultimate goal of&lt;br/&gt;producing
a report identifying and articulating the critical impacts of the scientific
grand challenge problems of the coming decade on future cyberinfrastructure. The
first workshop will be held in late summer 2009, in the early stages of the
group's deliberations. The second workshop will be held in spring 2010, with the
goal of finalizing the report. The specific aims of the workshops are to (1)
develop a thorough understanding of the requirements of modern science and
engineering applications on the cyberinfrastructure that must be deployed to
address the scientific Grand&lt;br/&gt;Challenges of the coming decade; 2)
identify mechanisms for facilitating collaborations within distributed
computational science communities to address complex problems that are beyond
the reach of more traditional approaches; and(3) produce a set of well-
considered recommendations on ideas for new programs to more tightly couple
advanced problem-solving in science and engineering with continuing investments
in cyberinfrastructure.