* 0956879
* SBIR Phase II:   Affordable Optically Pumped Semiconductor Lasers for Polychromatic Guide Star Systems
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Gregory Fetzer, Arete Associates
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 03/31/2012
* USD 515,988.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project conducts
research and development of a unique laser technology that simultaneously
provides a compact and low-cost alternative to laser guide star and
polychromatic laser guide star sources. Guide star lasers are used in ground
based adaptive-optics telescopes to provide high altitude, bright, point sources
enabling adaptive near real-time correction for atmospheric aberrations.
Adaptive optics systems rely on a combination of laser and natural guide-stars
for tip-tilt correction. This limitation reduces the regions of space that can
be explored due to the scarcity of natural guide-stars of adequate brightness.
An elegant solution is to use polychromatic laser beacons comprising two closely
spaced output wavelengths (569 and 589nm) to produce guide stars emitting, at
distinctly disparate wavelengths (330 and 589nm). In 2008 a National Science
Foundation committee of key adaptive optics scientists and decisions makers
found astronomy is limited by the current state-of-the-art in lasers and that
improving sodium laser beacons is critical to reaching stated astronomy science
objectives. The research conducted under this SBIR project will produce
optically pumped semiconductor lasers that can overcome technical limitations
presented by more traditional guide star laser alternatives while simultaneously
making guide star lasers more affordable.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will significantly
impact the ability of observatories around the world to reach their scientific
objectives by making available highly-reliable, low-cost guide star lasers.
Currently, laser guide star systems are too expensive for all but the most well
endowed observatories. Renowned experts and key decision makers in the field
estimate the current laser guide star system cost at $100,000 per Watt of output
power. The use of the laser technology to be produced can dramatically reduce
the cost while simultaneously reducing the size weight and power required to
operate the laser. In the near future, astronomical observatories will develop
and field telescopes with much larger apertures. These and existing large
aperture telescopes require multiple guide star lasers with a higher level of
diversity, greater reliability while having lower per unit acquisition and
maintenance costs. Successful development of the proposed product will
positively impact astronomy, science and education by freeing up resources
otherwise allocated to acquisition of expensive guide star systems. As a result,
smaller observatories requiring a single system and large observatories
requiring multiple laser guide stars will be able to execute their capital
acquisition plans and achieve their science goals more rapidly.