* 0956064
* CAREER: Quantum Optics in Nanoscale Devices Approaching the Quantum Limit
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2017
* Lin Tian, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education on novel quantum phenomena in nanoscale condensed matter
devices and their applications in quantum information. As their dimensions
approach the atomic limit, nanoscale devices can sometimes be treated as simple
macroscopic quantum objects, such as spins and harmonic oscillators. Such
quantum objects can be studied by quantum optics, which is a well-developed tool
that has achieved success in studying atomic systems. A theoretical framework to
study coherent, dissipative, and collective behavior of nanoscale devices will
be developed in two main topics by combining techniques of quantum optics with
microscopic concepts of condensed matter physics. First, continuous variable
quantum information processing will be studied in nanomechanical resonators
which feature tiny mechanical vibrations that can carry quantum information. The
coupling between nanomechanical resonators and solid-state electronic circuits
will be explored to study ground state cooling, entanglement and Bell-inequality
tests, and continuous variable quantum protocols, where the mechanical mode
serves as an excellent quantum storage element. Second, nonlinear effects of
superconducting quantum emulators coupling to a superconducting resonator will
be studied, where the emulators are made of superconducting qubits to simulate
quantum many-body Hamiltonians. The nature of the quantum phase transition will
be studied in this nonlinear system, and a numerical package will be developed.
In both topics, questions that are of particular importance for nanoscale
devices will be studied, including the proper design of circuits and the effects
of low-frequency fluctuations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project
connects the fields of quantum optics, condensed matter physics, and quantum
information. The quantum effects in nanoscale devices can be explored to study
fundamental issues in quantum mechanics, novel problems in condensed matter
physics, and the development of a new generation of solid-state quantum devices.
In particular, this project seeks realistic quantum computing architectures
using the nanoscale devices as information carriers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award is made to the University of California (UC), Merced, which is a
newly started research university established to serve the educational needs in
the San Joaquin Valley. It is the only UC campus that is designated as a
Hispanic serving institution. The educational activities in this project will
provide training for students from underrepresented groups, including minority
and women students, to encourage and help them to pursue careers in physics. A
pipeline of activities will be organized, including women physicist networking
group, Saturday lecture series for high school students at a local museum in
Merced County, and development of undergraduate research projects and courses
using the Peer Instruction Technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education on novel quantum mechanical effects in small solid-state devices on
the nanometer (one billionth of a meter) size regime. On this scale the
distinction between materials, atoms, and devices becomes blurred. Many such
devices can be the building blocks of a quantum computer, which is a device for
computation that makes use of quantum mechanical phenomena, and if successfully
built on a large scale, will be much faster than any currently available
classical computer for some algorithms. As the potential elements for storing
information quantum mechanically, these devices can profoundly influence the
information technology and national security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
bridges the disciplines of condensed matter physics, quantum optics, and quantum
information science. It focuses on two main topics. One is to explore tiny
nanometer-sized mechanical resonators as carriers of quantum information. The
mechanical vibrations in such resonators can be connected with solid-state
electronic circuits to store and manipulate information. One focus area along
this line is to study the approaches that can bring the tiny mechanical
vibrations into the quantum regime by extracting the thermal noise in the system
to generate ?cooling? of the resonators. The other topic is to study phenomena
in superconducting quantum circuits, which carry electrical current without
dissipation. These effects can introduce phenomena that are new to condensed
matter physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantum effects in nanoscale devices
can be explored not only to study fundamental physics issues, such as the
detection of gravitational waves and the boundary between the quantum and the
classical worlds, but it can also help in developing a new generation of solid-
state devices that are based on quantum mechanical effects for metrology and
information applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is made to the
University of California (UC), Merced, which is a newly started research
university established to serve the educational needs in the San Joaquin Valley.
It is the only UC campus that is designated as a Hispanic serving institution.
The educational activities in this project will provide training and learning
opportunities for students from groups typically underrepresented in science and
engineering disciplines, including minority and women students, to encourage and
help them to pursue careers in physics. A pipeline of activities will be
organized, including women physicist networking group, Saturday lecture series
for high school students at a local museum in Merced County, and development of
undergraduate research projects and courses using the Peer Instruction
Technique.&lt;br/&gt;