* 0956301
* EAGER: Transforming public engagement by ecosystem scientists from burden to benefit: The Research Ambassador Program
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2010,07/31/2011
* Nalini Nadkarni, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Beth Grimm
* 07/31/2011
* USD 299,252.00

Solving environmental issues such as global climate change requires new ways to
understand the biosphere, and for much greater engagement between ecosystem
scientists and the public. However, the current academic system does not reward,
and sometimes penalizes, such activities. Academic scientists only rarely
connect to those who have little access to science (e.g., people in assisted
living centers, urban youth, or incarcerated people).

A pilot study suggested that scientists who engage with scientifically unaware
audiences can generate new ideas, implement research, communicate results, and
inspire ecological understanding in ways they could not if they were restricted
to academic interactions or worked only with traditional public audiences. This
proposed project explores a high-risk/potential high- return approach to create
a rigorous, creative, sustainable, and transformative program to change public
outreach from burden to benefit.

Working with a team of professional evaluators, the PI will gather well-
established and early career ecosystem ecologists as "Research Ambassadors"
(RAs) to engage scientifically unaware audiences via lectures, research
projects, and websites. They will: a) brainstorm with appropriate public
audiences whose interests overlap with the RAs'; b) provide guidance on outreach
activities; and c) evaluate effects on the scientists and their science, as well
as the public audiences.

This is a first systematic effort to provide a sustainable outreach program for
senior and junior ecosystem scientists and to understand the impacts of public
engagement on them. The results for ecosystem science can extend to other fields
of science in the future.

Research Ambassadors will create materials and projects for underserved public
audiences that are often disproportionately weighted toward minorities. This
work will set the stage for large numbers of scientists to understand that
contact with these audiences can bring academic and societal rewards.