* 0956791
* SBIR Phase II:  Electrochemical Ozone Generator
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Michael Kimble, Reactive Innovations, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2012
* USD 431,588.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
water disinfection system based on an electrochemical generator that produces
ozone directly into process water. Because of its excellent disinfection and
oxidation qualities, ozone is widely used for drinking water and process water
purification treatment. Ozone has been proven to deactivate resistant
microorganisms such as Cryptosporidium Parvam and Giardia Lambia that have
caused a large number of epidemics in the United States through drinking and
process water. To enable wider adoption of ozone as an disinfectant,
improvements in ozone generators are needed that are safer to operate than the
corona arc discharge systems and that are more cost effective to install and
operate. Building on demonstration of technical and economic feasibility during
Phase I, this Phase II project will develop an electrochemistry based water
disinfection system for commercial deployment. The Phase II program will focus
on finalizing the electrocatalyst formulation, optimizing the module design for
performance and cost, incorporating the reactor module into a packaged end-use
product, and evaluating the process for disinfecting water in field applications
using strategic partners.

The broader/commercial impact of this project is an improved and lower cost
disinfection system that will prevent the vast outbreaks of contaminated water
that harm the general public. These occurrences push the utmost urgency for
advanced quality control methods, especially in food manufacturing. With the
wider adoption of ozone generation systems, both water and food-borne diseases
would diminish due to its effectiveness as a disinfectant against Lysteria,
Salmonella, E. coli, and any other pathogens found in fruits, vegetables, meats,
and seafood. Contributions to the scientific and technological field will be
realized by the improved electrochemical reactor design and catalyst development
that enables an ozone disinfection system that is low in cost and energy
efficient.