* 0956057
* CAREER: Mathematical Questions Arising from Neural Systems - Research and Education
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Janet Best, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 405,035.00

The neural circuits of the brain are central to human actions, human thoughts,
and human feelings. Because these circuits are so complicated and the details of
the circuitry vary from person to person, our understanding of the brain remains
limited. In this project the Principal Investigator will study fundamental
questions relating circuit structure and dynamics in the brain. One thing we do
know about the brain is that neural circuits change, from infancy through young
adulthood and into our later years. Some of these changes are part of healthy
developmental transitions, such as an infant becoming able to sleep through the
night or an adolescent entering puberty; other changes are pathological, such as
the loss of a particular group of neurons in the sleep disorder narcolepsy. In
close collaboration with laboratory scientists, the Principal Investigator seeks
both to characterize these neural changes and to determine the underlying neural
mechanisms. She will focus on three areas: (1) puberty, (2) sleep-wake
regulation, and (3) systems of neurotransmitters such as dopamine and serotonin.
Changes in the cells of neural circuits can alter the activity of these
neurotransmitters, with sometimes profound effects on important human behaviors
such as feeding, mood, and social interactions. The Principal Investigator will
carry out these investigations by studying mathematical models of different
brain circuits, using mathematics that she is developing for this
purpose.&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical investigations will include developing the
theory of mixed mode oscillations, studying how stochastic dynamics on graphs
change as the graph changes, using spectral analysis to understand how graph
structure determines the general character of the distribution of absorption
times of Markov processes, and developing the theory of doubly stochastic
processes. These investigations will give understanding of the normal
functioning of particular neural circuits and also help to explain what goes
wrong in neuropsychiatric illnesses and neurodegenerative diseases. The
Investigator will use her extensive experience in teaching, recruiting, and
mentoring students to design a new pipeline program in Ohio that will encourage
students to choose careers in science.