* 0956372
* Collaborative Research:  Imaging the Tall Timbers Research Station's Biological Research Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2012
* Austin Mast, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2012
* USD 6,314.00

The goal of this project is to create high-resolution digital images of the ca.
16,000 plant, bird, mammal, and Lepidoptera specimens in the Tall Timbers
Research Station (TTRS) Museum in Tallahassee, Florida, USA. The specimens
represent a nearly complete collection of plant, bird, mammal, and Lepidoptera
species that occur in the Red Hills region of Florida and Georgia. In addition
to imaging all specimens, the project will migrate existing plant and animal
specimen description data and associated images to the Florida State University
herbarium database, from which they will be accessible through an existing on-
line searchable website. All of the specimen records generated by the project
will be searchable by Global Biodiversity Information Facility portal using the
DiGIR protocol and will be deposited in Morphbank (www.morphbank.net). The Red
Hills Region, from which most of the collection is drawn, is a part of the East
Gulf Coastal Plain ecoregion, which is one of the nation's top five
"biodiversity hotspots." The Red Hills have particularly high biodiversity
because of the frequent application of prescribed fire, on which most of the
indigenous species depend. Thus, the collection is a valuable source of baseline
data for natural species diversity and distribution, which can be applied in
research, conservation, and restoration throughout the East Gulf Coastal Plain.
Most of the specimens were collected by renowned taxonomists and naturalists,
lending credibility and value to the collection. Over 21 federally listed
threatened or endangered species and over 400 state listed threatened or
endangered species are represented in the collection, usually by multiple
specimens. TTRS researchers mentor numerous graduate students and undergraduate
interns, most of whom rely on TTRS specimens for their research. Access to web-
based imagery for species identification will be particularly useful to these
researchers and others in the several universities and biological field stations
within the ecoregion. The TTRS collections can be found at
http://www.talltimbers.org/museum.html.