* 0956876
* STTR Phase II:  Tip Biosensor Array for MRSA Surveillance Testing
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Kyonghoon Lee, NanoFacture, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 516,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project is to
develop a prototype biosensor array system for rapid surveillance of
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) operated by minimally-trained
personnel. MRSA, one of the major bacterial pathogens for healthcare acquired
infections (HAI), afflicts overcrowded and understaffed US hospitals. Thus, an
urgent need exists for a more rapid, reliable yet affordable testing method for
HAI screening. The proposed tip sensor?s novel sample concentration mechanism
enables rapid screening of whole cells followed by confirmation of genetic
signatures. The project implements a proprietary sample concentration mechanism
for highly efficient capture and detection of bacterial pathogens in a size-
exclusive manner. The novelty of the proposed work involves studying DNA
reaction kinetics enhanced by a high-frequency electric field on a high aspect
ratio tip. The transformative nature of the proposed biosensing technology
enables screening for pathogens and nanoparticles without culture and
amplification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is to establish a solid fabrication and detection method for a
high-throughput biosensor. The tip sensors offer a specific concentration of
whole bacterial cells (screening) and an accelerated DNA detection
(confirmation). The proposed method will pave the way to high-throughput
screening of pathogens through the specific detection in terms of target-
geometry, electric properties, and affinity chemistry. The operation cost and
time can be minimized through superior concentration performance. Considering
the concentration and detection mechanisms, the tip sensor works as a universal
platform for low cost detection of various pathogenic analytes including
bacteria and viruses, proteins and nucleic acids in clinical samples. The
societal impact of this biosensor platform will fulfill an unmet need to save
healthcare costs associated with specific pathogens. The technology would
eventually be deployed in resource-limited settings including individual uses,
for the detection of various pathogens. Thus, this technology will directly
impact the fields of micro/nanochip fabrication, biomedical sensors, and low-
cost diagnostics.