* 0956414
* Collaborative Research: The Online Consortium of Pacific Northwest Herbaria Expanded to Include Taxonomically Diverse Specimens from Large and Small Regional Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Joseph Ammirati, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2014
* USD 658,111.00

The purpose of this project is to digitize (i.e., image and database) botanical
research specimens at nearly twenty university, college, and federal agency
herbaria in Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and Washington. Vascular plant, moss,
lichen, and fungal specimens will be included in the project. Once digitized,
the records will be available online through an existing Web portal
(http://www.pnwherbaria.org). The investigators are leveraging the
cyberinfrastructure (e.g., Ethernet, servers, technical staff) available at
several large universities to build partnerships with smaller institutions that
otherwise would not have the resources to undertake this activity.

This project provides tangible benefits to the general public, undergraduate
students, and the research community. Digitizing specimens and making them
available online creates public access to collections that have been assembled
in part through prior federal funding. The specimen data will be downloadable
from the Web site, so anyone can use the information to pursue unique interests
and questions. Undergraduate students will be involved extensively with imaging
and data basing activities, providing them with skills and training applicable
to future professional pursuits. Online availability of nearly 2 million Pacific
Northwest herbarium specimens will increase access and efficiency for the
research community using these collections.