* 0956692
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  When Worlds Collide: Terrestrial Places and Outer Spaces
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Lisa Messeri, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2011
* USD 11,100.00

This dissertation research explores the practice and scientific arguments of
planetary scientists, suggesting that the concept of place is fundamental to
understanding extraterrestrial landscapes. To do so, doctoral candidate Lisa
Messeri will examine how three space science communities employ different
methods of practice to achieve the same goal: producing knowledge about other
planets. Using ethnographic methods, Messeri tracks research activities of MIT
astronomers, NASA Ames planetary geologists, and Mars Desert Research Station
(MDRS) simulation participants. She suggests that place has an important role
for each of these communities and shapes how they study outer space. Planets, as
scientific objects, are transformed into worlds that can be explored and mapped;
worlds that are more like terrestrial kin than alien others. Astronomers at MIT
studying planets in other solar systems, transform numerical counts of photons
into complex worlds with atmospheres and weather, imbuing elements of place and
thus familiarity onto these distant objects. Instead of creating an Earth-like
place in space, NASA planetary geologists and crews of Mars Society's MDRS
create spaces on Earth that resemble extraterrestrial landscapes. Planetary
geologists at NASA Ames in Moffett Field California conduct field research in
Mojave Desert, Yellowstone National Park, and other locations of geologic
interest with the intent of learning more about features on Mars, Venus, or the
moons of Jupiter. In Utah's San Rafael Desert, the Mars Society has built a
permanent habitat occupied by participants on two-week long missions. These
participants simulate the experience of being part of an early Martian colony
charged with conducting geologic surveys of the alien environment. Simulation
members imagine they are on Mars, seeing the landscape outside their habitat as
a Martian place, not as Utah. This project moves beyond questioning the role of
place in science with respect to the laboratory and field, questioning instead
how processes of place-making occur in conjunction with knowledge creation.