* 0956764
* SBIR Phase II:   Bioluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer Probes for Molecular Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Daniel Sobek, Zymera Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2013
* USD 850,296.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
the production of robust, versatile probes based on Bioluminescence Resonance
Energy Transfer to Quantum Dots (BRET-Qdot®) technology. The main goal of this
project is to develop a platform for target-directed in vivo imaging of tissue,
such as whole tumors and organs, in animal models. To accomplish this goal,
biotinylated targeting agents for the detection of important biomarkers, in
combination with BRET-Qdot® probes with streptavidin functionality, will be
developed to provide one-step target detection. The probes will represent the
range of molecular sizes used for a majority of assays, from small molecules to
antibodies, thus enabling detection of virtually any cell surface target
molecule.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a
sensitive probe reagent that will be broadly applicable to a wide range of
preclinical assays including in vivo imaging of tumors, organs and various
anatomical structures. In order to understand the molecular mechanisms
underlying diseases, such as cancer, autoimmune diseases, and other diseases,
there is increasing interest in advancing from cell-based assays to in vivo
imaging of disease states in small animal models. The targeted BRET-Qdot®
platform will provide a cost effective,convenient and effective alternative to
competing fluorescence and bioluminescence imaging probe technology.