* 0956993
* Metacognition in Comparative Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2015
* John David Smith, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2015
* USD 224,640.00

Humans feel doubt and uncertainty. We know when we don't know or don't remember.
A good example of this is the feeling that someone's name is on the tip of your
tongue. This sophisticated cognitive capacity to be aware of our own thinking is
called metacognition. It is closely allied to our consciousness and self-
awareness and represents a fundamental dimension of our mental experience and
intellectual functioning. The goal of the proposed research is to discover the
origins of the metacognitive capacity by tracing the evolutionary roots of
metacognition, self-awareness, and consciousness in nonhuman animals.
Accordingly, this project explores metacognition in humans and rhesus macaques.
The research design includes tasks that assess whether humans and nonhuman
primates monitor and control their thinking in similar ways. The animals are
tested via computer tasks in which they respond by touching icons on their
computer screen using a joystick-controlled cursor. In previous work, animals
performed these tasks eagerly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metacognition is crucial to
every aspect of learning and comprehension, and in every educational setting.
Understanding the cognitive organization of this capacity in adult humans and
tracing its evolutionary emergence will support the development of animal models
for metacognition. These models will ground the study of neurological substrates
and neurochemical blocks and enhancements to metacognition. The simple,
nonverbal tasks developed to suit animals are also ideal for testing very young
humans. These paradigms should extend the range of techniques available to child
development researchers. These paradigms may also support the study of
metacognition in language-delayed or autistic children and promote efforts to
train metacognition in educationally challenged populations. The research may
open a new window on reflective mind in animals and on human origins, perhaps
explaining how or why conscious cognitive regulation came to be such a crucial
aspect of human intelligence. Finally, the demonstrations of animal awareness
emerging from the research will have important implications regarding
respectful, compassionate husbandry in all areas of animal research.