* 0956210
* CAREER: Emergent Biological Mechanics of Cellular Microstructures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Paul Atzberger, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 05/31/2016
* USD 435,195.00

A fundamental problem in cell biology is to relate how molecular level events
result in the emergent mechanics and functions of cellular structures. This is
especially challenging since biological processes often exhibit organization and
coupling over a wide hierarchy of spatial and temporal scales. This can be
readily seen when observing cellular structures, such as the lipid-protein
bilayer membrane encasing the cell or the intricate filament architecture of the
cytoskeleton. It is expected that this organization is not only designed to have
mechanics which allow the cell to resist outside perturbations from the
environment, but also to be readily regulated and to provide feedback on
cellular processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims
to contribute to this area by the formulation of new paradigms and the
investigation of specific hypotheses. For lipid-protein membranes, mechanisms
will be investigated for how mechanical stresses in the bilayer alter protein
conformations, protein aggregation and depletion, and protein mobility. For the
cytoskeleton, mechanisms will be investigated for how bulk mechanical properties
change when augmenting the filament architecture and interactions through
passive linkers and active motor proteins. These will be explored through a
combination of large-scale computational simulation studies performed by the PI
and through experimental studies carried out by collaborators. New mathematical
and computational approaches will also be developed for the bridging of
organizational scales in dynamic models of cell
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program is
integrated with the mentoring and training of both undergraduate and graduate
students for work at the interface of mathematics and the biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;Proposed activities also include a number of educational and
community outreach initiatives. This includes recruitment of students from
under-represented groups leveraging the UC RISE and UC CAMP programs at UCSB,
teaching an undergraduate freshman seminar course on mathematical biology,
teaching a graduate special topics course on cell mechanics, and participation
in the UCSB Math Circle for junior high school teachers and students. In the
third year of funding, an interdisciplinary workshop focused on cell mechanics
will be organized to facilitate the exchange of research results and to foster
collaborations between mathematicians and experimental
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Office of Cyber Infrastructure.