* 0956404
* Improvements to the Auburn University Natural History Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2010,11/30/2013
* John Feminella, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 11/30/2013
* USD 429,878.00

The state of Alabama enjoys the distinction of being one of the most
biologically diverse regions of the country. Documenting this often overlooked
and imperiled natural heritage is the priority of the Auburn University Natural
History Museum. Although natural history collections are in decline nationwide,
Auburn University has made a strong commitment to collections-based research,
education and public outreach. This award will fund improvements to the plant,
invertebrate, fish, amphibian, reptile, bird and mammal collections in concert
with their relocation to a new, central campus museum building. Upgraded
cabinetry and shelving will allow efficient use of the new space, ensure
preservation of valuable specimens and improve access to specimens by
researchers, students and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
provide numerous opportunities for the inclusion of undergraduate and graduate
students in collections-based activities as part of their academic experience.
Several students will participate as paid support personnel and receive on the
job training to become the next generation of curators and collections managers.
This award will facilitate integration of the collections into several popular
and effective public education programs, including K-12 mini courses, museum
tours, and workshops that heighten public interest in and emphasize the
importance of Alabama's natural heritage.