* 0956116
* CAREER: Rational Design of Semiconducting Polymers with Tunable Opto-Electronic Properties: An Interdisciplinary Program for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Mihaela Stefan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2015
* USD 502,250.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER grant will allow the PI to
launch an interdisciplinary research and education program at the interface
between organic/polymer chemistry, materials science and semiconductor
technologies. The overall objective of the proposed research is to establish a
synthetic design protocol to generate semiconducting polymers with tunable
structures and electronic properties. Benzodithiophene with phenylethynyl
substituents and thienodipyrrole will be employed as building blocks for the
synthesis of novel semiconducting polymers with tunable energy levels.
Benzodithiophene monomers with phenylethynyl electron withdrawing substituents
render the polymers a lower LUMO energy level. By contrast, thienodipyrrole
monomers with increased donor ability will generate semiconducting polymers with
a higher LUMO energy level. Intermediate energy levels can be obtained by
copolymerization of monomers. The proposed 5-years research program targets the
synthesis of the proposed monomers and their corresponding polymers, structural,
morphological and opto-electronic characterization, and the testing of the
materials in bulk heterojunction solar cells. The experimental data obtained
from solar cell testing will be used to fine tune the structures of the monomers
and semiconducting polymers. The research program will have an application
driven approach, where students will gain expertise in organic/polymer
synthesis, characterization, and semiconductor technologies. The PI will
capitalize on prior experience in polymer science and organic electronics, but
also expand skills in fabrication and testing of solar cells. The PI?s research
program will naturally expand into its education component by training graduate
and undergraduate students who will develop skills in synthetic chemistry and
solar cell fabrication and testing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pending global energy crisis requires the
development of new technologies that exploit the potential of renewable energy
sources, such as solar power. For example, inorganic semiconductor based
photovoltaic technology has reached the performance of converting 30% of solar
energy into electric power. Despite this good performance, inorganic
photovoltaics based on existing crystalline silicon technology are still too
expensive to compete with the conventional sources of electricity. While
extensive research in the field of silicon-based, inorganic photovoltaics is
expected to result in a decrease in their fabrication cost, organic
photovoltaics developed by the PI?s group are viable alternatives for low cost,
lightweight, large area and flexible solar panels. The proposed research will
aim toward the production of novel organic semiconducting polymers with high
performance in organic solar cells. This CAREER award will support the
interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students at the
interface between chemistry and materials science. The PI will work closely with
the Chemistry Students Association at the University of Texas at Dallas to
design workshop experiments using polymers. These workshops will be presented in
science fairs in the DFW area. The PI is also participating in the highly
successful Nanoexplorers Program at UTD which gives high-school students the
opportunity to participate in summer research.