* 0956891
* SBIR Phase II:   An Innovative and More Effective Means to Manage the Communication Process Between Colleges and Prospective Students
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2010,04/30/2012
* Douglas Wofford, 422 Group
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2012
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
commercialize a predictive modeling technology that automatically adapts to
changing interaction patterns between providers of higher education (colleges
and universities) and consumers (prospective students). Current methods produce
only retrospective static models which, due to peculiarities of the higher
education recruitment cycle, require at least a one-year lag between data
acquisition and application to new prospects. As a result, data mining
techniques have gained only limited popularity in college recruiting. The
approach proposed here employs a proprietary adaptive modeling engine (AME) to
leverage real-time transactional data from a CRM system and dynamically update
scoring algorithms to predict outcomes. AME relies on a logical interface and
unified dimensional data model to extract analyzable record-sets accurately
representing the state of underlying transactional data at any time-slice within
the system's effective-dated range. The integration of these key technologies
allow relationship patterns to be identified in the recruitment process as they
occur and scoring algorithms to dynamically adapt to changing patterns within a
single recruitment cycle.

It is believed that the changing demographics of college-going students will
present a number of significant obstacles to the traditional college business
model and could jeopardize the future financial health of many higher education
providers in this county. The decade-long trend of yearly increases in demand,
as represented by the number of new students entering college, comes to an end
in 2009. In stark contrast to the 24% growth the market has experienced over the
past decade, future enrollment numbers will remain stagnant overall, and in many
localities college enrollment will actually decline. Furthermore, dramatic
shifts are coming in the geodemographic, ethnic, and cultural mix of high school
graduates that feed the higher education market. As competition for students
increases dramatically in the face of rising attendance costs, dwindling
endowments, changing demographics, and a decline in college-bound students, each
college's ability to survive, much less prosper, will depend directly on its
ability to identify, understand, and communicate with students in a more
efficient and cost-effective manner. Those that are able to adapt this new
landscape through the use of innovative tools like AME will flourish, and those
who are unable to adapt will face an uncertain future of declining enrollments
and financial instability.