* 0956637
* SBIR Phase II:   Internet-based Software for the Treatment of Depression  among Veterans
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Roger Sweis, Prevail Health Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2013
* USD 1,016,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project seeks
to determine the feasibility and effectiveness of a Web-based software that
provides depression treatment for Veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan.
A recent Pentagon study concluded that returning Iraqi and Afghanistan veterans
are currently suffering from "daunting and growing mental health problems" with
nearly 1/3 of these military personnel reporting symptoms of mental illness upon
their return from combat. A lack of adequate available resources combined with a
fear of stigmatization inherent in seeking face-to-face treatment, prevent as
many as 77% of these military personnel from ever getting the treatment they
need. The proposed innovation will enable the military's mental health
professionals to offer an effective, evidence-based and drug-free depression
intervention which will effectively mitigate stigma concerns faced by military
personnel and will provide treatment at a fraction of the cost of the typical
depression interventions available today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
innovation in this proposed research has the potential to create significant
value by 1) allowing VA mental health professionals to provide an easily-
accessible, evidence-based and drug-free depression treatment to returning
military personnel suffering from depression 2) enabling veterans to seek
treatment without having to face the fear of stigmatization inherent in seeking
face-to-face treatment within the confines of a mental health care facility 3)
reducing the economic burden on the military health care system by providing an
effective and scalable depression treatment at a fraction the cost of today's
typical depression interventions. With an estimated 5 million veterans and 20
million civilians in the U.S.A suffering from depression, cost-effective and
innovative methods to help address this burgeoning healthcare problem are
critical. Through further research, this Web-based framework has the potential
to extend to many mental health problems that plague our country such as PTSD,
Drug Abuse, Anxiety and Alcoholism.