* 0956081
* CAREER: Magnetically Tunable Photonic Crystal Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Yadong Yin, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 03/31/2015
* USD 700,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Photonic materials with properties that can be tuned
by external stimuli have important applications in areas such as color displays,
biological and chemical sensors, inks and paints, or active optical components.
This proposal, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) and
Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) programs in the Division of Materials
Research (DMR) and the Particulate and Multiphase Processes program in Division
of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET), aims
to develop an integrated self-assembly approach for building magnetically
responsive photonic crystal structures with photonic properties rapidly and
widely tunable using external magnetic fields. The main strategy is to design
the superparamagnetic colloidal building blocks in accordance to the liquid
media so that a strong interparticle repulsion exists to balance the
magnetically induced attraction force and eventually induce the self-assembly of
particles into ordered structures. By changing the strength of the magnetic
field, the periodicity and consequently the photonic property can be rapidly
tuned. Through manipulation of surface chemistry of the magnetic particles,
electrostatic, solvation and steric forces will be employed as repulsive forces
countering the magnetically induced attractive forces for optimal assembly.
Unlike conventional colloidal assembly approaches, this new strategy allows
instant creation of photonic crystal structures, and rapid and fully reversible
tuning of the photonic properties in a wide spectrum range, thus providing a new
platform for many photonic applications. This proposal also explores the use of
this self-assembly approach and the magnetically tunable photonic systems for
applications such as full-color high resolution printing and rewritable photonic
papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will develop a unique self-assembly approach for the preparation of
photonic structures whose color can be changed rapidly and reversibly by
applying an external magnetic field. Upon establishing a balance between the
repulsive and attractive interactions, magnetic colloidal particles can be
instantly assembled into ordered structures with photonic properties that are
tunable by changing the strength of the magnetic field. These responsive
photonic structures will have important applications in areas such as color
displays, biological and chemical sensors, inks and paints, or active optical
components. The proposed research efforts will be closely integrated with
educational outreach to promote the interest of students, especially those from
underrepresented groups, in science and engineering. Results from the proposed
research will be incorporated into a new core course "Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology" offered to graduate and senior undergraduate students at the UC
Riverside. Undergraduate students from UCR and local small liberal arts colleges
and local high school students will be recruited and given the opportunity to
conduct related research through regular academic and summer internship
programs. Onsite and online exhibitions will be developed through partnerships
with museums, science centers, and educational websites to broadly disseminate
the research results and to enhance the public's understanding of science and
technology. Effective collaborations with researchers at UCR, industry, national
laboratories, and international research groups will be established during the
project period.