* 0956425
* An Improved Understanding of Water Isotope Fractionation in Atmospheric Vapor and Its Source
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Chun-Ta Lai, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2015
* USD 399,440.00

This research project aims to establish a premium water isotope research station
with high quality, frequent and uninterrupted atmospheric vapor isotope (2H and
18O) measurements to investigate vapor isotope fractionation and its
applications on ecosystem-atmosphere water and CO2 exchange. The research builds
upon current understanding of water vapor isotopic fractionation under the
influence of vegetation-atmosphere interaction. This project will evaluate a
number of critical assumptions in hydrospheric isotope models, identify key
fractionation processes, and develop mechanistic algorithms to address caveats
that mask the potential of hydrogen and oxygen isotope tracers in hydrological
and carbon cycle research. Objectives of the research are to: quantify the
extent of below-cloud evaporation during the descent of raindrops and its
effects on the vapor isotope variation in forest air; determine how this
recycling of water affects atmospheric moisture and precipitation; evaluate
plant-based proxy as an integrator of atmospheric vapor in surface air; provide
mechanistic algorithms of isotope fractionation that accompanies surface
evapotranspiration in hydrospheric isotope models.

Products of the research complement synthesis activities for a number of
networks, including Biosphere-Atmosphere Stable Isotope Network (BASIN),
Moisture Isotopes in the Biosphere and Atmosphere (MIBA), AmeriFlux, and North
American Carbon Program (NACP) site interim synthesis. New courses will be added
to the curriculum to promote the use of stable isotope ratio measurements in
biogeoscience research, in order to ensure a breadth of technological skills in
students, encourage undergraduate student participation in laboratory research,
and increase public awareness of the eco-hydrological consequences of climate
change.