* 0956749
* SBIR Phase II:   Development of Design and Operational Criteria of Continuous Culture Hatchery Techniques for the Production of Brachionus rotundiformis (s-type) rotifers
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Douglas Drennan, Aquaculture Systems Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 347,875.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project's overall goal
is to commercialize a robust, continuous culture production system for rotifers
(Brachionus rotundiformis; s-type), the major live feed source for marine larval
fish. A major bottleneck in the expansion of the marine aquaculture industry in
the United States remains the lack of commercial live feed production
technologies to support the grow-out industry. Specifically for rotifer culture,
there exist limited standardized design and operational criteria for continuous
culture methods that could facilitate increased productivity and consistency of
supply. The inability to supply microalgal/zooplankton feeds cost-effectively
(quantity) and consistently (quantity and quality) continues to be a major
limitation to the expansion of the marine aquaculture
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this technology are
simplification of fingerling production which will lead to rapid expansion of
marine hatcheries and hence a dramatic increase in the availability of lower
cost marine fry and fingerlings for aquaculture grow-out in ponds, ocean cages
and/or indoor recirculating systems. This research has the potential to help
jump-start the marine aquaculture industry by eliminating one of the key
limiting factors to increasing the production of many marine species, i.e. the
unavailability and the high cost of fry and fingerlings. Aquaculture production
of the more popular marine finfish will relieve the pressure on commercial fish
stocks that are currently severely threatened or overfished and allow culture
under highly controlled, biosecure conditions using commercial formulated diets.