* 0956948
* WORKSHOP:  Creating a Research Agenda in Computing at the Margins
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Rebecca Grinter, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

"Creating a Research Agenda in Computing at the Margins" is a workshop designed
to help articulate a set of intellectual challenges that should be addressed by
CISE researchers as they design and develop information and computing technology
that is oriented toward people who are not currently in the set of already well-
served technology users. This includes underrepresented populations within the
United States, populations who encompass emerging markets in the third world, as
well as the economic disadvantaged. The common assumption that increased access
resolves the digital divide may actually be false. Indeed, what may be needed
are fundamentally different kinds of technologies -- based on new advances in
the methods and theories of design and evaluation, along with technological
innovation -- grounded in an understanding of the unique constraints and
considerations of the communities for which those systems are intended. Evidence
already suggests that local differences in infrastructure, literacy, culture, or
economic models, can and have fostered scientific innovations in user experience
methods and theories, advances in systems and networking technologies and
algorithms.

The resulting research agenda will stimulate technical innovation that will
support the creation, deployment, and assessment of technologies that allow ever
more people to enjoy the benefits of the digital society. It will enrich the
digital society by diversifying those who participate. New techniques and
technology that addresses the wider needs of society is an important educational
opportunity. As a research agenda it has the potential to teach the next
generation of researchers and engineers a set of skills that help them build
technologies that respond to the needs of all sectors of society.