* 0956127
* CAREER: Structure and Electronic Anomalies of Vitreous Matter
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Vassiliy Lubchenko, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2016
* USD 554,290.00

The electronic structure of a material, including electronic energies and
wavefunctions, determines its electronic and optical properties. In turn, these
properties underlie a myriad of important implications for energy conversion,
transportation and storage, renewable energy production, information processing
and storage, catalysis, optical devices, and many others. Even if the atomic
locations in a material are known, inspection of the electronic structure is
difficult because of the need to simultaneously solve for the dynamics of many
electrons that are strongly interacting. Amorphous materials, such as window
glasses, pose a still greater challenge to the chemist due to the difficulty to
determine their structure via techniques that have worked well for periodic
crystals, such as X-ray diffraction. Amorphous materials, in particular those
made by rapid cooling of a liquid melt, are important in applications due to
their low manufacturing costs and numerous unique properties not found in
periodic crystals. For example, alloys containing elements from groups 5 and 6,
such as antimony and tellurium, are presently used to make optical drives and
are the leading candidate for next generation computer memory. Another important
example is viscous ionic liquids, which are used to make batteries. The project
aims to trace the origin of the unique optoelectronic anomalies of vitreous
(i.e., glassy) solids to the atomic motions above the glass transition which,
surprisingly, occurs subject to very strict statistical rules. The project
focuses on the dynamics of a viscous liquid above the glass transition which is
to be mapped onto seemingly different model systems that are defined on a fixed
lattice. By connecting the parameters of these models with the properties of
specific substances, a microscopic description of glassy solids is expected
whereby structure and electronic properties emerge self-consistently.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solutions to the important problem of the electronic
structure of amorphous materials lies at the interface of chemistry, physics,
and materials science. These factors combine to create a unique
multidisciplinary research environment for participating students and
researchers, and for communicating to high school students the fascinating
properties of viscous liquids and amorphous materials. Considering the ethnic
diversity at the University of Houston and in the greater Houston area, the
research enhances the educational opportunities of underrepresented groups and
promotes their participation in advanced research. Local writers and radio
personalities are collaborating to publicize the societal benefits of the
research resulting from this project. In addition to the fundamental
significance of the research on vitreous materials, other potential benefits
include new ways to manufacture efficient computer memory, solar cells,
batteries, optical fibers, and many others.