* 0956629
* STTR Phase II:   Improved Addressing Speed of  Plasma-sphere Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2011
* Carol Wedding, IMAGING SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2011
* USD 561,992.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is a study to
expand the high speed addressing work conducted under Phase I using monochrome
Plasma-spheres to color Plasma-spheres. Plasma-spheres are hollow transparent
shells that encapsulate a selected pressurized gas. When a voltage is applied
across the shell, the gas ionizes and glows. Plasma-spheres are applied to
flexible, electrically addressable arrays to form Plasma-sphere arrays for use
as large area plasma displays. Plasma-sphere arrays, like standard plasma
displays require secondary electron emitting materials to increases addressing
speeds. Under Phase II, the team will continue to investigate both thin film and
thick film techniques for applying these materials to color Plasma-spheres. The
proposed research presents a novel approach to produce video speed large area
plasma displays. The Plasma-sphere array differs from other display technologies
in that it allows for low-cost displays that are flexible, ultra-large, with
full-color and full motion video.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is a breakthrough display
technology. It moves away from the traditional semiconductor fabrication
processes as practiced by many display manufacturers in Asia and replaces them
with low cost plastic, glass, and printing processes practiced and well
understood by US based companies. The successful development of a high speed
addressing will help move this product toward commercialization in the large and
growing market of dynamic signage. Commercialization of this technology will
lead to job creation and commercial opportunities in the United States.
Furthermore, Plasma-sphere arrays are an order of magnitude lower in production
cost when compared with ultra large LED displays. Lower material and
manufacturing costs provide a social benefit in that fewer natural resources are
required with a less taxing effect on the environment. The Plasmasphere array
can be made large like an LED display, while retaining many of the exceptional
features of a conventional, rigid plasma display including good viewing angle,
high brightness, excellent contrast, and&lt;br/&gt;full motion video.