* 0956865
* STTR Phase II:  Condensation on Gradient Surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Richard Bonner, Advanced Cooling Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2012
* USD 451,156.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project
proposes innovative heat transfer research involving dropwise condensation on a
wettability gradient. Dropwise condensation alone has shown the ability to
increase condensation heat transfer coefficients by an order of magnitude over
film condensation, typical of vertical thermosyphons. Droplets condensing on a
gradient surface experience different contact angles, causing the droplets to
accelerate to high velocities in the direction of increased wettability. The
difference in contact angle on opposite sides of the condensing droplets is due
to locally varying properties of the condensing surface, controlled by varying
surface concentrations of molecules with low surface energy. The higher droplet
velocities caused by condensing on the gradient surface further increases the
heat transfer coefficient over typical dropwise condensation. Furthermore, the
gradient surface does not require gravity to remove liquid from the condensing
surface, enabling dropwise condensation heat transfer on horizontal surfaces and
in microgravity applications. In this proposal, the technology demonstrated in
Phase I will be integrated into a vapor chamber heat transfer device suitable
for electronics cooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be felt in the thermal management industry.
Specifically, incorporating this innovation will enable significantly improved
thermal performance in vapor chambers, leading to cost savings and allowing
improved performance in a number of industries. In the computing industry,
solutions for notebook computers and servers are becoming increasingly limited
by thermal issues. In micro-gravity environments, these new gradient surfaces
will replace or enhance the capillary forces currently used in heat pipe
devices, such as axially grooved heat pipes and loop heat pipes, for
communication satellite applications. In the nuclear industry, more efficient
condensation directly increases electrical conversion efficiency. There is
already a demand for higher capacity thermal solutions, and this demand will
only increase as commercial entities and government agencies expand their
capabilities and demand greater thermal dissipation. This development effort
will also enhance the fundamental understanding of liquid movements due to
surface gradients and similar Marangoni flows, which will have an impact in
various fields, including research related to fluid pumping in micro-fluidic
applications.