* 0956472
* Stakeholder Alignment in Socio-Technical Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* David Goldberg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mark Suchman
* 08/31/2012
* USD 352,409.00

This research will help avoid catastrophic ?disconnects? in virtual
organizations, promote valuable ?connects? among the stakeholders, and advance
integrative theory in the emerging field of virtual socio-technical systems.
Many complex socio-technical systems are virtual ?meta organizations? comprised
of multiple stakeholders. The central challenge facing these systems is the
alignment of stakeholders sufficient to enable regular operations and support
periodic transformation. Stakeholder misalignment causes these systems to fall
short of their potential and may result in catastrophic failures such as the
response to Hurricane Katrina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops
tools and methods which will be used to advance ?lateral alignment? of
stakeholders theory by enabling transparent data collection. These tools and
methods will also be of practical value in fostering stakeholder alignment. Web-
based tools and methods for identifying behavioral, structural and cultural
alignment or misalignment among stakeholders will be developed, allowing
stakeholders to visualize their interrelationships and to anticipate and address
threats and opportunities. The efficacy of these tools and methods and the value
of lateral alignment of stakeholders theory will be tested on four pilot cases,
representing a range of research, educational, and industry partnerships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every day we rely upon complex socio-technical systems
such as the air, water and ground transportation systems, the power grid, and
health care delivery systems. Many of these require cooperation or partnerships
among several different organizations and agencies. These partnerships depend on
stakeholder alignment to operate effectively. Providing tools to identify and
address stakeholder misalignments could potentially transform the creation and
management of these systems and help avoid future catastrophes.