* 0956687
* Econometric Analysis of the Financial Crisis
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Peter Phillips, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 04/30/2014
* USD 248,622.00

As events during the 2008 financial crisis and its aftermath have shown, extreme
movements in financial time series can have wide socio-economic impact. The
immediate effects involve huge swings in wealth, which in turn can lead to
financial insecurity, institutional insolvency, misallocation of economic
resources, and global consequences that threaten the credibility of major
economic institutions. In addition, economic globalization has led to strong
financial linkages that can increase risk exposure in the event of a large
common shock. Understanding this phenomenon, exploring its causes, mapping its
evolution over financial markets, and studying its effects on the real economy
all present major challenges to the economics
profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop quantitative
methods that will contribute to our understanding of some of these issues.
Beyond the immediate concerns that have confronted policy makers during the
recent financial crisis lie questions that relate to the emergence and detection
of the bubble phenomena and the evolutionary course of the resulting crisis
through the financial and economic systems. These issues form the focus of the
primary program of proposed research, which seeks to design new econometric
methodology to enable early detection of bubble behaviour and to provide
empirical date stamping technology that quantifies dynamic timing and helps to
map the evolutionary course of a financial crisis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will provide a rigorous econometric approach to dating financial
bubbles, deriving a limit theory for empirical estimates of the origination and
collapse dates of bubble episodes, and using a new model of financial bubble
activity that is based on the successive conjunction of ?efficient market?
models and ?mildly explosive? models that can capture episodes of financial
exuberance. An extensive empirical implementation of this technology to recent
financial crisis data is envisaged, yielding empirical information on the
temporal extent, the magnitude, and the course of the various bubble phenomena
that have involved financial and commodity markets, exchange rates and real
economic activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to this primary research
program, two secondary projects will be pursued. The first deals with co-
movement in economic and financial data where there is some uncertainty about
the persistence characteristics in the data, as is common in empirical research.
The second program of research will explore new econometric methodology for
dynamic panel modelling in the presence of individual effects. The importance of
these fields is reflected in the vast empirical literatures in the social
sciences that utilize cointegrating methods to study long run linkages among
time series and dynamic panel regression to study the effects of individual
decision making over time.