* 0956817
* SBIR Phase II: Automated Mining of Worker and HR Preferences for On-Demand Job Matching
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2010,10/31/2013
* Paul Nemirovsky, dMetrics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 10/31/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to improve
the quality of on-demand job matching by applying data mining and machine
learning techniques to natural language descriptions of job requests, worker
reviews, and transaction history. The project will enable lasting job matches by
predicting the needs, preferences and constraints of workers and human resource
managers. Currently available methods of job matching rely primarily on keyword
search, corporate personality assessment tests, or fixed ontologies. Such
systems lack comprehensive learning and therefore have difficulty matching
workers with jobs. This project approaches job matching with a bias-free
learning model that learns from hiring successes, trains on real-world data, and
adapts to new job verticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact
of the project is a matching technology that optimizes workers' and employers'
strengths, discovering matching opportunities overlooked by traditional search
technologies. Online reputation-building through performance reviews can improve
workers' ability to market themselves. The global matching technology permits
nearly every skill to become marketable by matching workers with all features
from every available job request. Natural language processing techniques,
developed in the course of this project, have the potential to broaden the
appeal of cell phone text-messaging as a comprehensive job-searching tool.
Furthermore, the contextual approach to learning about workers and employers
enables trends to be identified among users, and has far-reaching commercial
implications in fields as diverse as medical research and e-commerce.