* 0956897
* EAGER: Composite Adaptive Mirrors
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Christ Ftaclas, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey R. Pier
* 09/30/2011
* USD 97,412.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Telescopes on the ground must observe objects in deep space through the
interference of the earth's atmosphere. As light passes through the atmosphere
it gets spread out by turbulence due to wind shear and changes in temperature
and pressure within the atmospheric layers which effectively diminishes the
resolving power of earth-based telescopes. This difficulty can be overcome to a
large extent by relatively new techniques employing "Laser Guide Stars" and
"Adaptive Optics." A bright laser illuminates a patch of sky near the target
object. The laser's light is absorbed and then re-emitted by atoms in the upper
atmosphere, above much of the interfering lower atmosphere. The return signal
can then be used to track the time-dependent scattering of the light. Adaptive
Optics uses this information to adjust optics in the telescope's instrumentation
to restore the image to what would be seen from above the atmosphere.

In order to make this work astronomers have had to divert the light path from
the telescope to an optical bench where a "deformable mirror" modifies the
optical beam to correct for the distortions. The corrected beam then must be
piped back into the science instruments. Recently, however, some observatories
have been developing adaptive secondary mirrors, making the adjustments within
the telescope beam itself. (The secondary mirror is typically the second mirror
in a telescope's optical chain and it reflects light from the primary mirror
back down into the science instruments.) The problem with this is that secondary
mirrors tend to be relatively large - much larger than current deformable
mirrors; consequently making large adaptive mirrors using current technology is
very costly. Dr. Christ Ftaclas of the University of Hawaii is investigating a
new scheme to make adaptive mirrors that, if successful, would be less expensive
and enable even larger adaptive mirrors. The ultimate goal of adaptive optics
would be to make the telescope's primary mirror adaptive and with Dr. Ftaclas'
idea this may become a reality. His work is funded by NSF's Division of
Astronomical Sciences under an Early-concepts Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER).