* 0956900
* STTR Phase II:  An Ultra Compact and Low Cost Raman Analyzer Based on Slitless Volume Holographic Spectrometers
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Arash Karbaschi, ProSpect Photonics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project focuses on the
commercialization of a new low-cost and compact low-resolution (~1 nm) Raman
spectroscopy (LRRS) technique for medical diagnostics. Current Raman
spectroscopy systems are bulky and expensive and have small throughput for
diffuse light (e.g., Raman scattering), due to their front narrow slit. Handheld
and low-cost LRRS systems are needed for medical diagnostics, specifically at
less equipped point of care (POC) facilities. Besides, the small efficiency of
the current systems make them use higher pump laser power and focus it onto the
examined tissue that adds to the cost and can damage the tissue. The technology
adopted in the proposed Raman analyzer is a holographic spectroscopy method that
uses spherical and cylindrical beam volume holograms. The technology enables
compact, light weight, and low-cost spectrometers with the fewest main elements
compared to the conventional LRRS systems. Specifically, the narrow slit as in
the conventional spectrometers is eliminated, whereby diffuse light can be more
efficiently coupled in the spectrometer. The development of a LRRS system
prototype with the mentioned volume holography technology is proposed. The
developed LRRS system will be then optimized for medical diagnostics based on
surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS).

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be over a broad
range of applications in the fields of biochemistry, medicine, pharmaceuticals,
industrial quality assurance, homeland security, mineralogy, and environmental
sensing. The compact and low-cost nature of the proposed instrument makes it the
perfect choice for handheld sensing devices that are of high current demand in
several fields mentioned above. The entire US market volume that can be covered
by this technology has been $2.6B in 2005, with a prospected 7% growth rate
through 2010. The potential application of the proposed instrument in the field
of medical diagnostics (e.g., in the use of SERS signals for the detection of
cardiovascular diseases) will have a major impact on public health by reducing
the suffering and death of people due to a variety of medical conditions. The
handheld SERS reader can be adapted to other rapid diagnostic tests and many
other diseases can be rapidly diagnosed at less equipped POC facilities with
this technology.