* 0956779
* Mossbauer studies of iron containing enzyme active sites and model complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Codrina Popescu, Ursinus College
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2014
* USD 165,000.00

This award in the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program, co-funded with the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB), supports work by Professor
Codrina V. Popescu at Ursinus College, an undergraduate liberal arts
institution. The proposed Mössbauer investigations include studies of iron
complexes and the exploration of novel iron sites in proteins. Mössbauer
spectroscopy provides insight into the electronic structure and bonding
situation of iron compounds by probing the iron nucleus.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Iron is the most abundant transition metal found in biological
systems, being involved in a variety of physiological processes carried out by
enzymes and transport proteins. Thus, to understand biological processes at a
molecular level, one must elucidate the electronic structure of iron
coordination complexes. The study of metalloproteins has seen a great
development due to the enticing prospect of using design elements inspired by
Nature in manmade catalysts for cleaning out pollutants through catalytic
oxidation, or cheaply obtaining hydrogen to be used as a fuel. This fundamental
research seeks to accomplish two types of results. First, large families of iron
compounds could be systematically characterized, a broad study useful in
establishing correlations between structural and spectroscopic changes in these
molecules. A second, more challenging endeavor, is the resolution of
spectroscopic problems by analyzing a set of spectra for a single compound under
carefully chosen conditions. A picture of the electronic structure of a given
compound can then be generated from the spectral parameters.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goals of this research are the elucidation of structure
and mechanism of hydrogenases and certain oxygenases, which have direct
applications in fuel and pollution control technologies. For example, the
enzymes hydrogenases catalyze the production and breakdown of molecular
hydrogen. If understood well, these enzymes may offer a cheaper, non-polluting
way, to obtain hydrogen fuel. This type of research has a significant impact in
the chemical and biological sciences, given that it provides answers to
fundamental structural questions, such as structure and bonding, and uncovers
their profound implications on the function of the active sites in
question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the proposed
research supports a close mentor-student relationship, in which students are
part of the scientific pursuit from hypothesis generation to interpretation of
results. The expected impacts on undergraduate training and education include:
(1) to develop and maintain an undergraduate research program that fosters
student growth and independence through cultivation of logic and problem-solving
skills; (2) to provide students with interdisciplinary projects that promote
learning spectroscopy hands-on while solving current scientific problems; (3) to
provide the resources for external presentations and publications.