* 0956022
* CAREER: A Political Ecology Approach to Rural Sanitation in India
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2017
* Kathleen O'Reilly, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2017
* USD 435,944.00

The World Health Organization estimates that 2.4 billion people worldwide are
without access to sanitation. The social cost of poor or inadequate sanitation
is significant. Disease related to poor water, sanitation, and hygiene is the
leading cause of death in children in the developing world and reduces the
quality of life and economic opportunities for millions of adults. Health
concerns do not strongly motivate people in poor countries to build latrines at
home, however. Even when latrines are subsidized and built, people do not use
them. There is a critical need to identify and understand the reasons people
decide not to build or use latrines, and by contrast, the factors that lead to
latrine use and maintenance. This CAREER award will support research that aims
to identify the international policies, socioeconomic factors, and environmental
conditions that influence the building and use of latrines in rural India, where
an estimated 360 million people live without access to toilets. Sanitation
projects directly depend on land and water resources. The investigator will
collect data on environmental conditions (e.g., access to open land or running
water) that support existing practices and their locations. The research project
will explore latrine use and non-use as complicated by social and spatial norms.
The investigator will use an iterative, mixed-method approach, including the use
of quantitative methods to link socioeconomic and geographic factors with
latrine building at the national scale. These analyses will inform the selection
of four separate sites in rural Indian villages where interviews will be
conducted with residents and community leaders. Systematic analysis of extensive
ethnographic data will seek to explain the complex factors influencing the
uneven distribution and use of latrines at village and household scales.

This research will generate fundamental insights regarding the factors that
influence the use of different forms of sanitation by residents in developing
regions. Through a multi-scalar exploration of the everyday practices of people,
this project will advance knowledge about household-scale adoption or rejection
of sanitation interventions. As such, the project may help provide practical
solutions to the global sanitation crisis by determining the socio-economic,
environmental, and geographic factors that influence the willingness and ability
of communities to use latrines. The project also will provide valuable education
and training opportunities for students in the U.S. and India, and it will
provide information for public health educational activities in the study areas
and elsewhere.