* 0956356
* CISE-IIS: Creating a Knowledge Foundation for Citizen Services Research Programs in Government
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Anthony Cresswell, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2011
* USD 114,781.00

Both the need and the opportunities for governments to understand and respond to
citizens expectations have grown enormously. Technical innovation and social
forces are creating a kind of perfect storm of new data for government agencies
to cope with, coming from a convergence of rapidly expanding web-based service
delivery, exploding capability of social media and mobile devices for network-
based citizen feedback, and policy initiatives promoting greater use of network-
based applications and infrastructure to promote transparency and citizen
engagement. Government agencies are thus challenged with gathering, integrating,
and interpreting rapidly growing, diverse data flows both to and from citizens
across the knowledge life cycle, and using the results to improve performance.

It is not clear what computational, analytical, and organizational capabilities
agencies will need to cope with this expanding scale of citizen engagement, or
what theory and research methods are most appropriate to understand the
information received. The complexity of shifting interactions among technical
and social developments requires understanding and strategies somewhat beyond
our existing knowledge base. Service providers will need improved computational
and analytical skills, strategies, and assessment methods, in short a new set of
integrated computational and organizational capabilities. Researchers will need
new frameworks to guide inquiry.

The purpose of this project is therefore to build out the knowledge base
available to government agencies and researchers. This will be done by
assembling and reviewing existing research and best practices, building a
research agenda for future work, and developing methods to enhance agency
capabilities to conduct citizen research programs. The research team will
collaborate with a Federal agency (General Services Administration - Office of
Citizen Services) to identify the goals and capability issues from the agency
perspective, and to develop the research agenda for building agency
capabilities. This includes conducting pilot-type scale research with OSC to
build capacity and test methods.

Intellectual Merit This research addresses a critical problem that extend across
information systems and organizational studies: How to gather, integrate, and
interpret complex, dynamic data flows in ways that lead to enhanced
organizational capabilities and improved performance. Theory that treats
organizational capability and performance improvement recognizes the importance
of information, but does not deal adequately with the capability or design of
systems supplying the information. The wide range of technical challenges to
integrating information across diverse sources are well recognized but the path
to interoperable and adaptive systems remains largely unmapped. The research in
these areas crosses organizational studies, computer and information science,
and public administration.

Broader Impact Government agencies face an information environment that is vital
to the success of their programs and at the same time challenges their capacity
to cope with the volume and diversity of flows. They are expected to provide
ever greater information to the public and at the same time seek and respond to
ever greater levels of public engagement and feedback. There is a real prospect
of rapidly growing public demand for both engagement and access, spurred by
improved communication capability and stimulated by more responsive agency
behavior. New information system strategies are needed to cope with such
increases in scale and complexity. This research will respond to this need by
treating the information systems themselves as integrated organizational and
computational entities. This approach will provide an enhanced knowledge base
for developing these improved systems as well as the capabilities for
information gathering and integration strategies in the organizations
themselves.