* 0956801
* STTR Phase II:  Lower Extremity Exoskeleton Assist Device for Reducing the Risk of Back Injuries among Workers
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2010,07/31/2012
* Homayoon Kazerooni, Ekso Bionics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project proposes will
study the technology barriers associated with creating exoskeleton assist
devices for workers in distribution centers and automobile assembly plants. By
using these devices, workers can dramatically reduce the load in
the&lt;br/&gt;vertebrae of the lower back when maneuvering parts and boxes. The
assist device will take the majority of the load off of the user?s body. Such
collaboration between humans and machines has the benefit of the intellectual
advantage of humans coupled with the strength advantage of machines. The
proposed project involves the University of California at Berkeley as research
partner, General Motors Corporation, and the U.S. Postal Service. The end goal
is a reduction in back injuries in the workplace which are considered by OSHA
the nation?s number one workplace safety problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research are reduced worker?s compensation insurance
costs, reduced disability payments, increased worker productivity, and the
ability for workers to keep working into their older years. Furthermore, these
new devices will open an entirely new market which will serve an important role
in establishing the United States as the number one player in the emerging field
of bionics. Additionally, establishing this market for exoskeletons will enable
the development of other exoskeleton markets which include military exoskeletons
for carrying backpack and body armor loads, rescue worker exoskeletons, stair
climbing exoskeletons for urban firefighters, and wild-land firefighter
exoskeletons. The potential impacts to worker safety and American quality of
life are large and diverse.