* 0956234
* Rehousing and Reorganizing Mammals of the Oklahoma State University Collection of Vertebrates
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Karen McBee, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 12/31/2012
* USD 163,303.00

This project will fund replacement of damaged and deteriorated cabinets for
mammals in the Oklahoma State University Collection of Vertebrates (OSU COV).
Purchase of new cabinets will allow the PI to move more than 13,250 specimens of
mammals, representing 26 of 29 extant orders, into a single location. Specimens
have heretofore been stored in three different locations in six different
designs of cabinets, ranging from modern steel cases to secretarial supply
cabinets and cabinets hand made by Curator Emeritus Bryan P. Glass and his
students during 1940-1950s. Not only have specimens been inadequately protected,
but the diversity of cabinet designs and dimensions results in inefficient use
of newly renovated space allocated to COV in 2009. New cabinets will alleviate
currently poor storage conditions, improve use of newly renovated space, and
allow thoughtful and steady expansion for research and teaching. Osteological
material will be housed in dust-free cabinets, and fragile tanned hides will be
moved into custom cabinets similar to those for large, fragile textiles. This
project also facilitates reorganization of specimens to reflect current
taxonomy. The resulting improvements in storage conditions and organization will
facilitate collaborations with Art Department programs at OSU, increase
accessibility to the public of northern Oklahoma, and enhance collaboration with
K-12 programs in the Colleges of Engineering, Architecture, and Technology and
Education. The PI will offer a multidisciplinary course in curatorial practices
supported by this award. In addition to students enrolled in the course, the
project will provide direct support to one doctoral and three undergraduate
students and will supplement existing practicum experiences for approximately
five undergraduates per semester.