* 0957568
* Philosophical Implications of the GRW Theory of Wave Function Collapse
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Roderich Tumulka, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 175,404.00

This is a research project in the foundations of quantum mechanics that focuses
on the concept of spontaneous collapse of the wave function, and more
specifically on a specific theory that characterizes the collapse that was first
put forward by Ghirardi, Rimini, and Weber (GRW) in 1986. Although Quantum
mechanics underlies most of modern physics, it is beset with foundational
problems; it is very successful in predicting observable phenomena, ye it does
not actually say what kind of microscopic events and mechanisms lead to these
phenomena. Theories that attempt to complement quantum mechanics and close this
gap are called "quantum theories without observers." They do so by replacing
Schroedinger's equation by a stochastic time-evolution law for the wave function
that implements the concept of collapse of the wave function in a precise way;
more to the point, it also implies that macroscopic superpositions such as
Schroedinger's cat quickly decay, while the Schroedinger equation remains an
excellent approximation for any system comprising only a small number of
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an investigation into
philosophical aspects of the GRW theory. The first goal, on which the PI and a
graduate student will work together, is to mathematically prove statements like
the following: It is impossible for inhabitants of a GRW universe to measure the
number of collapses that occur in a given system in a given time interval,
although, according to the GRW theory, this is a well-defined number. More
generally, the statements studied describe limitations to what inhabitants can
know about their world. The researchers in this project do epistemology by means
of mathematical proofs. Another goal, on which the PI will work with
collaborators from physics and philosophy, is to explore and explain the
philosophical framework of the GRW theory, in particular in the light of a
recent technical development in which the PI was involved: the derivation of an
operator formalism, analogous but not identical to the operator formalism of
quantum mechanics, encoding the empirical predictions of the GRW theory
including small deviations from standard quantum mechanics. The topics to be
discussed include the need for a precise ontology in space and time (such as the
flash ontology) and the idealizations involved in both operator
formalisms.&lt;br/&gt;