* 0957102
* Simulation and Theory of Solid-Liquid Interfaces and Grain Boundaries
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Brian Laird, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 02/28/2014
* USD 435,000.00

Brian Laird of the University of Kansas is supported by an award from the
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program. The project focuses on
understanding the role that atomic and molecular interactions play in shaping
thermodynamic and kinetic properties of solid-liquid and solid-solid interfaces.
This effort requires development, evaluation and application of new
computational methods. The proposed methodology is a mixture of fundamental
studies of interfaces using model potentials with studies of realistic
materials. Reliable experimental results of interfacial phenomena are
challenging and rare. Thus, atomistic simulation is an important means for
determining the thermodynamic phenomenology of such processes.

The thermodynamics and growth kinetics of interfaces in condensed matter systems
are primarily controlled by two quantities: the interfacial free energy and the
kinetic coefficient. The interfacial free energy between two coexisting phases
is the amount of work required to reversibly form a unit area of interface. The
kinetic coefficient is the constant of proportionality between the growth
velocity of an advancing interface and the undercooling drop in temperature.
Accurate values of both are necessary for the full understanding of phenomena
such as dendritic crystal growth, crystal nucleation, wetting, liquid-metal
embrittlement, and others. Specific tasks that will be addressed are: (i) new
method to quantify the dependence of the interfacial free energy on atomic and
molecular interactions, (ii) direct method development to calculate grain
boundary free energies, (iii) method adaptation to study the interface
thermodynamics and structure of chemically heterogeneous solid-liquid
interfaces; (iv) method for detecting the dependence of the kinetic coefficient
on intermolecular forces, and (v) method to calculate the interfacial free
energy of molecular systems, including binary mixtures.

Broader impacts include continued participation in a cooperative research team
on Dynamics and Cohesion of Materials Interfaces encompassing semiannual
collaborative meetings between materials scientists, chemists and physicists.
Efforts for training of students in the techniques of computational chemistry,
programming and modeling will be undertaken within the Chemistry NSF-funded REU
program at Kansas University, which has a strong history of participation by
underrepresented groups.