* 0957820
* Automata in Science
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Elly Truitt, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 06/30/2012
* USD 146,158.00

Automata-artificial objects that are, or appear to be, self-moving-were
culturally significant in medieval Europe. They appear as diplomatic gifts from
distant rulers to European courts; in stories and legends and chronicles of
distant lands and times; as manifestations of esoteric and sometimes forbidden
knowledge; in courtly settings of great luxury; attached to monumental
clockworks; as examples of technological innovation, and in the service of the
Church. This research project examines the presence of automata in visual,
textual, and material form in medieval Europe and, in the course of this
examination, traces the interpenetration of scientific ideas, technological
developments, philosophical theories, and cultural history. By examining
different types of primary sources, including philosophical treatises,
historical chronicles, scientific texts, archival documents, visual
representations of automata, technical drawings, and literary sources, and using
close analysis of textual, visual, and material sources, this study examines the
developments in how automata were created from the twelfth to the fifteenth
centuries, and how these shifts relate to developments in medieval natural
philosophy and technology. Additionally, a particular theme of this project is
how automata, and the knowledge needed to create them, were initially believed
to be from the Arabic-speaking world, and were thus viewed with mistrust,
suspicion, and fear, as well as desire and wonder. Over time, however, automata
were decoupled from these origins, and took on new significance. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will make significant intellectual contributions to
several different fields. By revealing that automata were central to western
medieval society, it will contribute to histories of science and technology as
well as establish the importance of science and technology in medieval history.
The project will also have a broader impact on scholars and scientists who work
on robots, artificial life, and artificial intelligence. This project will place
these scholars' interests and research on contemporary science into historical
context, showing that current ideas about artificial, self-moving objects and
the categories used to organize them have an intellectual, cultural, and
scientific history that has been largely invisible. Lastly, this research will
compellingly demonstrate that ideas often assumed to be novel developments of
early modern natural philosophy are in fact rooted in medieval philosophy,
scientific culture, and technological developments.