* 0957191
* Incorporating MM Quadruple Bonds (M = Mo, W) into Organic Conjugated Pi-Systems.  Fundamental Studies and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Malcolm Chisholm, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2014
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports the work of
Professor Malcolm H. Chisholm of The Ohio State University for the investigation
of metal-metal (where metal, M, is molybdenum or tungsten) quadruplly-bonded
compounds. Particular emphasis is given to alpha-alpha'-linked thienyl units
attached to the M2 center by carboxylate, thiocarboxylate or amidinate groups.
The chemical synthesis and fundamental physico-chemical studies contribute to
the "intelligent design" of metallated organic polymers that enhance device
characteristics of organic photovoltaics, OPV, by spectral expansion. The
electronic coupling of the M2 quadruply bonded centers is modified by
controlling the distance between the two metal atoms, their orbital energy
matching, conformation and/or chemical charge. These molecular systems can be
viewed as molecular rheostats and rectifiers as they act as signals and switches
to report on their environments and redox states. The electronic spectra of the
complexes are studied by ultra-fast spectroscopy (femtosecond- and nanosecond-
transient absorption, IR and Raman) to examine the charge delocalization as a
function of time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sunlight is one of the few renewable
energy sources available on a large enough scale to address the world's long-
term energy needs. This research examines new chemical structures that are
capable of capturing sunlight for further conversion into electrical energy. In
collaboration with Professors Epstein in Physics and Berger in Electrical
Engineering, the Chisholm group examines the use of the MM quadruply bonded
complexes as light "harvesters" for solar cells and light emitting devices
(LEDs). These metal complexes are modified and optimized to absorb large
portions of the available solar light and to transfer this light into forms of
energy that can be transported or stored. Undergraduate and graduate students
interact with groups in physics, electrical engineering and material science.
This multidisciplinary program provides an outstanding educational background
for careers in science, particularly in the development of alternative energy
technologies. Particularly noteworthy is the connection with the Ohio
Photovoltaic Initiative for Commercialization which provides students with
opportunities for internships and future employment as well as providing a ready
platform for the commercialization of devices that arise from these fundamental
laboratory studies.