* 0957317
* Development and Application of Multicentered Integrated Methods for Weakly-Bound Non-Covalent Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Gregory Tschumper, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2014
* USD 363,173.00

Gregory Tschumper of the University of Mississippi has received an award from
the Theory, Models and Computational Methods. The project focuses on high
accuracy electronic structure characterization of molecular clusters held
together by weak non-covalent interactions such as hydrogen bonding and
dispersion interactions. Non-covalent clusters have significance in almost every
area of the physical and biological sciences, playing key roles in everything
from solvation to the physical, chemical, and electronic properties of materials
in the solid phase.

The project has two goals: (1) Development and implementation of multi-centered
(MC) integrated electronic structure methods (e.g., MO:MO, QM:QM, QM:MM and
ONIOM) for the evaluation of molecular properties such as dipole moments,
harmonic vibrational frequencies, NMR shielding constants among others; and (2)
Application of the methodology for studying chemical physics of water clusters
and micro-solvation phenomena. Of particular interest are the electronic and
vibrational structure of water clusters at the crossover from 2D to 3D hydrogen
bonding networks, the blue-shifted vibrational frequencies of azabenzenes in the
condensed phase, and the relationship between the energy of complexation and
solvent polarity for aromatic Â¼-type interactions between "electron rich"
1,5-dialkoxynaphthalenes and "electron deficient"
1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylicdiimides.Broader impact activities include a
continued effort to mentor female and underrepresented students at the
undergraduate and graduate level. Software developed during the project is made
freely available. In addition, the large body of benchmark data generated as a
by-product during the calibration of the MC integrated technique is collected,
organized and distributed in a public and accessible database.