* 0957834
* New York University Structural DNA Nanotechnology Facility
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Nadrian Seeman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,663,215.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit. Structural DNA nanotechnology - the use of synthetic DNA
molecules to develop branched motifs that can be assembled into objects,
lattices and devices using the information inherent in the DNA molecule - is a
rapidly expanding research enterprise that was pioneered at New York University
(NYU) by Professor Nadrian Seeman, a co-PI and Director of the NYU Structural
DNA Nanotechnology Facility. This work has blossomed into an internationally
recognized research discipline, but the existing conditions of the NYU facility,
which was renovated more than 20 years ago, threaten to slow advances in the
field. This infrastructure project will enable NYU to correct experimental
limitations and poor working conditions in the existing facility, which include
damaged walls, uprooted floor tiles, corroded casework, inoperable hoods, poor
student workspace, poor crystal preparation and characterization space,
inadequate Ethernet capabilities, and outdated molecular graphics and data
analysis facilities. Moreover, advances in computation and instrumentation have
rendered many infrastructure features of the facility obsolete. The proposed
project will address these constraints by creating a 710 square foot data
analysis room, with an adjoining 295 square foot computer graphics room;
refurbishing two shared wet laboratories, totaling 1065 square feet; creating a
325 square foot crystal preparation and characterization room, reconfigured for
improving crystal growth capability, atomic force microscopy and sample
handling; and replacing an outdated cold room with a 120 square foot
environmental chamber. The renovation will substantially improve shared space
utilization, laboratory practices, cyberinfrastructure, data handling, DNA
nanostructure design and characterization, integrity and reproducibility of
experimental work, safety, data security, and laboratory security.

Broader Impacts. Structural DNA nanotechnology was innovated and established in
the site of this infrastructure renovation project, and during the past decade
this field has grown from this single laboratory to nearly 50 laboratories
worldwide today. The existing facility supports the research of the faculty,
postdoctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate students, and external
collaborators on a continual basis. Moreover, as the founding site of structural
DNA nanotechnology, the NYU facility has become a nexus for training many
visitors on a continual basis. These individuals hail from U.S. institutions as
well as institutions worldwide (e.g., Italy, Germany, South Korea, Japan, and
Australia), all interested in learning structural DNA nanotechnology
fundamentals. The facility trains at least three high school students each year,
and many of the high school students have won awards based on their work. The
renovation of the laboratory will permit continuation and expansion of these
training activities and collaborations, which are essential to the continued
growth of the structural DNA nanotechnology field. The renovation of the
Structural DNA Nanotechnology Facility will permit its investigators to
accelerate their research efforts, employing DNA nanostructures to direct the
assembly of nanoparticles, inorganic nanotubes, and nanoelectronic/nanophotonic
components into precise 3D arrangements. The investigators will incorporate DNA-
based nanomechanical devices into 3D crystals and use molecular cavities in
these crystals as host sites for biological species, which can facilitate
structure determination of biomolecules as well as their organization into
multi-enzyme species. The renovated facility will provide a modernized
laboratory environment for training all levels of investigators in DNA design
and synthesis, crystallization and crystal preparation, characterization, and
data refinement and visualization.