* 0957185
* A Biophysical Analysis of C. Elegans Thermotactic Behavior in Diverse Environments
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Aravinthan D Samuel, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2014
* USD 430,200.00

In this project the PI will develop new techniques to study worm thermotactic
behavior in different types of environments with an approach that draws on
technological innovation in both physics and biology. At the level of behavior,
the PI will develop new assays to track the thermotactic movements of individual
animals at high resolution for extended periods of time in two and three
dimensions and at the level of neural circuits, the PI will develop an assay for
optical recording of the activity of multiple neurons within the intact nervous
system. The research program will provide a comprehensive and rigorous
understanding of how a worm performs thermotaxis in different environments where
it might have to swim, crawl, or burrow towards its preferred temperature. A
better understanding of different modes of thermotactic behavior, along with
improved methods for manipulating and monitoring neural activity, will provide
new insights into how neural circuits give rise to sensory perception,
information processing, and motor control during animal navigation. In addition
the research program will promote training in the natural sciences through the
awarding of undergraduate and graduate research assistantships. It will promote
scientific education by integrating aspects of the program into course curricula
at Harvard University that is aimed at introducing undergraduate and graduate
students to current problems in biophysics and neuroscience. Outreach programs
will provide summer internships in neuroscience research to high school students
from a small rural community, and to undergraduates at historically black
colleges and universities.