* 0957024
* Collaborative Research: Advanced Methodology for Calculation of Pairwise Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Jianlin Xia, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2013
* USD 162,160.00

Robert Skeel of Purdue University and Klaus Schulten from University of Illinois
Urbana-Champain have received a collaborative award from the Theory, Models and
Computational Methods. The project focuses on the creation, analysis, and
implementation of methods of broad applicability for calculating pairwise
interatomic interactions in atomistic computer simulations with applications in
chemistry, physics, and materials science.

Atomistic simulations of macromolecules, biomolecules, nano-systems, and
condensed phases of atomic or molecular systems require vast amounts of computer
time. Typically, the bulk of this time is spent on calculating pairwise
interactions between particles. The calculation of pairwise interactions is done
either directly or with standard tools like the fast multipole method or the
particle-mesh Ewald sums. This proposal will investigate the advantages of a
less well known O(N) algorithm, the multilevel summation method (MSM). This
algorithm has the potential of becoming very useful for approaches such as
molecular dynamics. The project will explore creative implementations involving
mathematical techniques for improving the software and exploring implementation
in emerging hardware like GPUs. It is the objective of the proposal to study the
efficiency and scalability of MSM as applied to several interdisciplinary
molecular dynamics problems, to analyze the implication of approximations both
theoretically and experimentally, and to implement and disseminate the results.

The project provides an opportunity for graduate students to engage in high-
impact interdisciplinary research. Open source implementations of the algorithms
as libraries of modules will be made available. The software modules will also
be embedded in simulation software such as NAMD. Molecular dynamics has
applications beyond chemistry, and N-body solvers have applications outside of
molecular dynamics. Better methods and software in the hands of scientists will
enable chemical and biomolecular simulations of much larger systems with
improved accuracy, and this will result in benefits to society. The impact will
be broad.