* 0957935
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Single Particle Soot Photometer (SP2) for Analyses of Black Carbon in the Environment
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Carey Gazis, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/29/2012
* USD 187,413.00

Kaspari 0957935

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This MRI-R2 award will fund the purchase of a particle soot photometer (SP2) for
black carbon analysis. The SP2 system allows measuring mass, mixing state, and
optical size of black carbon particles. It does so with lower detection limits
and less sample alteration than traditional thermal-optical methods. Gaseous
samples can be introduced directly while liquid samples (ice core sections, for
example) are nebulized before introduction. Black carbon is produced from
incomplete combustion and derives from biomass, coal and fossil-fuel burning. It
absorbs light in the atmosphere and leads to increased temperature. In ice or
snow, black carbon can reduce surface albedo leading to increased melting. It is
thought to play a major role in global warming. Black carbon will be analyzed in
ice cores to provide proxy data for paleoclimatological reconstructions. The SP2
system will be critical to obtaining high-resolution measurements on very small
sample quantities. Sampling will focus on several regional systems including the
Himalayas, the North Cascades, Greenland, Antarctica and other North American
sites. Black carbon impacts on snow and ice albedo will be determined and the
impact on climate forcing assessed. These data will be placed into context with
other measures of snowmelt and climate gradients. The analyzer will also be used
to better understand anthropogenic and natural aerosols. Research conducted with
the new instrument will, at its core, have tremendous societal relevance as
black carbon and its associated heat forcing may account for a considerable
portion of the uncertainty in estimating global climate change. The SP2 will be
incorporated into 2 graduate and 4 undergraduate courses at CWU. University
science programs are established which target underrepresented groups. The
instrument will be housed in newly renovated laboratory space. The adjacent
spaces house clean laboratories and ice core processing facilities. The PI will
be responsible for instrument purchase, installation, maintenance, calibration
and training. The PI has managed this instrumentation as a post-doc. Two full-
time engineering technicians are available through the department. Consumables
will be purchased through research grants and laboratory fees charged to outside
users.

***