* 0957313
* Charge Transfer Processes at Electrochemical Nanointerfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Michael Mirkin, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2014
* USD 320,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Michael Mirkin and his research
team at the City University of New York, Queens College will utilize
nanoelectrode and nanopipet technologies developed in the Mirkin laboratory to
explore the dynamics of charge transfers in thin layer cells and at the
interface of two immiscible liquids. These studies are focused on interfacial
charge transfer in situations where the system dimensions are smaller than or
comparable to the thickness of the electrical double layer?a largely unexplored
area of dynamics at interfaces. The research project will also involve the
development of nanoelectrode based methods for the characterization of reactive
oxygen and nitrogen species generated within living cells. The aforementioned
projects will be done in collaboration with US and international scientists
(Prof. Shigeru Amemiya at the University of Pittsburgh and Prof. Christian
Amatore at the Ecole Normale Superieure, France). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is directly relevant to various areas of science and
engineering beyond the field of chemistry?from nanoscience and molecular
electronics to alternative energy systems and life sciences. The studies of
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species in activated macrophages can lead to
advances in immunology and contribute to the prevention/treatment of metabolic
diseases related to oxidative stress. The graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows involved in this project will get multidisciplinary research experience
in interfacial electrochemistry, bioanalytical chemistry and nanoscience. They
will benefit from extensive national and international collaborations. The
results of this research will be broadly disseminated through publications and
professional presentations. The requested funds with enable the PI to contribute
to ongoing CUNY efforts to recruit underrepresented minority STEM students and
participate in its diversity initiatives.