* 0957099
* ChemMine Tools: an Open Source Framework for Chemical Genomics
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2015
* Thomas Girke, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2015
* USD 601,032.00

The University of California, Riverside is awarded a grant to develop
ChemMineTools, an environment to efficiently analyze and model large sets of
small molecules along with their bioactivity data. It will provide unrestricted
access to a scalable set of open source tools that integrates novel and existing
algorithm. To maximize its utility spectrum for experimental and computational
scientists, the analysis modules will be available from the powerful R
environment, as well as an intuitive-to-use web interface. The specific
objectives of this project are: (1) The development and implementation of
accelerated compound search and clustering algorithms that scale to today's
large databases with millions entries. This will focus on the expansion of the
ultrafast EI-Search and EI-Clustering algorithms by embedding and indexing (EI).
These multipurpose algorithms will be adopted to advanced similarity measures
that can currently not be used for processing large databases due their
insufficient speed performance. (2) The R package ChemMine R Tools will be
developed. It will offer access to advanced clustering, machine learning and
visualization functionalities along with interactive visualization tools. (3)
User-friendly access to all analysis and visualization tools will be provided by
the ChemMine Web Tools interface. (4) An educational outreach program will be
offered to provide extensive training opportunities and to integrate
underrepresented groups into this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating
novel and existing analysis routines in an efficient data mining environment,
the project will disseminate and transform multidisciplinary concepts of
powerful chemical approaches in modern biology. Moreover, it will encourage
young scientists to incorporate cheminformatics strategies into their daily
research. Substantial educational resources for interdisciplinary training at
the intersect of computational biology and cheminformatics will be provided by
this project. Workshops will be offered to scientists, postdoctoral researchers,
graduate, undergraduate, high school and other K-12 students. Members of
underrepresented groups will participate in all aspects of this project.
Extensive online workshop and software manuals will be provided to maximize the
educational outreach of the activities. Further information about this project
may be found at its website: http://cmtools.ucr.edu.