* 0957033
* Doctoral Dissertation Research;  A New Reward System for Academic Science.
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2010
* Joseph Hermanowicz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

David R. Johnson University of Georgia

ABSTRACT: A NEW REWARD SYSTEM IN ACADEMIC SCIENCE?

This study addresses the following question: How does a commercially-oriented
reward system operate in academic science? Since 1980, the erosion of boundaries
between universities and industry has resulted in acceleration in the
commercialization of scientific discoveries in the form of patents and companies
generated by scientists in the academy. Whereas peer recognition of priority in
discovery has traditionally been considered the chief reward for role
performance, the ability to commercially-exploit scientific discovery has
enabled financial rewards to play an equal and perhaps more powerful role as
recognition in the system of rewards in academic science. Because
commercialization is predicated on the privatization of knowledge and market-
based evaluations of work, new norms of science have also likely emerged that
may contradict traditional practices of community-shared, peer-evaluated
contributions. Consequently, scientists in academe are exposed to different
conceptions of the scientific role, occupational norms, and rewards for
scientific conduct. To address this question, sixty interviews with academic
scientists will be conducted at four universities. The study employs a
theoretical sampling strategy that compares commercially-oriented scientists and
non-commercial scientists at public and private universities, evenly divided
between scientists who received their PhDs before and after the onset of
commercialized academic science. Data will be analyzed to explain contemporary
conceptions of the scientific role, motivations to commercialize science, the
character of scientific norms, and the operation of the scientific reward system
and its consequences. This research builds on existing analyses of the
commercialization of academic science by examining the meanings scientists
assign, and their motivations to engage in, commercial practices. Moreover,
through inclusion of scientists who reject commercialization, it questions
assumptions that commercialization is widely accepted or that traditional
scientific norms are inoperative. Finally, the study will provide an account of
the stability of the academic profession and attributes of universities that
constrain and enable scientific achievement.