* 0957163
* Animal Research and Alternatives: Measuring Progress 50 Years Later: Workshop at George Washington University in Washington, DC on September 23-24, 2010.
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Hope Ferdowsian, The Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 02/28/2011
* USD 24,959.00

Currently, an estimated 100 million animals are used in research each year. This
year marks the 50th anniversary of the development of the key model for
protection of animals in research, often referred to as the "3 Rs". These
standards, first published in the book The Principles of Humane Experimental
Technique by William Russell and Rex Burch, ask researchers to reduce the number
of animals used, refine or limit pain and distress to which animals will be
exposed, and replace the use of animals with non-animal alternatives when
possible or use a species considered less capable of pain and distress. The past
five decades have been marked by tremendous progress in scientific understanding
of animals' cognitive functions, as well as in technologies that replace animals
in research. Difficult questions have been raised about the adequacy of relevant
ethical and welfare guidelines, the effectiveness of some animal models in
predicting human outcomes, and the availability of non-animal research methods.
Accordingly, the Georgetown University Kennedy Institute of Ethics, the Johns
Hopkins University Center for Alternatives to Animal Testing, the Institute for
In Vitro Sciences, The George Washington University, and the Physicians
Committee for Responsible Medicine will jointly sponsor a two day multi-
disciplinary conference to advance the study of the ethical and scientific
issues surrounding the use of animals in research. Speakers and participants
will examine the adequacy of current protections and the promise and challenges
of developing effective alternatives to the use of animals. The conference will
bring together a diverse group of established and early-career scientists,
researchers, medical professionals, academic and applied ethicists, and
students.