* 0957784
* Combining Imaging Mass Spectrometry and Capillary Electrophoresis to Decipher Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System in Response to Environmental Stress
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Lingjun Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 04/30/2014
* USD 450,000.00

With this award from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the
Chemistry Division, Professor Lingjun Li at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
seeks to develop sensitive and versatile approaches to assessing the
neurochemical response to environmental stress. Probes include mass
spectrometric imaging and capillary electrophoresis, with novel tagging reagents
and improved bioinformatics software.

The tools will have broad applicability to analysis of biochemical and
peptidergic signaling in nervous systems. Insights gained should lead to better
understanding of the neuroendocrine regulatory mechanisms involved in adapting
to environmental stress, a process that is highly conserved among all living
organisms to maintain their survival in the face of both externally and
internally generated stimuli. In simple terms, the long-term aim is better
understanding of the detailed functioning of nervous systems. The tools will be
promulgated rapidly to the neuroscience community through long-term and active
collaborations with biologists in the field. Collaboration with industrial
partners will also facilitate both improvement and promulgation of the CE-MS
interface design. A large group of graduate and undergraduate students with
diverse background (including many women scientists) is actively engaged. A
partnership with the Madison Metropolitan School District (MMSD) provides
opportunities to host and mentor high school students during summer research
internships.