* 0957891
* The Sciences of Ice and the West Antarctica Problem: Geophysics, Glaciology, and Geology, 1945-present
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2011
* Gerald Thomas, American Institute of Physics
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 08/31/2011
* USD 0.00

The Sciences of Ice and the West Antarctica Problem: Geophysics, Glaciology, and
Geology, 1945-present

William Thomas American Institute of Physics, Center for History of Physics
College Park, Maryland

Abstract

This project examines the history of research on the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
(WAIS), placing it in the context of other contemporary research in the fields
of geophysics, glaciology, and geology in Antarctica and elsewhere. Since the
1970s, WAIS has been of special scientific interest because the fact that it
rests on bedrock below sea level suggests the possibility that WAIS could be
inherently vulnerable to disintegration on a time scale of centuries. This would
lead to rises in sea level of approximately five meters. This possibility was
initially raised because it was thought that WAIS disintegration might play a
role in the planet's long-term climate cycles. Since about 1980, it has been
feared that accelerated climate change due to human activity might trigger or
hasten such a disintegration. On this basis, the question of WAIS disintegration
has motivated the construction of special research programs (funded largely by
the National Science Foundation), the holding of workshops and conferences
dedicated to the subject, and the integration of WAIS research into climate
change assessments, such as those conducted by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC).

The proposal of the possibility of rapid WAIS disintegration, and the
subsequent investigation of its likelihood and timescale, have involved the
integration of disparate traditions of scientific research, including the
geological reconstruction of the Earth's climate history, the suggestion of
mechanisms governing that history, the field investigation of ice behavior, and
the construction of mathematical and computer-simulated models of ice behavior,
all of which have also been integrated with broader research programs dedicated
to the study of planet-wide climate change. This project will study the ways
these lines of scientific research have been integrated, contextualizing each
line as arising from a distinct tradition, and will make results available via
publications and a web resource.