* 0957701
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Versatile Deposition System
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2012
* Weijie Lu, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 01/31/2012
* USD 304,583.00

0957701&lt;br/&gt;Rosenthal&lt;br/&gt;Vanderbilt
U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for the acquisition of a deposition tool
that has the capability to sequentially evaporate high quality, defect-free
organic, metal, and oxide films without cross-contamination or exposure to air.
An attached spin-coating coating unit (also in inert environment) allows the
integration of nanocrystals and polymers, extending the fabricating capabilities
of the tool. The instrumentation will be used for a broad range of research
projects spanning the disciplines of physics, chemistry, engineering and the
life sciences, all within the central theme of nanoscience. The capabilities of
this deposition cluster tool will enable transformative research initiatives
addressing a large range of forefront nanoscience and nanotechnology challenges,
from nanoscale plasmonics to biological sensing on single cells, and from
efficient solid-state lighting to graphene devices. The deposition tool will
also enhance student learning, as students who grow their own materials and
design/build their own materials structures are forced to engage the science at
a much deeper level than they would if relying on outside sources for samples
made elsewhere. The instrument will be housed and operated by the Vanderbilt
Institute for Nanoscale Science and Engineering and will improve the research
and training of many young scientists including under-represented students
(supported by a NSF IGERT for Fisk (an HBCU) and Vanderbilt) and a diverse group
of professors near the beginning of their careers. In addition to incorporating
the instrumentation into graduate and undergraduate course work, the deposition
system will be a part of three outreach efforts involving summer programs for
high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intrinsic to building any
device is the capability to deposit material. A single deposition might be the
evaporation of aluminum onto graphene to make electrical contact, whereas more
complicated structures might involve evaporating multiple layers of different
organic materials and metals to make a desired device structure, such as a solar
cell or a solid state lighting device. This proposal is for the acquisition of a
versatile materials deposition system that has the capabilities to deposit
organic films, metal films, and metal oxide films. The deposition system is in
an air free environment such that the films do not react with air, and the
different materials are in different chambers in such a fashion that depositing
one film layer does not contaminate another, and such that the films can be
deposited sequentially. The instrumentation will be used for a broad range of
research projects spanning the disciplines of physics, chemistry, engineering
and the life sciences, all within the central theme of
nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;The capabilities of this instrument will enable
transformative research initiatives addressing a large range of forefront
nanoscience and nanotechnology challenges, from nanoscale plasmonics to
biological sensing on single cells, and from efficient solid-state lighting to
graphene devices. The instrument will be housed and operated by the Vanderbilt
Institute for Nanoscale Science and Engineering and will improve the research
and training of many young scientists including under-represented students
(supported by a NSF IGERT for Fisk (an HBCU) and Vanderbilt) and a diverse group
of professors near the beginning of their careers. In addition to incorporating
the instrumentation into graduate and undergraduate course work, the deposition
system will be a part of three outreach efforts involving summer programs for
high school students. Many of the proposed research efforts utilizing the
deposition system pertain to energy, including the creation of new types of
solar cells, bio-fuel cells, and energy conserving solid state lighting.
Progress in these areas would benefit society by creating renewable energy,
reducing demand on current power sources, and subsequently reducing greenhouse
gas emissions.