* 0957914
* Biomechanics Across Scales: A Combined Computational-Theoretical-Experimental Approach
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Ioan Kosztin, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2015
* USD 420,323.00

In this project the PIs will develop, validate and implement a computational-
theoretical-experimental framework, referred to as Cellular Particle Dynamics
(CPD), to quantitatively relate biomechanical properties at the cell level to
those at the multicellular and tissue level. Within this formalism a cell,
considered as a continuum material object with defined volume and adaptive
shape, is coarse-grained into a finite number of equal volume elements. Each
such element is represented by a point-like Cellular Particle (CP) situated at
the center of the volume element. Interactions between the CPs determine their
effective size (same as the size of the volume element they represent), as well
as their dynamical behavior. Cell and multicellular level biomechanical
properties (e.g. viscosities, elastic moduli) will be determined through the
combined use of experiments and the proposed theory of continuum elastic and
viscous media. The same biomechanical properties will also be measured
computationally using the CPD framework, and results expressed in terms of
parameters characterizing CPs and their interactions, the CPD parameters.
Comparison of experiments and simulations will quantitatively relate CPD
parameters to the biomechanical properties of both cells and multicellular
assemblies. Once the CPD parameters have experimentally been calibrated, the
formalism will provide a systematic framework to predict the time evolution of
complex multicellular systems during shape-changing biomechanical
transformations. As an application, the PIs will use the novel framework to
guide ongoing efforts to fabricate tubular, lumen-containing functional organ
structures (contractile vascular grafts). At present no systematic framework
exists to analyze biomechanical processes that involve multiple scales,
resulting from the combination of individual cell behavior and collective cell
rearrangements and this project will fill this gap. Beyond this intellectual
challenge that the proposal will address the project will contribute to the
urgent practical societal need of fabricating functional replacement tissue and
organ modules. The graduate students involved in these activities will be
exposed to multiple scientific disciplines.