* 0957089
* DDIG: Bioethics Byplay?: The Performances of Bioethics in the Private and Public  Sectors
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Jason Robert, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 02/29/2012
* USD 11,249.00

This dissertation compares bioethics committees in the private and public
sectors of the United States to better understand the similarities and
differences between their recommendations and impact on scientific practice.
Although individuals may assume private sector ethics boards are less effective
or strident than public sector ethics committees, there is little empirical
evaluation of this assumption. This project studies the missions, personnel, and
activities of two private sector ethics committees, SmithKline Beecham's Ethics
and Public Policy Board and Advanced Cell Technology's Ethics Advisory Board,
and of two government ethics committees, the National Bioethics Advisory
Commission and the President's Council on Bioethics. The goal is to compare
experiences and tensions across public and private sector bioethics committees
(in terms of mandate, membership, legitimacy, and advice), and the impact (if
any) bioethics committees can have on their particular intended
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating how ethics committees function in
corporate laboratories and government agencies (and the cross-over of ethicists
between the two sectors) will contribute to a broader understanding of how these
boards work in practice. Through literature review, qualitative analysis of
semi-structured interviews, and theory-building, this project will contribute
empirically grounded policy guidance about the constitution and mandate of
future bioethics committees. Moreover, an analysis of ethics boards'
contributions in both the public and private sectors will provide knowledge
about their strengths and weaknesses, thereby potentially aiding organizations
that wish to create more effective ethics advisory committees. In turn, more
effective ethics boards may enhance the societal benefits derived from science
and technology research and development.