* 0957884
* EAGER: An International, Dedicated High-End Collaborative Project to Revolutionize Climate Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* James Kinter, Institute of Global Environment and Society
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2012
* USD 260,850.00

Atmospheric convection must be parameterized in present day global climate
models because available dedicated computational resources have not been
sufficient to run the models at fine enough resolution to simulate convection
explicitly. This project will explore whether dedicated high-end computing
support for ultra high resolution experiments can truly accelerate progress in
the area of climate modeling. The approach will be three-pronged: 1. State-of-
the-art high-resolution numerical weather prediction models will be run on
multi-year timescales to assess the impact of high resolution on systematic
error. Specifically, global numerical weather prediction models will be run at
10-15 km resolution with 20th century forcings and analysis will be performed on
the improved ability to simulate the statistics of weather, including severe
weather, with high resolution. As well as being relevant for the climate change
problem, such integrations will be of importance to numerical weather prediction
centers in guiding their future operational strategies on the need for high
resolution models in monthly and seasonal forecast mode. 2. Time-slice climate
change simulations will be made using available climate models run at strikingly
higher resolution than is typically used. Dedicated computational resources will
be used to run state-of-the-art global models at 10-15 km resolution to produce
simulations for the 20th and the 21st centuries. Analysis of these runs will be
done, focusing on the impact of greenhouse gases on changes in the statistics of
weather, extreme events and the hydrologic cycle, in comparison with identical
runs made at 100-150 km resolution, downscaled to regional scales. 3.
Convection-permitting atmospheric models capable of resolving cloud systems in
the atmosphere (4-8 km grids) and energetic eddies in the ocean (10 km grids)
will be used to evaluate the impact of resolving these processes on simulation
of seasonal climate. In particular, global cloud-system-resolving atmospheric
models will be used in two-tier, regionally-coupled mode to produce a series of
hindcasts to be compared with hindcasts made using conventional resolution
models. The predicted surface fluxes of heat, momentum and fresh water will be
used to drive an eddy-resolving ocean model, to determine if the simulated ocean
climate is significantly different from that simulated using coarser resolution
fluxes.

An international team of experts has formed to contribute models, advice on
experimental design, and effort to run and evaluate the model simulations. The
research has strong potential to be transformative and influence the future
directions of computational geo-fluid-dynamics. The research is exploratory, the
work is in its early stages and untested on the time and spatial scales
consistent with climate process physics and dynamics. It is therefore, high-
risk-high payoff research.

Broader Impact: The international weather and climate modeling community came
together in 2008 at the World Modeling Summit (WMS) to reach a consensus that
the time is ripe to revolutionize the application of numerical models for
prediction of climate through the development of seamless prediction
methodologies which unify the weather and climate forecast problems. The
rationale includes: a. a recognition that the climate models of the current
generation have reached a plateau in their ability to simulate salient features
of Earth's climate, b. a societal demand for reducing the uncertainty in
projections of climate change in the future, c. a complementary demand for
greater spatial discrimination in the climate changes that may be anticipated in
the next 30 years, especially concerning changes in extreme events, and d. a
hypothesis that resolving important processes in the atmosphere and ocean and at
the land surface, as well as interactions among them, as is already the case in
weather prediction models, can dramatically improve the fidelity of the models.