* 0957655
* Zero- and Low-Field NMR with Atomic Magnetometers for Chemical Analysis and Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Dmitry Budker, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 03/31/2013
* USD 590,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, Profs. Alexander
Pines and Dmitry Budker and their groups at the University of California -
Berkeley are developing novel methods in chemical analysis based on nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy of J-coupled systems at zero magnetic-
field, using high sensitivity atomic magnetometers to monitor NMR signals.
J-couplings are an important parameter in high-field NMR spectroscopy yielding
important information about molecular bonding and nuclear spin topology, and are
crucial for determination of molecular structure and function. The advantages of
using atomic magnetometers to detect such couplings at zero magnetic-field are
the high sensitivity of atomic magnetometers to low frequency signals, and the
extremely high absolute magnetic field homogeneity, yielding very narrow
magnetic resonance lines for high resolution. Major goals include optimization
of sensitivity, development of multi-pulse sequences for decoupling and
recoupling specific heteronuclear couplings in zero-field multidimensional
spectroscopy, investigation of parahydrogen-induced polarization for enhancing
signal, and the development of a rudimentary chemical fingerprinting library
based on zero field J-spectra.

NMR is widely used to characterize materials across nearly all branches of the
physical and biological sciences; it is the core of biomedical and other
magnetic resonance imaging applications. This fundamental research is expanding
the capabilities of NMR by developing and employing new approaches to creating
and measuring the associated signals. By advancing the development of sensitive
atomic magnetometers, the work will enable portable, low-field magnetic
resonance imaging sensors with potential application in a wide variety of
fields, ranging from geophysical and space research to medicine to tests of
fundamental symmetries. It is providing training to both undergraduate and
graduate students in multiple disciplines, as well as mentoring for several
postdoctoral researchers.