* 0957758
* Systems Biology: Global Regulation of Gene Expression Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2011
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2011
* USD 7,000.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How cells control the expression of
their genes is a fundamental problem in biology, yet knowledge of how gene
expression is controlled remains sketchy, particularly at the "global" level of
the whole cell or organism. The last several years have seen rapid advances in
the development of new approaches for analysis of each step of gene expression.
Many of these approaches involve a computational component in their design or
interpretation, and it is clear that effective collaborations between
experimental and computational biologists will be required to come to grips with
the complex problem of gene regulation. To encourage free cross-disciplinary
exchange of existing ideas and expertise, the meeting "Systems Biology: Global
regulation of gene expression" will be held at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on
March 23-27, 2010. The meeting aims to provide a mechanism for the establishment
of new collaborations, and a forum for discussing new experimental and
computational approaches. Twenty-two speakers of international renown have been
invited to give oral presentations, and approximately forty-five others will be
selected from submitted abstracts from applicants to the meeting. This is a
unique feature of Cold Spring Harbor meetings, and ensures that the scientific
exchange is largely about unpublished results. Poster sessions will be included
to encourage meaningful participation by the non-speaking attendees. In
addition, pre-meeting workshops will be held to familiarize molecular biologists
and bioinformaticians with the key concepts, terminology, and acronyms needed to
understand each others' disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Past meetings have attracted a large number of
female scientists, students, postdoctoral fellows and early-career
investigators, and the current meeting promises to be no exception. One of the
two keynote speakers, 25% of the remaining invited speakers, and two of the four
meeting organizers are women, and funds provided by NSF will be used to support
attendance by student, postdoctoral fellows, and minority
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is co-funded by the Genes and
Genome Systems and Cellular Systems Clusters.