* 0957286
* RUI: Theoretical study of the removal of triplet Herzberg states of oxygen by collisions with nitrogen
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* George McBane, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2013
* USD 49,821.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor George McBane and his students
at Grand Valley State University will conduct calculations that will seek to
describe the energy transfer reaction of electronically excited oxygen molecules
(O2) with nitrogen (N2). The goal of the research is to identify the major
pathways of the reaction, determine the relative importance of each, estimate
their rates, and determine how the excess energy is deposited in the products.
Diabatic potential energy surfaces will be constructed using ab initio
techniques and the atomic motion on those surfaces will be modeled with
trajectory surface hopping calculations. A series of studies at restricted
geometries will be used to guide the final computational approach, since a
brute-force computational attack on the problem is too expensive to be
practical. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will be useful
both to atmospheric modelers and to experimentalists seeking new information on
excited states of oxygen in the atmosphere. The work will be carried out by
Professor McBane and undergraduate students at Grand Valley State, and
collaborator Dr. Reinhard Schinke of the Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and
Self Organization in Germany, who brings expertise in electronic structure
calculations. The research will strengthen the role of computational research in
the student community at GVSU, improve the computational infrastructure there,
and bring modern theoretical tools to bear on an outstanding problem in
aeronomy.