* 0957386
* GOALI: Organocatalytic Polymerization: New Synthetic Methods for Polymer Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Robert Waymouth, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2013
* USD 510,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports Professor Robert M. Waymouth at Stanford
University and Dr. James L Hedrick at IBM for a research project that will
explore new patterns of reactivity of organic catalysts for controlled
polymerization reactions. Specific objectives are to: (1) develop novel
bifunctional strategies for organocatalytic polymerization reactions; (2)
develop a detailed kinetic and mechanistic understanding of zwitterionic
polymerizations for the synthesis of macrocyclic polymers; and (3) develop new
organocatalytic methods for the synthesis of biodegradable and biocompatible
polyphosphates. The zwitterionic polymerization mediated by N-heterocyclic
carbenes is a new conceptual advance for the enchainment of monomers to high
molecular weight cyclic polymers. Mechanistic and kinetic insights on the
details of these reactions will provide a conceptual and quantitative picture of
the scope, power and limitations of this new synthetic method. Organocatalytic
polymerization strategies provide an environmentally friendly approach for the
synthesis and recycling of major commodity polymers. Mechanistic insights on new
mechanisms of enchainment will create new opportunities for the generation of
novel polymer architectures, including new families of polyphosphates for
biomedical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation,
Drs. Waymouth and Hedrick will perform research that will provide new catalytic
strategies for the design of biodegradable polymers derived from renewable
resources. New synthetic methods developed as part of this program will enable
new strategies for the synthesis of well-defined polymer architectures. These
developments will enable studies of the role of polymer structure on properties
and function, issues that are fundamental to our understanding of chemistry and
to the application of macromolecules in modern technologies. Broader impacts
include involving students in an exceptional training environment involving a
highly interdisciplinary and collaborative effort between an academic
institution and an industrial laboratory. The PIs have taken an active role in
recruiting and mentoring underrepresented minorities and disabled students. In
addition, IBM is committing significant resources to this effort, including
laboratory and office space for a postdoctoral coworker and visiting Stanford
students, materials and supplies, extensive access to IBM facilities and
infrastructure as well as 25% of Dr. Hedrick's time.