* 0957137
* Acquisition and Upgrading of Equipment for High Pressure-Temperature Research in Mineral Physics
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Murli Manghnani, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 283,876.00

0957137 Manghnani

This grant supports upgrade and new capabilities at the University of Hawaii
Mineral Physics Laboratory with the Hawaii Institute of Geophysics and
Planetology. New equipment to be acquired incrementally over the next three
years will include: 1) a solid state laser that would be employed for Raman and
Brillouin spectroscopic measurements of the elastic and structural properties of
hydrous and anhydrous silicate glasses and melts under high temperature and
pressure conditions in the laser heated diamond anvil cell (DAC); 2) electronics
necessary for ultrasonic measurements of the compressibility of silicate melts
in the large volume press; 3) microscopes and computer controlled translation
stage for diamond anvil sample loading and micro-Raman scattering experiments;
4) an vibration isolated optical table to support new Raman and Brillouin
spectroscopic capabilities; 5) a new power supply for an existing Raman system;
6) equipment to support development of a new spectroradiometric system for
measuring temperature in situ in the laser heated diamond anvil cell; and 7) a
new control system for an existing Brillouin spectrometer. The lab upgrade will
allow for the collection of new observations of silicate melt elasticity at
pressure and the effects of water on melt structure and compressibility. The lab
upgrades will support student and postdoctoral research training in materials
characterization methods with implications for supporting the next generation
geoscience workforce and the development of synthetic materials for societal and
military applications.

***