* 0957192
* Collaborative URM Program:   Empowering Historically Underrepresented Undergraduate Students in Functional Genomics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Ming Gao, Alcorn State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 81,801.00

An award has been made to establish a joint Undergraduate Research and Mentoring
(URM) program to be conducted by four collaborating institutions, Mississippi
State University (MSU), Alcorn State University (ASU), Jackson State University
(JSU), and Tougaloo College (TC). Mississippi State University (MSU), serving as
lead institution, will train four students, and the collaborating institutions
-- ASU, JSU and TC -- will each train two students, for a period of two years.
Over the three-year grant period, a cohort of ten students will be recruited and
trained in research focused on functional genomics. The goal of the program is
to engage African-American undergraduates in functional genomics and
computational biology research and to prepare these students for graduate
studies in the biological sciences. At least twenty faculty members from the
four collaborating institutions, who are dedicated to both teaching and
research, will serve as potential research mentors. Each student will work with
two mentors, one from their own institution and a second from one of the
collaborating institutions. Students will select their own individual project
from a number of available projects addressing fundamental biological questions
involving plants, animals, and microbes, including basic questions in
environmental toxicology, plant and animal genetics and development, genome
sequencing and annotation, systems biology, and bioinformatics. Training in
computational biology and the use of bioinformatics will be integral components
of the program. An eight week summer training program at MSU will provide
introductory courses on genomics, and workshops in scientific communication, lab
safety, and lab experimentation. Students will enhance their scientific
communication skills by attending lectures, writing manuscripts for peer-
reviewed journals, and giving presentations at conferences. In addition,
students will receive career counseling to enhance their self-confidence, and
increase their success in graduate studies. The consortium of four institutions,
three of which are designated Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCU) institution, will use a combination of face-to-face and web-based
meetings to provide support and networking opportunities for all participants.
Additional information is available by visiting http://www.urm.msstate.edu, or
by contacting the Program Directors at any of the participating institutions:
Dr. Erdogan Memili at MSU (em149@ads.msstate.edu), Dr. Ming Gao at Alcorn State
University (mgao@alcorn.edu), Dr. Bettye Sue Hennington at Tougaloo College
(bshennington@yahoo.com), or Dr. Raphael Isokpehi at Jackson State University
(raphael.isokpehi@jsums.edu).