* 0957729
* RUI: Activation of Small Molecules by Hexanuclear Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Lisa Szczepura, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2014
* USD 307,500.00

This award in the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program supports work by Professor
Lisa F. Szczepura at Illinois State University to carry out fundamental studies
to determine the scope and mechanism of small molecule activation by octahedral
hexanuclear metal complexes. The reactions of interest are [2+3] dipolar
cycloadditions and nucleophilic additions involving nitriles, isonitriles, and
azides. The reactivity of different terminal ligands will be investigated, and a
study of the mechanistic aspects of these reactions will be performed. These
investigations will result in a deeper understanding of the factors that
influence small molecule activation by these cluster cores. In addition, these
studies will help probe potential applications of octahedral cluster complexes
as catalysts and as building blocks in new solid state materials. By
incorporating successful concepts from the Enrichment Workshop Program,
developed with funds from a CAREER award, into her mentoring and research
efforts, the PI hopes to generate well trained, motivated, underrepresented
scientists at the undergraduate and graduate levels. In particular, mentorship
of freshman or sophomore students from groups that are underrepresented in the
sciences will help increase the retention and success rate of these students at
Illinois State University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These studies will provide a
better understanding of the activation of small organic molecules by transition
metal clusters and will lend insight into the mechanistic aspects of this
activation. Small molecule activation involves the formation of a number of
fundamentally important compounds that play key roles in organic synthesis, and
in a number of different industries including: pharmaceuticals, explosives, dyes
and agriculture.