* 0957537
* "Robert Fulton: Between Art and Engineering"
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2011
* Alex Roland, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2011
* USD 13,676.00

Robert Fulton went to England in 1786 at the age of twenty-one to study art with
Benjamin West, the most famous American artist of the day. After several
reasonably successful years with West in London, Fulton went to Devon to paint a
series of commissioned portraits, and that marked the beginning of a substantial
transformation for Fulton. In six years of traveling through the English
midlands, he converted from artist to engineer, a title he claimed in his first
publication, A Treatise on the Improvement of Canal Navigation (1796). The
purpose of this research project is to investigate Fulton's conversion, to
understand why he gave up a promising career in art to devote the rest of his
life to engineering and invention, culminating in his widespread recognition as
the inventor of the steamboat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fulton has attracted many
biographies since his death in 1815, but most fall victim to the nationalism
that so often engulfs the stories of "heroic inventors." Americans have been
most assiduous and hagiographic in telling Fulton's story, but they have done
most of their research in the United States and much less in Europe, where
Fulton had spent almost two decades. Europeans have generally neglected Fulton
in favor of their own claimants for the title of inventor of the steamboat. The
working hypothesis behind this research project is that Fulton's experience in
the English midlands in the mid-1790s was the formative period in his
professional and personal development, the time when he embraced a view of
technology that was flourishing in the British Industrial Revolution and also
when his political and ideological views of the world began to develop. These
factors and others shaped the rest of Fulton's remarkable career, and only
research in local records and artifacts can fully capture what he might have
experienced. The results can shed light on the continuing relationship between
art and engineering and the motivations that spur creative people to embrace
engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
eventually be published as part of a full length biography of Fulton. The
biography should have broad appeal well beyond historians of science; it should
be of substantial interest to art historians, inventors, engineers, architects,
and others.