* 0957988
* Data Needs for Accelerating Progress in Corporate Sustainability Workshop to be held in Washington, DC during January 2010.
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,11/30/2010
* Michael Lenox, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 11/30/2010
* USD 50,000.00

This workshop will be a gathering of approximately 30 academics and individuals
from both the public and private sector. The discussion will focus on data needs
to guide effective policies and firm strategies related to sustainability.
Without such a workshop, this type of collaboration between academic researchers
on corporate sustainability, government officials and corporate leaders would
likely not take place.

The event will likely occur in January, 2010. An assessment of existing
corporate sustainability-related data sets will be completed by a researcher and
communicated to attendees prior to the workshop. A primary goal of the workshop
will be to develop an action plan for collecting the data determined by the
attendees to be essential. Subsequent to the event, the researcher will engage
with partners to begin the data collection process.

The goals of the Data Needs workshop are to: -Foster collaboration between
academics and both and public and private organizations regarding data needs for
rigorous academic research on corporate sustainability issues; -Identify
specific data needs and the resources necessary to collect them; -Reduce
redundancy and identify ways to maximize use of data collection resources.