* 0957085
* SGTR: The Embryo Project Training and Research
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Jane Maienschein, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 536,711.00

This STS training and research project is supported by the Impacts of Biology on
Society (IBS) initiative, which is jointly funded by NSF's BIO and SBE
directorates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide rigorous
interdisciplinary training and research for graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows in history and philosophy of the life sciences, with a focus on
developmental biology. The program will involve graduate students at Arizona
State University (ASU) as well as visiting students from other universities.
Participants will receive training in interdisciplinary scholarly research in
history and philosophy of science; in addition, they will receive training on
digital curating and database managing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research theme
for this training and research project is provided by the Embryo Project, an
ongoing project in history and philosophy of developmental biology at ASU's
Center for Biology and Society. The Embryo Project explores historical,
philosophical, bioethical, legal, and social aspects of developmental biology
and its relations to society, all with a solid grounding in developmental
biology and its historical development. It pursues these goals through a set of
focused projects directed by individual faculty members at the Center for
Biology and Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merits of this IBS
supported training and research project lie with research focused on projects
within the history and philosophy of developmental biology. Each member of the
training group will play a defined role building upon and beyond existing
strengths. Each student will develop a focused research project related to
individual career directions, and based on that will write a set of related
articles to be submitted for review, editing, and publication in the Embryo
Project Encyclopedia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's Broader Impacts
include the participants learning to communicate research results effectively to
multiple user groups, and helping to develop contributions targeted toward K-12
teachers and the broader public, and will take advantage of ASU's outreach
activities "Ask a Biologist" and "Chain Reaction." The team-based approach makes
it possible for each student to excel in a targeted area while also
participating in all other aspects of the project, including outreach.