* 0957931
* CCE: Conference on Promoting Climate Literacy in Informal Science Learning Settings
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jo Ellen Roseman, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2010
* USD 334,909.00

To enhance and build on NSF-funded efforts already underway in the informal
science education community, this proposal requests funding to: (1) bring
together educators working in informal science environments for a two-day
professional development conference that will focus exclusively on climate
literacy in all of its dimensions, and (2) provide opportunities for informal
science educators to interact on the topic of climate change with scientists and
science media who will be participating in the AAAS annual meeting that
immediately follows. This Climate Literacy professional development conference
will take place on February 17-18, 2010 in San Diego.

AAAS will organize the conference in partnership with the Birch Aquarium, the
public exploration center for the Scripps Institution of Oceanography. In
addition to presentations on all aspects of climate literacy and what it entails
for educators and for the public, this professional development conference will
also provide a variety of hands-on opportunities for participants to apply their
new knowledge and skills to their own programs and projects. An expert advisory
group will guide the development of the conference program and the selection of
speakers and participants, focusing especially on including and serving the
needs of informal science educators from institutions of varying sizes and types
and serving diverse public audiences.