* 0957607
* Developing Reliable Strategies for Hydrogen- and Halogen Bond Driven Supramolecular Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Christer Aakeroy, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 467,000.00

With the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program, Professor Christer Aaker√∂y of the Department of Chemistry at Kansas
State University, will establish versatile supramolecular design strategies
based on site-specific intermolecular interactions, by determining how
relatively small molecules prefer to bind to each other. In particular, the team
will (i) design and synthesize ditopic molecules that utilize tunable halogen-
bond interactions for constructing supermolecules and co-crystals with pre-
determined motifs and stoichiometries; (ii) determine how hydrogen bonds and
halogen bonds can be made to operate side-by-side in a hierarchical fashion in
the assembly of binary and ternary co-crystals; and (iii) establish whether
hydrogen-bond/halogen-bond based synthetic methodologies can be informed by a
systematic analysis that integrates experimental thermodynamic data with
calculated binding energies. Chemistry is the science of communication and
change, and these interrelated processes are primarily initiated and controlled
by reversible interactions between molecules. A better understanding of these
inter-molecular forces can be refined into versatile pathways for improving
processing, performance and shelf-life of a wide range of specialty chemicals
such as pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals, agrochemicals, semiconductors, dyes,
and energetic materials. Students who participate in this research will obtain
an interdisciplinary foundation that will prepare them particularly well for
scientific challenges that arise at intersections of biology, chemistry, and
materials science. The research team contains a high proportion of women and
minority students, and all group members are expected to attend and present
their work at scientific meetings as frequently as possible, and results from
this research will therefore be disseminated quickly via conferences and peer-
reviewed publications. To further broaden outreach efforts, the PI will
participate in campus-based programs that specifically offer research
opportunities for female high school students and undergraduate minority
students, respectively.