* 0957983
* EAGER: RI: Developing a Framework for Automated Measurement of the Intensity of Spontaneous Facial Expressions
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Mohammad Mahoor, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 10/31/2011
* USD 87,886.00

Spontaneous facial expressions are representative of facial expressions in daily
life. Studying spontaneous (non-posed) facial expressions and Facial Action
Coding System-AUs (FACS-AUs) requires spontaneous face expression data where the
action units are manually and reliably coded. Currently, there is a high demand
in computer vision society for such a database. The first objective of this
research is to capture a 3D facial expression database and make it publically
available to others interested in studying spontaneous facial expressions. As
ground-truth, we also manually code the existence and the intensity of important
action units (i.e., AU 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 20, 25, and 26) in this
dataset. These action units describe positive and negative emotional
expressions.

The second objective of this research is to develop a framework to automatically
measure the intensity of spontaneous FACS action units in videos captured from
adults? faces. We aim to study dictionary-based representation (e.g.,
combination of wavelet and shearlet) to model face appearance in facial images.
This is due to the fact that human facial images contain of edges, wrinkles and
texture. We study this type of combined representations to provide a sparse
representation of images containing edges and textures and utilize it in
measuring the AU intensities.

The results of this research, the face database, the manually codes of AUs, and
the developed framework in the measuring the AUs, are made publically available
to other researchers in computer vision society.

