* 0957312
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Gene Expression Monitoring System to Enhance Faculty-Student Collaborative Research
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Irina Makarevitch, Hamline University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2012
* USD 55,411.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from the NSF MRI-R2 program has
been awarded to Hamline University for the purchase of a BioRad CFX96 Multi-
Color Real-Time PCR system and a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer. Quantitative
monitoring of gene expression, as enabled by these instruments, is central to
many projects of Hamline Biology faculty. Research projects conducted by faculty
of the Biology Department address a variety of questions about plant response to
chromosomal imbalance and environmental stresses, plant-microbial interactions,
cell biology, plant meristem development, molecular control of vernalization and
flowering time, environmental microbiology, early Drosophila development, and
genetic analysis of invasive species populations. The new instruments will
increase the number of students and faculty using gene expression analysis and
enhance the quality of the data produced during the studies. The Biology
Department at Hamline strives to create an environment where students have
multiple opportunities to learn, become interested in, and receive training to
do research. Over 25% of Hamline University students are older students
returning to school for an additional degree or certificate. After graduation,
they pursue careers in a variety of fields, including graduate education, health
profession programs, careers in industry, and as secondary school science
teachers. Access to modern instrumentation ensures that these individuals will
be competitive in their chosen careers. The Hamline Biology Department also runs
a Summer Biotechnology Institute to address the urgent need to bring high school
biology teachers up-to-speed on the rapid advancements in biological sciences.
Teachers engaged by hands-on investigative laboratories involving modern
instrumentation transfer their understanding of modern biology techniques and
concepts and their excitement and engagement to the high school students,
potentially enhancing science education and improving perception of science by
high school students. Real-time PCR technology will be an important addition to
a set of molecular biology applications currently in use in this program.
Results from the research and outreach projects enabled by the new
instrumentation will be disseminated in peer-reviewed journals, and by student
and faculty presentations at regional or national meetings.