* 0957260
* Spectroscopy Predissociation Dynamics and Scattering of Van der Waals Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Henning Meyer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Henning Meyer of the University
of Georgia and his students will explore the dynamics of weak intermolecular
forces in systems where at least one of the interacting members has an open
electronic shell. The research will target complexes of nitric oxide (NO) with
various molecular partners like N2, CO, CH4, C2H6 which are important in
atmospheric chemistry or with partners like aromatic or hetero aromatic ring
molecules which can contribute to the understanding of the biological
functionality of NO. Their IR and near-IR vibrational and rotational spectra
will be studied through constant photon energy sum (CONPHOENERS) scans, a
technique developed in the Meyer laboratory or through action spectroscopy. As a
new technique, ionization detected mm-wave absorption spectroscopy will be
developed and employed to access transitions in the structural finger print
region of the spectrum of these complexes. The experimental data will serve as
benchmark to extend or stimulate high level ab initio calculations of
interaction potentials towards larger open shell systems including lower
symmetry configurations. This is especially important for the extension of
dynamics or bound state calculations to include the full inter- and
intramolecular coordinate space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to revealing
information about the specific chemical systems targeted in the experimental
studies, the research will advance our general understanding of molecular
relaxation rates, which in turn are critical to the theoretical modeling of
combustion environments or the modeling of chemical reactions in extreme
environments not easily amenable to laboratory experiments. Results for the
interaction of NO with specific aromatic or hetero-aromatic ring molecules will
provide structural information about model sub-units involved in the binding and
release of NO in its regulatory function recognized in structural biology. Since
the research will involve the development of new spectroscopic tools (based on
mm-wave and optical technology) which will bring together very different
technical and scientific communities, it will provide unique opportunities for
the training of the graduate students supported by this grant. In addition, the
Meyer group will invite local high school teachers and undergraduate students
(physics, chemistry and science majors) to participate in the proposed research,
and thus experience experimental research at the frontiers of chemical physics
and physical chemistry