* 0957440
* Future Directions in Signal Processing, Communications, Information Theory, and Physical Layer Networking
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Michael Zoltowski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2015
* USD 94,309.00

The workshop forum will bring together approximately 25 leading researchers
working at the intersections of communications, information theory, signal
processing and networking (with emphasis on the lower layers) to explore future
directions, potential initiatives and long-term goals of the NSF CISE-CIF
program. The workshop will assess the current status of each of the respective
disciplines, identify emerging areas of important research, near and long-term
goals, future challenges and opportunities, and lay out a five-year vision, in
the context of what will it take to get there. The workshop will also produce a
report detailing consensus findings and recommendations that will serve as a
guide to the research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop seeks to
realize the high synergistic potential for cross-fertilization of ideas among
the intersecting fields of communications, information theory, signal processing
and physical layer networking. The forum will address the need for dramatic
changes in conventional paradigms brought on by the ubiquity of small, mobile,
energy-efficient sensing, processing and communicating devices. The forum will
also address the need for new theory and technology to harness the tremendous
potential of large, decentralized, and complex networked systems. The areas of
research fostered by this workshop, as an outgrowth of the findings and
recommendations on future directions and challenges, will support the
development of enabling technologies critically important to the growth of the
technological base of the nation.