* 0957201
* Integrated experimental and computational studies of 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2015
* Honggao Yan, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2015
* USD 480,000.00

Terpenoids are the most diverse, largest, single family of compounds found in
nature. They play vital roles in all living organisms, and have a variety of
applications in agriculture, nutrition, and medicine. The building blocks for
the biosynthesis of terpenoids are made in nature by one of two biosynthetic
pathways. The recently discovered MEP pathway is the pathway for the
biosynthesis of the building blocks for terpenoids in most microorganisms,
apicoplasts of some protozoa, and plastids of plants. 1-deoxy-D-xylulose
5-phosphate (DXP) reductoisomerase (DXR) catalyzes the biosynthesis of
2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate (MEP), the committing step of the MEP
pathway. While there is rich structural information on DXR, the chemical
mechanism of the DXR-catalyzed reaction remains unresolved and the transition
state of the reaction is unknown. The proposed project is a combined
experimental and computational study aimed at addressing these most challenging
issues of this important enzyme. It involves the simultaneous measurement of
multiple 13C kinetic isotope effects (KIE) on the DXP isomerization by a novel
NMR-based method and combined quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics molecular
dynamics simulation and 13C KIE computation. Furthermore, the transition state
stabilization by DXR will be determined by site-directed mutagenesis and
biochemical, X-ray crystallographic, and computational analysis of the site-
directed mutant enzymes. The proposed research is not only of fundamental
significance for the understanding of DXR catalysis but also valuable for the
development of antibiotics, antimalarial drugs, and herbicides targeting DXR. It
will also provide an outstanding opportunity for multidisciplinary research
training of both graduate and undergraduate students. The results of the
proposed research will be incorporated into protein biochemistry and
computational chemistry courses taught by the PI and the co-PI at two
institutions and will significantly enhance these courses and benefit students
taking the courses for many years to come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
a study by a combination of modern experimental and computational methodologies
on 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase, the most important enzyme in
a pathway for the biosynthesis of the building blocks for terpenoids. This
pathway is absent in human and animals but essential for most microorganisms,
some protozoa, and plants. The research is not only of fundamental significance
but also valuable for the development of antibiotics, antimalarial drugs, and
herbicides targeting this enzyme. It will also provide an outstanding
opportunity for multidisciplinary research training of both graduate and
undergraduate students.