* 0957155
* Metal Phosphonate Interfaces for Phosphopeptide Enrichment
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Daniel Talham, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2014
* USD 392,500.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program (with
co-funding from the Office of International Science and Engineering), Professor
Daniel Talham and coworkers at the University of Florida are exploring metal
phosphate and metal phosphonate solids and thin films as a new class of
phosphopeptide separation and enrichment media. The expected improvements in
performance are based on a new mechanism for phosphopeptide affinity involving
the ability of some metal phosphate solids to selectively form covalent linkages
to divalent phosphate groups while excluding other common anions. The project
will explore new particle systems for affinity enrichment and new surface
modification approaches to extend metal phosphonate-based enrichment strategies
to on-target techniques. The new mechanisms and materials will be evaluated
using surface analytical methods to quantify the activity of the new materials
toward different phosphopeptide structures. Finally, newly developed systems
will be tested to prove their applicability to phosphoprotein mass spectrometry.

These experiments seek to devise new means of isolating a wide range of
biomaterials that are important in high-technology applications ranging from
sensing and diagnostics to enabling fundamental studies of proteins - a
fundamental building block of life. In addition, training related to
biomaterials, interfaces, chemical measurement, and protein chemistry will
provide graduate and undergraduate students with the skills and knowledge needed
to be competitive in biotechnology related high-technology professions. The
project also fosters collaboration with international partners at the Université
de Nantes in France. This cooperation includes an extensive international
educational component through the exchange of graduate student researchers.
These exchanges are designed to facilitate thesis work and to also provide
students with important alternative perspectives on research and approaches to
scientific exploration.