* 0957798
* Convex Polycycles: Synthesis, Structure, and Chemistry of Heterotriquinanes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Mark Mascal, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This research program is based around the synthesis and applications of
heteroatom-containing, convex polycycles. The principal goals of the project are
to prepare azatriquinanes which are asymmetric at the nitrogen atom for
applications to chiral H+ or X+ delivery, to produce a range of azatriquinane-
based transition metal ligands and host-guest systems, to synthesize new series
of hetero (O, S, P, and/or B) triquinanes, triquinacenes, and acepentalenes, to
devise a new synthetic entry into the heterotriquinane ring system via
cyclononatrione, and to approach heterododecahedranes both by heterotriquinacene
dimerizations and by total synthesis. These investigations will provide the
researchers with broad experience in organic synthesis, coordination chemistry,
crystallography, and fundamental aspects of aromaticity, strain, electron
delocalization, and molecular architecture.

With the support of this award from the Chemical Synthesis Program, Professor
Mark Mascal of the Department of Chemistry at the University of California Davis
will explore the nature of molecules with curved surfaces -- from concave, to
hemispherical, to completely closed-shell, polyhedral bodies. The study of such
molecules answers fundamental questions regarding the electronic structure of
organic (carbon-based) materials, and also presents opportunities for practical
applications, particularly in the area of nanotechnology. This project also
serves as an excellent training ground for graduate and postdoctoral researchers
in fundamental and applied chemical synthesis. The broader impacts of this
program include K-12 outreach by sponsoring summer research projects via the
American Chemical Society SEED and UC Davis Youth Scholar Programs, the
development of innovative student learning and assessment practices, involvement
in programs which promote the participation of underrepresented groups in the
Pacific Rim, and enhancing the relevance of research chemistry in undergraduate
laboratory courses. Finally, the visual impact and beautiful symmetry of the
curved and spherical molecular bodies being studied lends itself to additional
outreach opportunities through the popular press and public science venues, and
thereby a greater appreciation of the art of technology.