* 0957162
* Simulation of Chemical Processes in Solution using Hybrid Quantum and Molecular Mechanical Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Jiali Gao, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 01/31/2013
* USD 420,002.00

&lt;br/&gt;Jiali Gao of the University of of Minnesota, Twin Cities is supported
by an award from the Theory, Models and Computational Methods to develop an ab
initio valence bond model based on a mixed molecular orbital and valence bond
(MOVB) approach for the description of the adiabatic and diabatic potential
energy surfaces. The PI and his research group make use of combined quantum
mechanical and molecular mechanical (QM/MM) methods to carry out dynamics
simulations. They are developing a hierarchy of QM/MM models based on ab initio
valence bond theory for studying chemical reactions in condensed phases. They
employ an ab initio self-consistent field valence bond theory to treat the
quantum mechanical subsystem for use as a guide to formulate a well-defined,
two-state MOVB model based on molecular orbital theory. Additionally they are
developing an effective Hamiltonian MOVB method that can be conveniently
calibrated and used by experimentalists to study chemical reactivity and
dynamics in solution. Finally, they are extending the MOVB method into the realm
of density functional theory &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is
to design computational methods to investigate chemical reactions in solution,
particularly those systems where interactions with the solvent itself play a
major role. These studies lead to a deeper understanding of solvent effects and
chemical reactivity in condensed phases. The PI and his coworkers have
implemented their methods in widely available software packages for use by non-
theorists in many fields of biochemistry, chemistry, biophysics, engineering,
catalysis and atmospheric science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;