* 0957659
* Building Your Home One Grain at Time: How Construction, Function and Robustness of Fire Ant Nests Depend on Ground Properties
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Daniel Goldman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 01/31/2014
* USD 480,000.00

In this project the PIs will use laboratory experiments and simulations to
systematically study how the behavioral and physical interactions of fire ants
(Solenopsis invicta) with cohesive granular media influence the formation of
underground nests. The specific objectives are: (1) To study how ant colonies
build and respond to perturbations in different media. (2) To understand how
ground properties affect nest structure and stability. (3) To study multi-agent
simulation models of nest formation. A major problem in modeling nest
construction is that the physics of cohesive soils is not sufficiently developed
to predict stability of structures. To address this question the PIs will
combine information from the first two aims into a multi-agent simulation to
model nest formation; individual behavioral rules will be derived from
observations and cohesive soil rule will be derived from physics studies. These
will be integrated to form a minimal physical model using granular physics
simulation and ant grain interaction that captures the observed nest formation
and allows the testing of different hypotheses of colony function. The PIs will
coordinate with high schools serving populations underrepresented in the
sciences to recruit teachers into the research labs and place graduate students
into local high schools as teaching assistants. In addition they will also
institute engineering-science team projects for undergraduates so that students
gain a better understanding of interdisciplinary research at the intersection of
biology and physics. The proposed experiments and models can aid in controlling
invasive species such as S. invicta by learning how soil modification affects
nest building. The multi-agent simulations will be of use to many outside this
field for solving scientific or engineering problems. In addition this research
program will provide a platform for modeling bioturbation, a major factoring
affecting planetary ecology.