* 0957413
* Generation and Detection of Chemically Active Species with Nanometer Precision around Nanostructures in Aqueous Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Ting Guo, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 02/28/2013
* USD 289,717.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) program of the NSF
Division of Chemistry will support the research project of Prof. Ting Guo of the
University of California at Davis. Prof. Guo and his students will investigate
the effect of X-ray radiation on the surface chemistry of nanoparticles. The
hypothesis to be tested is that irradiation of nanoparticles with X-rays release
chemically reactive species like electrons and free radicals from the surface
and these chemically reactive species could induce localized chemistry at the
nanometer scale. If confirmed, this unique phenomenon will open up new research
avenues in multiple traditional disciplines associated with nanochemistry. The
project will have a significant impact on the fields of radiation physics and
chemistry, radical chemistry, macromolecular chemistry and materials chemistry.
The results of this study will also provide guidance to general studies aiming
to develop X-ray contrast agents, radiation therapy, advanced 3D nanomaterial
networks and architectures, and theories regarding the interactions of ionizing
radiation with nanomaterials. The study will provide excellent training
opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students who will acquire important
skills in chemical synthesis and characterization, and biochemistry and a more
holistic understanding of the emerging interdisciplinary field of nanochemistry.