* 0957946
* Collective Representations and Memories of Atrocities after Judicial Interventions: The Case of Darfur in International Comparison
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Joachim Savelsberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 195,629.00

Collective Representations and Memories of Atrocities after Judicial
Interventions: The Case of Darfur in International
Comparison&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the case of the Darfur region of Sudan as
a basis, this research examines the role that judicial intervention plays in
shaping acknowledgment, collective representation and memory of atrocities. It
also considers how the related impact of UN Security Council and International
Criminal Court (ICC) interventions vary across eight Western democracies as well
as across the diverse institutions within each country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collective memory theory is concerned with the impact of
current-day interests on representations and memory and with ways in which
memories of past atrocities, differing across countries, shape representations
of new atrocities. Theoretical ideas in this tradition speak to the potency of
law in shaping collective representations and their consequences. But outcomes
depend on the country-specific acceptance of the ICC and further, on nation-
specific institutions (such as news media, NGOs, scholarship, consulting,
policy-making institutions). The shape these institutions take should modify the
impact neo-institutional theories suggest derives from new international human
rights norms. A combination of quantitative and qualitative methods will be used
in the current research. A sample of newspaper articles (from prominent liberal
and conservative papers) and policy documents (including state department policy
statements) from each country will be content analyzed. The resulting data will
undergo statistical analysis. In-depth interviews will be conducted with
producers of these texts (including journalists and policy-makers) and their
sources within scholarship and rights- and humanitarian aid-oriented
NGOs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collective representations and memories are mediating
mechanisms that inspire intervention and promote, impede or end cycles of
violence. This research seeks to advance insights into the country-specific role
of judicial intervention in constructing such representations and memories.
Policy conclusions concern the uses of international criminal justice.