* 0957051
* Action's Effect on Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Jessica Witt, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/28/2013
* USD 350,000.00

Athletes playing well describe distortions in spatial perception: basketball
hoops appear as large as hula-hoops, golf holes as big as manholes, and
baseballs as big as grapefruits. These subjective, anecdotal effects have been
confirmed in experiments as psychological reality. However, they are not
accounted for by current theories of perception, which consider optical cues and
limited cognitive knowledge as the information for perception. In those
theories, performance is thought to affect a post-perceptual process that
generates the response rather than affecting perception itself. The aim of this
proposal is to determine whether the experience of a larger target when playing
well reflects a perceptual or a post-perceptual effect and to characterize the
conditions under which action is most or least likely to influence perception.

Action-related factors, such as performance, influencing perception has
important implications for our understanding of the perceptual process. In
particular, it requires a functional approach in which perception provides
information that is beneficial for planning actions. Strategies could eventually
be developed to exploit or compensate for differences in how individuals
experience their environments. Such strategies could elevate skilled
performance, enhance rehabilitative strategies, and encourage more active
behaviors in sedentary individuals. For example, if a goal is experienced as
closer, an elderly or obese adult might be more willing to walk, thereby
promoting a healthier lifestyle.