* 0957039
* II-NEW: Towards an Infrastructure for Research on Multimodal Language Processing in Situated Human Robot Dialogue
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Joyce Chai, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2014
* USD 229,275.00

A new generation of robots is emerging which aims to interact with humans on a
daily basis to provide service, care, and companionship. To support natural
interaction between people and this type of robot, robust language processing
enabling situated human robot dialogue will become increasingly important.
Compared to traditional spoken dialogue systems and multimodal conversational
interfaces, situated human robot dialogue is drastically different due to two
unique characteristics. The first characteristic is situatedness. A robot is
situated in a physical world that is cohabited with human partners. The spatial
relations between the robot, the human, and the environment, and the dynamic
nature of the surroundings, have a massive influence on how the robot
accomplishes its task and interacts with the human. The second characteristic is
embodiment. A robot and its human partner both have physical bodies in the
environment. In embodied communication, speakers make extensive use of non-
verbal modalities (e.g., eye gaze and gestures) to engage in conversation and
make reference to the shared environment. These two characteristics make
automated interpretation of human language in situated human robot dialogue
extremely challenging. This is funding to provide the PI and her team with an
enhanced infrastructure that will enable them to address these challenges. The
new resources will include a physical environment and a virtual environment to
enable human-centered investigation, tools to capture human multimodal language
behaviors that include human speech, eye gaze, and gesture during situated human
robot dialogue, and systems to support Wizard-of-Oz experiments, data
collection, and data analysis. The integration of a physical world and a virtual
world is an innovation of the new infrastructure. Limitations of sensor and
effector technology often make it difficult or expensive to change robot
configurations and implement desired behaviors. The virtual world paradigm
allows efficient and high fidelity simulation of the physical world and robots,
as well as studies on multimodal language behavior under many different
conditions which are otherwise difficult to obtain in the physical world. The
new infrastructure will enable a human-centered approach by facilitating a wide
variety of controlled experiments. It will enable new empirical findings and
provide a testbed for advanced techniques for multimodal language processing
that are psycholinguistically plausible.

Broader Impacts: The new infrastructure will provide tremendous research and
collaborative opportunities for the PI and her colleagues at Michigan State
University. It will have profound implications in enabling the next generation
of social and cognitive robots. This infrastructure will also provide new and
exciting training and education opportunities for students at MSU through
research mentoring and curriculum development. It will bring new educational
experiences to K-12 students and encourage broader participation in engineering
through several outreach programs at MSU.