* 0957004
* Doctoral Dissertation: An Ecology of Nuclear Weapons Testing
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2010
* Timothy LeCain, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 9,962.00

This award is for a doctoral dissertation research improvement grant. The
project will examine the development of ecological ways of understanding the
effects of radioactive fallout upon human health during the atmospheric nuclear
weapons testing period in the United States. Specifically, it will examine how
ecological conceptions of critical biological and ecological pathways of
exposure served to reformulate notions of risk and safety during the late 1950s
and early 1960s. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply a number of
recent methodological and theoretical approaches in the history of science,
environmental history, and historical geography to provide new and
intellectually productive interpretations regarding the safety practices of the
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) during the early years of the weapons testing
program. Three primary research questions drive this investigation, and they are
the following. How did ecological approaches for conceptualizing the
relationship between radiation and human health emerge and structure the fallout
controversy? In what ways did the political imperatives of nuclear weapons
testing shape the institutional practices of the AEC and the scientific
practices of scientists engaged in the question of radiation safety? How did
scientific activism both within the AEC and outside of the Commission during the
fallout controversy affect notions about the relationship between science and
public policy? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although this dissertation is historical in
nature, it will inform current policy debates regarding risk management and
environmental regulation. By focusing on the divergent practices of many
sciences, this dissertation will illuminate the complex ways that one comes to
know objectively the risks associated with environmental pollutants. It will
demonstrate that policy planners discount outmoded notions of objectivity that
rely on correspondence theories of truth; it will suggest instead that policy
makers also bring to bear a number of scientific ways of thinking to questions
of risk perception and management.&lt;br/&gt;