* 0957901
* Developing International Development: American Technological Transfer Programs in Nepal 1952-1980
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Thomas Robertson, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 215,856.00

In many parts of the world, America's influence has been felt through
technological programs designed to modernize health, agriculture, and family
structure, and to protect nature. Using a combination of archival and
ethnographic methods, Thomas Robertson will write a social, economic, and
political history of the environmental changes introduced by American technology
transfer programs in Nepal by focusing on four strategically selected case
studies from the 1950s to the 1980s: the Rapti Valley Development Project
(1950s), the Malaria Eradication Project (1960s), U.S. Agricultural Development
and Land Reform Programs (1960s), and U.S. Population Control, Natural Resource,
and National Park Programs (1960s-1980s). &lt;br/&gt;These four Cold War-era
programs, and the ideas of nature and technology wrapped within them, placed
Nepal on the frontlines of economic competition with the Soviet Union and China
in rural Asia and also reshaped the contours of Nepal?s national and local life.
Together, the programs became the face of 'progress' and 'modern technology' at
a time when Nepalis, on both the national and local levels, were just beginning
to invent what modernity would mean for them. In this book-length project,
Robertson will explore both the environmental and economic transformations that
came with these technological projects. This will be a history that is multi-
perspectival. Robertson will uncover the views of American strategists, American
development workers, Nepali planners, and Nepali villagers, especially those
often overlooked: ethnic minorities, religious minorities, 'lower' castes, and
women.&lt;br/&gt;At a time when international development has taken on new
urgency because of Iraq and Afghanistan, assessing the impact of American
technological transfer programs in earlier periods is more important than ever.