* 0957791
* Function and engineering of fungal biosynthetic genes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Eric Schmidt, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2014
* USD 480,000.00

Fungi are found in nearly every environment. They commonly produce diverse small
molecule natural products, many of which mediate interactions between organisms
or potently target proteins. Fungal natural products fall into many different
chemical subtypes and thus represent a resource for new chemical building
blocks. In particular, fungal polyketides and peptides have a very rich
chemistry. Genetic methods provide a possible route both to rapidly identify new
natural products and to use fungal chemical building blocks in the chemical
synthesis of new molecules.&lt;br/&gt;The Schmidt group is applying a two-
pronged approach to solve this problem using the fungal biosynthetic protein,
equisetin synthetase, as a model system. First, a series of biochemical
experiments is aimed at elucidating function of the equisetin synthetase
protein. Second, an interdisciplinary approach linking chemical output directly
to gene sequence is under development. This new method is designed to solve the
selectivity problem and to provide a new tool set that will be broadly useful in
chemical biology. Gene sequences and chemical products will be rapidly compared
in a novel high-throughput fashion. Through this approach, new genes will be
cloned from numerous sources, new structures will be made by genetic
engineering, and new insights will be achieved linking gene sequence to
structure in the fungal polyketide and peptide groups.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. On the scientific and training side, the PI will develop innovative new
tools that will be broadly useful in chemical biology and will train graduates
and undergraduates from basic science and cross-disciplinary programs in
interdisciplinary research. In outreach, he will work with a local high school
that is economically and socially diverse. He will participate in a summer
research program and will integrate some of his aims into a high school project
entitled "Metagenomes in the community". Students will homology clone and
compare fungal biosynthetic genes that are expressed in plants and other
surfaces in their yards, parks, nearby wilderness areas, and so on. In turn, he
will select some of these genes for later biochemical analysis by graduate
students in partnership with these high school students. Emphasis will be placed
on encouraging underrepresented students to pursue science in college and future
careers.