* 0957028
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Protecting Children Online: The Construction of Deviance in Youth Internet Safety
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2011
* Nancy Campbell, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

The past decade has been marked by a flurry of attempts to make sense of what it
is that youth are doing online, and the risks they face while doing so. Media
reports of online sexual predation, widespread bullying, and difficulties with
engaging youth Internet users in the classroom, have added urgency to these
efforts. The risks that come with youth Internet use (for example,
victimization, abuse, disconnection from standard modes of education) are in
sincere need of policy attention. However, such policies can often restrict the
very aspects of the Internet which have allowed it to become a vibrant platform
for communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ways youth, school administrators,
and policymakers come to differently understand Internet practice is of central
concern to this research project, which asks the following questions: How do
policymakers understand the risks youth Internet users face? How do youth
understand their own practices online as risky, problematic, or acceptable? Have
policies aimed at mitigating the risks of youth Internet use changed youth
Internet practice? This project will be primarily conducted through 60 in-depth
interviews with school administrators, policy-makers, and students, and
cybersafety focus groups for members from participating school districts.
Educational materials, internet safety policies, and media coverage will provide
context for interview questions. This data will act as the basis for the
development of research reports, which will be shared with school
administrators, parents, and internet policy makers. Project results will also
contribute to scholarly literatures on the dynamics of Internet use and policy,
and to recommendations for Internet policy for youth Internet users.