* 0957797
* Dissertation research: Toward A Successful Plan for Educational Technology in Low Income Communities: Formative Evaluation of One Laptop Per Child Projects in Nigeria and Ghana
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Carolyn Byerly, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 13,670.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement grant is to support the study of
US-based One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) programs in two African communities: Abuja,
Nigeria, and Accra, Ghana. It is to be undertaken by a professional educator
born and raised in Nigeria. The study will use a qualitative research design to
examine the planning and implementation phases of the two OLPC projects so as to
compare the OLPC goals to the perceived educational needs and expectations of
the local populations. Study data will be examined using an analytical framework
informed by progressive educational and postcolonial theories, as well as
participatory models of communication. The researcher builds on an earlier pilot
study, in which the research interviewed executives and examined documents from
the OLPC project, headquartered at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
to establish the company's goals and procedures. Fieldwork in Abuja and Accra
will involve conducting interviews with local educational leaders, parents, and
students in both communities, and gathering data related to the two respective
educational systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research shows that projects utilizing
educational technologies in low-income communities typically fail to accomplish
their objectives when they do not involve local leaders and users affected by
them. Such top-down approaches have typically been seen in the activities of
Western-based non-governmental or governmental organizations in developing
nations since the UN's "development decades" of the 1960s and 1970s. This
project comparatively examines two contemporary cases. The research is timely in
that the MIT-based OLPC Foundation continues to expand its scope of work within
poor communities within the US, as well as other nations. The research will
result in a formative evaluation of the OLPC efforts in Accra and Abuja, and
that will in turn lead to recommendations for ways to bring local participants
more actively into the Accra and Abuja projects and in other efforts the OLPC
might pursue. Research findings will be shared with program officials at the
OLPC headquarters.