* 0957544
* The Preparation and Utility of Pentafluorosulfanyl Substituted Aliphatic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* John Welch, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2014
* USD 375,000.00

Rarely in chemistry does the opportunity to explore the chemistry of a new
functional group appear. The pentafluorosulfanyl (SF5) group, one of the few new
functional groups of the last 100 years, has the potential to dramatically
impact both life sciences and materials chemistry. The SF5 group presents a
square pyramid of sulfur-bound fluorines to receptors yet occupies a volume
somewhat less than the tert-butyl group. The large dipole moment in the carbon-
SF5 bond results in long range electrostatic interactions of the substrate
molecule. As the core building blocks of an enormous number of biologically
relevant molecules, the synthesis of aliphatic SF5 containing carbonyl compounds
quickly and economically is invaluable. The stereochemistry of reactions of
cyclic and acyclic SF5-containing aldehydes, ketones and oxocarbenium ions with
nucleophiles will be elucidated. Both the steric effects and electrostatic
interactions of pentafluorosulfanylation can be employed in the synthesis of
carbohydrates, amino acids and azetidinones from SF5-containing building blocks.
The broader impact. Of vital economic and social importance, the utility of many
organofluorine compounds is plagued by both metabolic and environmental
limitations. The ready availability of these new SF5-containing molecules can be
the first step in replacing trifluoromethylated agrichemicals that persist in
the environment with adverse effects on both humans and animals. As replacements
in pharmaceutical agents, facile SF5 group metabolism to substances that are not
immunologically or enzymatically toxic may expand the utility of anti-malarial
or anxiolytic drugs. The proposed program trains the next generation of students
in basic synthetic fluorochemical and physical organic chemistry. Students will
utilize multi-dimensional NMR methods and ab initio computational techniques.
Students engaged in this cross-disciplinary project will be prepared to join
other scientists and engineers with multidisciplinary backgrounds and experience
in research and problem-solving. Within the last three years, PI has mentored
nine students from historically under represented groups. Of these students, to
date, five have continued their studies in graduate school. The development of a
new functional group and its applications in synthesis can have an impact on
nearly all areas of organic chemistry and offers a uniquely American technology
to our industries. The product of the proposed research clearly has direct
applicability to the development of new building blocks for medicinal chemistry
and materials science as well as the potential to illustrate new strategies for
the control of asymmetry in synthesis, a basic requirement of 21st century
preparative methods.