* 0957197
* RUI:Enhancing Single-Molecule Microscopy for Ion Channel Characterization in Lipid Membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Daniel Burden, Wheaton College
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2013
* USD 252,000.00

The Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program supports the collaborative efforts
of Profs. Daniel Burden and Lisa Keranen-Burden at Wheaton College to develop
new methodologies for monitoring aggregated proteins and ion channels in lipid
membranes by improving single-molecule fluorescence imaging techniques. The
research uses the alpha-hemolysin channel from Staphylococcus aureus as a model.
This protein has been shown to play a significant role in the virulence of
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections. In recent years,
MRSA ?superbugs? have been plaguing hospitals and schools nationwide, causing
extreme human illness, and forcing draconian measures to keep outbreaks from
spreading. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the immediate model target system, the
work gains broad impact from the important role of lipid membrane protein
channel assemblies in nervous signal transmission, intercellular communication,
toxin potency, and disease states. This highly interdisciplinary research offers
extraordinary opportunities for involvement by undergraduate students, enhanced
by a unique collaboration with Dr. John Kasianowicz at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology. Aspects of the program will be integrated into the
undergraduate curriculum, including general chemistry, advanced analytical
chemistry, and the general biology laboratory.