* 0957765
* Uncertainty and Incentives in Macroeconomic Policy
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Noah Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2010
* USD 25,761.00

The proposed research consists of two distinct but related projects which
explore the implications of uncertainty and asymmetric information for
macroeconomic policy. The first project focuses on empirically-oriented models
for the design of optimal policy, particularly monetary policy, under
uncertainty. The research in this project considers the estimation of policy-
relevant dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models and studies the design of
optimal policy under empirically structured uncertainty. The project then
develops and applies a new and relatively general method for dealing with many
different forms of uncertainty. This method captures model uncertainty by
embedding different structural models within a Markov chain, a setup which can
be applied to a host of different applications. Overall, this project will lead
to the development of theoretically sound and empirically relevant models for
policy analysis, and will provide practical guidance on the conduct of policy in
the uncertain environments policymakers face.

The second project considers the implications of asymmetric information in
dynamic environments, and quantifies the importance of information frictions in
aggregate economies. While informational asymmetries have long been considered
important for a host of economic issues, theoretical difficulties have hindered
the development of quantitative aggregate models with information frictions.
This project develops new theoretical methods which apply powerful results in
continuous time stochastic control. This approach makes amenable the analysis of
dynamic contracting models, and opens the door to a wide array of applications.
This project will use these methods to analyze the aggregate effects of
asymmetric information in efficient and equilibrium allocations, showing how the
informational distortions can help explain key phenomena in economic growth,
consumption, employment, and asset prices.

Broader Impacts. Many of the results in the proposal have strong policy
implications. In particular, most of the first project is explicitly aimed at
the design of monetary policy under uncertainty. By analyzing the empirically
relevant sources of uncertainty, this projects helps design policy rules which
will lead to good economic performance. While the second project is more
theoretical, it has implications for issues such as economic growth and
employment which are of prime importance in policy discussions. This research
will also be broadly disseminated. A large portion of the project deals with the
development of new theoretical methods. The investigator will make well-
documented user-friendly computer code available on the internet so that other
researchers can apply the new methods.