* 0957002
* Authenticity and Historical Fidelity in Ecological Restoration: The Case of Former U.S. Military Lands
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* David Havlick, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 05/31/2014
* USD 244,881.00

In recent decades, hundreds of U.S. Department of Defense installations have
closed as military infrastructure in the United States. Many of these military
sites are heavily contaminated with toxic chemicals and unexploded ordnance;
however, many of these same lands are ecologically rich and relatively
undeveloped. This combination of characteristics has led to the conversion of
almost two dozen former military bases to National Wildlife Refuges. The
restoration of these military-to-wildlife (M2W) conversion sites raises
important questions about restoration goals and the values that underlie them.
This project investigates two key values in ecological restoration -
authenticity and historical fidelity - and their relation to restoration at M2W
sites. The research explicitly considers the values that underlie restoration
goals at military-to-wildlife conversion sites and probes the extent to which
these values and goals account for the sites' complex genealogies. The research
will illuminate the critical ethical and practical question of what restoration
should preserve, recreate, or obscure, while also addressing important issues
facing managers of M2W lands as they develop restoration plans. Whether
restoration should aim to recreate "pre-settlement conditions," "pre-military
conditions," or have another goal, and how these goals produce authentic
restorations or historically faithful ones, are questions of pressing practical
importance. The philosophical portion of this study utilizes conceptual analysis
to investigate existing conceptions of authenticity and historical fidelity in
the ecological restoration literature. These results will be synthesized with
empirical case studies of three M2W sites, involving document reviews, archival
research, on-site visits, and interviews and surveys of land managers and refuge
visitors.