* 0957178
* Sentence processing in first and second language: Effects of lexical proficiency and cognitive control
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Edith Kaan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2012
* USD 113,534.00

Understanding written sentences in a language learned at a later age is
different from processing sentences in one's native language. This project aims
to clarify what underlies this difference by testing to what extent a language
learner's problems with sentence processing are related to 1) the lack of
detailed word knowledge and rapid access word-level information, and 2) the
reader's ability to suppress irrelevant information in general. Native speakers
and second-language learners will be closely compared. The proposed project is a
collaboration between the University of Florida (USA), the University of Utrecht
(The Netherlands), and the Universidad De La Laguna (Spain), and will test
native speakers of English, native speakers of Spanish, Dutch learners of
English, and English learners of Spanish.

Results from this project may lead to a better understanding of how second-
language learners comprehend written language and why certain individuals
experience more problems than others when learning a second language. Outcomes
of this project may inform research on language education and intervention
techniques. This will ultimately benefit minority populations learning English
as a second language, as well as populations with language impairments. Finally,
the project will be integrated into the linguistics curriculum at University of
Florida and will create international research opportunities for students to
gain hands-on experience with psycholinguistic and electrophysiological
research.

This work is co-funded by SBE/BCS and the Office of International Science and
Engineering