* 0957793
* Sensitivity and Structure in Solid-State NMR of Biomolecules and Nano-structured Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Yoshitaka Ishii, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2014
* USD 428,700.00

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a powerful tool for determining
the structure of molecules, and is the basis for the magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) technology which is now an established feature of modern medical
diagnostics. In this project, supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Yoshitaka Ishii of the
University of Illinois at Chicago and his research group will develop methods to
drastically accelerate NMR spectroscopy for solid materials and biomolecules,
which is generally called solid-state NMR (SSNMR). The proposed work would
employ paramagnetic doping, very fast magic angle spinning, and an ultra high
magnetic field in order to increase the speeds of the data collection 10-30
fold. Another component of the research involves 13C sample enrichment to
facilitate SSNMR analysis of graphene/graphite based nano materials, in
particular, graphene oxide and graphite oxide, at molecular level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Ishii's research will advance NMR technology
applications to insoluble proteins and non-crystalline materials which cannot be
analyzed by other tools such as x-ray crystallography. Advances in the Ishii
group research will likely have impacts in the many venues of NMR based
technology, including nanomaterials analysis, and MRI. Professor Ishii will
integrate his research into his educational activities by providing hands-on NMR
experiments in a graduate NMR course, and in the physical chemistry laboratory
for senior undergraduates. Professor Ishii will also develop MRI experiments in
the undergraduate course by incorporating a gradient coil into an existing
spectrometer for solution samples. Subsequent exercises will be developed that
address the correlation of contrast-agent used in chemical imaging with
relaxation time of an NMR signal. Finally, Professor Ishii will participate in
the University of Illinois at Chicago's Summer Research Opportunities for
Undergraduates Program (SROP).