* 0957789
* NCAR-Wyoming Supercomputing Center (NWSC) Project Office (NPO)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Krista Laursen, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sarah Ruth
* 01/31/2012
* USD 2,500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) has for several decades been
the principal provider of high-performance computing (HPC), data storage
resources, software engineering and visualization tools for the atmospheric and
related sciences community. NCAR's supercomputing resources have been housed in
the NCAR Mesa Laboratory since the 1960s. This facility is now approaching
obsolescence as power and other limitations mean it will soon be unable to
support the high-power HPC and data-storage systems that researchers need in
order to develop and run increasingly sophisticated models of the climate,
weather and Earth systems. UCAR (NCAR's managing organization) and a group of
Wyoming entities that includes the University and State of Wyoming have formed a
partnership to construct a new facility, the NCAR- Wyoming Supercomputing Center
(NWSC), near Cheyenne, Wyoming. It is anticipated that the NWSC will become
operational during 2011.

This award will support the NWSC Project Office (NPO), operated by NCAR, during
the design, construction and commissioning phases of the project. The NPO will
be essential for the effective planning, design and implementation of the
project, ensuring best value for the government and other stakeholders,
providing clear, centralized control of costs and schedules, and maximizing the
future capabilities available to the scientific community. A key objective of
the NPO is to ensure that the NWSC is an environmentally sustainable facility,
becoming a showcase of energy efficiency and green technologies.

The NWSC will support NSF's cyberinfrastructure vision and the Foundation's
efforts to create a national petascale cyberinfrastructure for the sciences and
engineering. It will be a supercomputing facility for the atmospheric and
related sciences community that will provide U.S. researchers in the atmospheric
and related sciences with the tools they urgently need in order to remain
internationally competitive. It will provide petascale computing resources equal
to the demands of the increasingly complex, high resolution Earth System models
that are being developed to address some of the most pressing scientific
questions facing us today.

The project is a unique and transformative partnership between U.S. research and
academic institutions, private industry, and local, state, and federal
governments. Construction of the facility in Wyoming will support intellectual
and cyberinfrastructure capacity-building in an area of the country that, like
many other EPSCoR states, has traditionally been neglected in terms of
cyberinfrastructure development. Close ties to the local community will ensure
that modeling work undertaken at the NWSC includes research projects that will
lead to a better understanding of important scientific questions that directly
impact people in the State.