* 0957221
* Methodology and Metaphysics in the Sciences of the Mind (Scholars Award)
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2012
* Matthew Haug, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 137,297.00

This project will critically examine the convergence of these two recent trends
in philosophical and scientific debates about the nature of the mind and its
place in the natural world, the resurgence of metaphysics (the study of the
fundamental nature and structure of the world) and the return of naturalism (the
view that the methods and results of philosophy should be consonant with and
informed by those of the empirical sciences).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of the project is to break the stalemate in the debate between two types of
physicalistic accounts of the mind, reductive and non-reductive physicalism. It
will do so by situating the debate within the larger context of naturalistic
methodology. Historically, this debate has assumed that one of two diametrically
opposed positions is correct: Either psychology is reducible to biochemistry or
psychology is completely autonomous. Contemporary, interdisciplinary research
suggests that there is a more complicated reciprocal relation between psychology
and biochemistry. Biochemical hypotheses are tested using data from psychology,
which in turn prompts new biochemical studies that can be used to test and
refine the psychological models. The PI will formulate and defend a naturalistic
approach to philosophy of mind called inclusive physicalism that is designed to
elucidate and exploit this reciprocal relation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major
component of inclusive physicalism is a general metaphysical framework that is
intended to accomplish to goals. One goal is to delineate the space of possible
outcomes in individual disputes about the metaphysics of mind (e.g., what the
irreducibility of mental properties amounts to and the various relations that
support it). The other is to offer a means of responding to abstract, general
arguments which seek to show that such irreducibility is incompatible with
physicalism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also incorporate several case
studies, including recent research on the biochemical and psychological
mechanisms of placebo analgesia, in order to illustrate both the benefits of
this framework and the reciprocal methodological process outlined above. These
case studies will also demonstrate the practical importance of debates about
reduction, which is often overlooked in the philosophical literature. Further,
the project as a whole has the potential to improve the general public?s
understanding of the relation between mental and physical properties, which
could possibly lead to better treatment outcomes for widespread mental
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;