* 0957616
* IMR-MIP: High Spatial Resolution Sampling Scanning SQUID Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Kathryn Moler, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,000,000.00

This award from the Division of Materials Research supports Stanford University
with the conceptual engineering design and development of a prototype scanning
sampling Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) microscope. High
spatial resolution sampling scanning SQUID microscopes are among the world?s
most sensitive magnetic detectors. The project will provide scientist and
engineers with a new imaging capability of time-independent magnetic fields with
nanoscale spatial resolution and single electron spin sensitivity. It will
enable imaging of time-dependent magnetic fields with 10 picoseconds time
resolution. Such measurements of nanomagnetic phenomena are of interest in
information technology, biotechnology, and energy technology, as well as
fundamental science. The microscope is designed to become a general user tool at
two co-located shared user facilities, the Stanford Nanofabrication Facility
(SNF), a member of the National Nanofabrication Infrastructure Network, and the
Center for Probing the Nanoscale (CPN). The microscope would be a transformative
tool in the hands of the users, scientists and engineers, needing to
characterize such widely varying materials as superconductors, magnetic
nanoparticles, magnetic semiconductors, and multiferroics. The project is based
on collaboration between IBM and Stanford. This university-industry
collaboration will allow mentoring and hands-on experience for a diverse group
of students and postdocs in an industrial environment.