* 0957555
* Flexible Precursor Strategies to New Catalytic Metal Phosphide and Phosphide-Sulfide Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Edward Gillan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2014
* USD 386,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Edward G. Gillan of the Chemistry Department at the University of Iowa
seeks support for research related to a recently discovered energetically
favorable oxygen-free method to produce nanocrystalline phosphorus-rich metal
phosphides (e.g., NiP2). This new method uses much lower temperatures and
greater macrostructural flexibility than has previously been demonstrated in
phosphide synthesis. The proposed research studies will manipulate experimental
conditions, particularly with respect to Lewis base coordinating additives in
solvothermal reactions, to develop rational and flexible synthetic methodologies
for nanoparticle metal phosphide growth. Advances in understanding the molecular
basis of precursor reactivity are critical to the tuning and control of
composition, structure, and morphology of resulting metal phosphides, sulfides,
and mixed anion/cation structures. Improved molecular synthetic understanding
will lead to more sophisticated chemical syntheses of phosphide (and sulfide)
materials with structural complexity and physical properties that are not
accessible by current synthetic methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Gillan will perform research where the specific chemical reactivity investigated
will encompass catalysis related to photochemical hydrogen evolution from
aqueous and alcohol media and thermal catalytic removal of sulfur from organic
molecules. Both catalytic processes have potential impacts in energy-relevant
areas, particularly in hydrogen implementation in fuel cell technology and in
sulfur removal from hydrocarbon fuels. Broader impacts also include training key
research personnel to work on multifaceted research at the interface of
molecular and materials chemistry and to provide the postdoctoral, graduate, and
undergraduate students with the critical tools necessary for future success
outside the academic laboratory. Specifically, they will be taught how to design
and implement appropriate research safety protocols in the laboratory
environment, to foster beneficial collaborative interactions with other
researchers in allied fields, and to effectively mentor junior colleagues in
design of research strategies. In addition to improvements in the teaching of
materials chemistry to undergraduates, Professor Gillan has established new
partnerships with the University of Iowa's Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
Institute to aid in educating K-12 teachers and the community about real world
applications of useful chemical reactions and inorganic and organic materials.