* 0957298
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Power and Pesos: Economics, Expertise and National Currencies in Mexico and Argentina
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2010
* Erik Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 14,964.00

Abstract Monetary and exchange rate policies are among the most important areas
of government regulation of the economy, but scholars have only recently begun
to study the political determinants of these policies. Given that episodes of
monetary instability over the past several decades, particularly in the
developing world, have frequently been blamed on flawed policies, a better
understanding of these determinants is a key concern for scholars and
policymakers. This dissertation argues that conventional theories that emphasize
interest group politics or electoral incentives are insufficient to account for
variations across countries and over time in these policy outcomes. Instead, it
is argued that the dynamics of competition among economic experts are a crucial
determinant of policies. Drawing on recent developments in science and
technology studies and sociological field theory, a framework is developed for
analyzing processes of competition and learning among experts. This framework is
applied to changes in monetary and exchange rate policy in Mexico and Argentina
since the early 1980?s. Data include interviews with key informants, archival
evidence, and a new database consisting of observations of the educational
background and career trajectories of high-ranking officials in the central
banks and finance ministries of these two countries. This study will inform
recent debates in the science and technology studies literature about the nature
of expertise and its relation to democracy and the role of economic science in
shaping the economy. Findings will also be used to draw conclusions about the
quality of expert advice and the design of monetary institutions.