* 0957363
* RCN-UBE Incubator:   Conceptual Assessments in Biology: Tools for Learning
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2012
* Kathleen Fisher, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 01/31/2012
* USD 49,850.00

This project addresses two problems, first identified in the 1980s, that persist
today. First, students have many misconceptions that are at odds with scientific
ideas and that are tenacious, persistent, and resistant to change. Second, with
the advent of large lecture classes and multiple-choice testing, many college
students can earn good grades simply by superficial memorization that results in
no long-term retention or modification of underlying misconceptions. Conceptual
assessments in biology (CABs) are designed to examine the ways students are
reasoning and applying scientific principles to solve scientific problems. This
project will support planning and initial development of a network focused on
the use of conceptual assessments to help biology faculty transform instruction
to promote students' meaningful understanding and problem-solving abilities.
Goals of the network will be to strengthen the community of CAB developers and
create a central repository on the web to serve the needs of both CAB developers
and faculty who use CABs.

Broader impacts of the network will include broad dissemination of CAB materials
and training of faculty in the development and use of CABs.

This project is supported jointly by the Biological Sciences Directorate and the
Division of Undergraduate Education.