* 0957869
* Femtosecond Studies of the Influence of Solvent on Chemical Reaction Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Stephen Bradforth, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2013
* USD 448,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Stephen Bradforth of the University of
Southern California and graduate students will study chemical reactions dynamics
in water. Novel femtosecond electronic and photoelectron spectroscopies will be
employed to unravel ionization, dissociation and proton-coupled electron
transfer reaction pathways in water with photochemistry in the phenol family of
molecules serving as model systems. The hydrogen atom dissociation and
ionization dynamics of phenol and thiophenol, bearing many similarities in
reaction dynamics to that of excited-state water but with additional surface-
hopping dynamics, will be mapped from gas phase to bulk aqueous phase by new
dispersed transient absorption experiments with 30 fs time resolution. These
will be complemented by the construction of a new liquid time-resolved
photoelectron spectrometer, capable of probing evolution along the reaction
coordinate via the photoelectron energy and angular distribution. Initial
targets for the liquid-jet spectrometer will be the steady-state angular
distributions from inorganic anions of different symmetries and time-resolving
phenol excited state chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While this research project
focuses specifically on the aqueous phenol system, it will lead to insights into
the interplay between solvent motions and solute reactivity that directly impact
how most chemists and biochemists design and/or model chemical transformations.
The photochemistries of heterocyclic aromatics, including the DNA bases, have
related excited state pathways to the phenolic chromophores in solution. Phenol
itself is a direct model for tyrosine side chain in proteins where tyrosyl
radicals are often significant intermediates in electron transfer activity. A
new generation of physical science students will gain vital training in new
spectroscopic probes of matter as well as designing and analyzing experiments at
the cutting edge of the field. These skills will prepare them for careers in the
vital US science and technology sector as well as academic research. Graduate
and undergraduate students will have the opportunity to learn from each other
and collaborate with international scientists. The Bradforth research group will
also participate in outreach efforts at USC to provide hands-on energy-
conversion themed summer internships for community-college students serving the
largely Hispanic population in South Eastern Los Angeles County. Broad
participation of different groups, and collaboration amongst those participants,
will continue to be emphasized at all levels of involvement in the project