* 0957281
* EAGER: Adapting the New Arecibo On-Dish High Frequency (HF) Transmitter System to Radar Mode
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2011,02/28/2014
* John Mathews, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 02/28/2014
* USD 145,203.00

The investigators will develop a radar capability for the new Arecibo high
frequency (HF) ionospheric heating facility using off-dish interferometric
receive techniques. They will also explore using an on-dish receive mode that
would require a T/R (transmit/receive) switch. The off-dish interferometric
receiver systems would employ small arrays of active antennas and, after the
initial analog filtering, a fully digital receiver system. Both the on and off-
dish receiver systems could be used simultaneously yielding the most sensitive
system. This radar system will enable new science by adding capabilities to
conduct studies of meteor physics. Recent discoveries have shown that the vast
majority of meteoroids visible as radar meteors fragment rather than simply
ablating. This process is a likely source of important nanometer ?dust? in the
80-130 km altitude region where meteors ablate. The radar would be used in
conjunction with the 46.8 MHz and 430 MHz radars at Arecibo to explore
fragmentation. The combined measurements would allow studies of the radiowave
scattering mechanism in meteor trails, and the processes whereby meteors deposit
important metals in the atmosphere. Other important science areas include
studies of mid-latitude spread-F, sporadic-E instabilities, quasi-periodic echo
(QPE) structures, low-altitude quasi-periodic echoes (LQPE) structures, and the
D-region ionization enhancements associated with lightning. The instrument could
also find application as an MST (Mesospheric-Stratospheric-Tropospheric) radar
and as a potential transit solar corona radar at solar minimum. Extending the HF
heater capabilities to include a radar mode will enable much new science from
the Arecibo instrument cluster. The HF-radar will allow direct probing of
D-region heating effects, and possibly detection of lightning-induced D-region
ionization. The effort will provide new opportunities for student research
involvement by further enabling common-mode multi-radar campaigns and by
supporting on-going model development efforts. Undergraduate students will be
involved in building and fielding the system that will be available to all user
communities, including students from collaborating institutions.