* 0957389
* Building Exterior Binding Sites on Peptide Coiled Coils
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Alan Kennan, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2014
* USD 445,000.00

This proposal seeks to further understanding of a broadly useful biopolymer
self-assembly unit, the alpha-helical coiled-coil. Despite extensive study of
coiled coil design principles, little attention has been focused on interactions
at and between coiled coil surfaces. Specific recognition of ligand peptides at
coiled coil surfaces is a crucial step in the infection cycle of a broad range
of RNA viruses, including many notorious human pathogens. An array of high-
resolution X-ray structures demonstrates that recognition often relies on
binding a few key ligand side chains, using a relatively focused constellation
of coiled coil surface positions. The Kennan group will examine ligand/pocket
pairs from HIV, visna, Ebola and mumps, to glean rules for effective binding of
buried hydrophobic side chains. The interactions of interest will be displayed
using a simple monovalent mimic of the HIV protein. Similar investigations of
surface and buried polar interactions will use a recently developed model. Once
the portability of these recognition elements is validated, they will move on to
designer systems that test programmed recognition patterns. These experiments
will establish the first fundamental recommendations for targeted molecular
recognition at coiled coil surfaces. Given the tremendous utility of these
structures in biology, biotechnology, and materials chemistry, a general tool-
set for designing and understanding these interactions will have broad
applicability. &lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a collection of young
scientists with a significant diversity of identity and experience. The ideas
and techniques are intrinsically multidisciplinary, applying the molecular level
thinking of organic chemistry to the problems of structural biology. Students
trained to date reflect a commitment to extending the research experience to
undergraduates and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;All of biology is
controlled by assemblies of biomolecules (proteins, DNA, sugars, etc.) that
transiently stick together long enough to carry out their assigned biological
tasks. The ability to control which molecules stick to each other thus holds
promise for control over biology itself. The interactions studied here are
central to many viral infections of current public interest (HIV, Ebola, etc.),
but they also target a very basic and common protein-protein interface that is a
core piece in the larger puzzle of someday acquiring full control over biology's
rules for how A sticks to B.