* 0957083
* EAGER: Research and Development of Dark Matter Detectors for Borexino
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Frank Calaprice, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2015
* USD 240,000.00

This EAGER award is for an exploratory, high-risk, high-payoff effort to develop
a novel instrument for dark matter detection. Observations indicate that 80% of
the matter in the Universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise
undetected elementary Dark Matter particles that do not emit or absorb light.
The leading hypothesis for the nature of dark matter is that it consists of new
elementary particles produced moments after the Big Bang, generally referred to
as Weakly Interacting Massive Particles. One way to detect them in an Earth-
bound experiment is to measure the low energy nuclear recoils they produce in
rare interactions with normal matter. This group will develop small NaI and
liquid xenon detectors that can be installed in the Solar Neutrino Borexino
detector, at the Gran Sasso Underground Laboratory, Italy, for a dark matter
search. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The detector would be inserted through existing
plumbing tubes into the center of the Borexino liquid scintillator. When
positioned in the Borexino scintillator, the background in the small detector
due to external sources of gamma rays and neutrons will be negligible. The
Borexino scintillator also serves as a very efficient anti-coincidence detector
to veto internal gamma and neutron backgrounds that originate and scatter within
the small detector and in the Borexino scintillator. A 10-kg detector with the
combination of low backgrounds from external and internal sources should have
sufficient sensitivity to test the validity of the reported DAMA/LIBRA dark
matter signal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For Broader Impacts, this proposal
addresses one of the major scientific questions of our time, the nature of dark
matter in the universe. As a cross-disciplinary topic it also has an impact on
advanced detector technology. The PI has a commitment to involving
undergraduates in his research projects.&lt;br/&gt;