* 0957836
* STTR Phase II:   Constitutive Promoters for Crop Improvement
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Alan Rose, GrassRoots Biotechnology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project seeks to
identify new and improved promoters to create enhanced genetically modified
crops. Plant biotechnology relies on the insertion of promoter-gene constructs
into plants. The promoter is the portion of DNA that controls when and where a
gene is expressed. The relatively few plant promoters in use today have
significant limitations including inconsistent effects across different growing
conditions and a lack of predictability. This project involves developing and
implementing a novel pipeline for promoter discovery that starts with a
sophisticated bioinformatics analysis to identify high confidence promoter
candidates. Using fluorescent reporters and confocal imaging, these candidates
are assessed in transgenic plants for cell-type-specific expression,
developmental-stage-specific expression, and responsiveness to environmental
stimuli. This pipeline was validated in the Phase I component of the project
where four novel and patentable constitutive promoters were identified.

The broader impacts of this research are the development of superior genetically
modified crops. Genetically modified plants already play an important role in
world agricultural production and will play a central role in averting
widespread food shortages in the future. In addition, substantial research is
being conducted to improve bioenergy crops though genetic engineering.
Genetically enhanced bioenergy crops are predicted to play a key role in
reducing our dependence on fossil fuels and in cutting greenhouse gas emissions.
A critical innovation that will facilitate advances in all of these areas will
be the introduction of new and enhanced plant promoters.