* 0957535
* Supramolecular Chemistry of Pyrogallolarene Channels, Nanotubes, and Receptors
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* George Gokel, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 02/28/2014
* USD 300,000.00

This research program builds on fundamental discoveries that macrocyclic
pyrogallol[4]arenes insert into bilayer membranes and form functional channels,
the properties of which can be varied by altering membrane properties. These
will be exploited as ion and molecule receptors and delivery systems and as
reporters of changes in membrane composition and properties. When the sidechains
are branched, rather than linear, hexameric nanotubes are formed that are
physically interlocked. Work will be undertaken to determine their chemical
stability, their ability to transport ions and molecules, their potential to
function as "nano-containers," and even to form physical tunnels within other
structures. These nanopore and nanotube formers will be useful in developing new
materials and in biological applications. These studies will provide students
with experience in synthetic chemistry, and a range of analytical methods such
as planar bilayer conductance, X-ray crystallography, electron microscopy,
Langmuir trough, and Brewster angle microscopy. Taken together, the program will
produce novel structures with novel properties and practical applications and
educate students to understand supramolecular interactions and offer valuable
practical applications in nanoscience.

With the support of this award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry Program, Professor George Gokel, of the Department of Chemistry
and Biochemistry and the Center for Nanoscience at the University of Missouri -
St. Louis, is preparing novel chemical compounds that have remarkable chemical
-- and potentially biological -- properties. These compounds, called
pyrogallolarenes, are doughnut shaped and have "arms" radiating from them.
Depending on the length and shape of the arms, the compounds form molecular
capsules or "nanotubes" and exhibit a range of remarkable properties. Some of
these compounds insert into bilayer membranes of the type that surround cells
and form pores or channels within the membranes. The nanotubes are of a
previously unknown type and will be used as "pipes" to transport ions and
chemicals much as metal wires transport electrons. The combination of these
properties opens the possibility of developing extremely small sensing devices
and exploiting the individual compounds as antibiotics or in other
pharmaceutical applications. The project will be valuable to recruit students to
cross-disciplinary studies because it involves both chemistry and biophysics and
a broad range of analytical techniques. Students will be prepared for the range
of programs currently underway in American industry. Individual components of
the program can be undertaken by undergraduate students or even high school
students with appropriate supervision. This project will have an important
impact to society because variations on these structures can lead to drug
delivery systems or to drugs themselves.