* 0957148
* EAGER: The Role of Membrane Progestin Receptors in Progestin-Facilitated Lordosis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Cheryl Frye, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 12/31/2012
* USD 106,000.00

Steroid hormones have pervasive effects throughout the lifespan for function of
the many systems of the body and brain. It is important to more fully understand
how steroids work, given that there are several potential mechanisms for their
varied effects. The traditional and well-characterized view is that steroids
have relatively slow actions after binding to intracellular steroid receptors.
However, steroid hormones can also have rapid effects at the cell membrane in
ways that have yet to be fully understood. The purpose of these studies is to
investigate how the key hormone progesterone may have actions on the brain and
behavior by acting at a potential membrane target, the recently discovered
membrane progestin receptors (mPR). In these experiments, the expression of mPRs
in the brain and body and the functional relevance with respect to behavioral
endpoints will be determined using rats and mice as models. Subjects will have
mPR actions in the brain manipulated to directly investigate the role of mPRs by
altering membrane progestin receptor expression or activity in brain regions
important for the behavioral effects observed. Because progesterone mediates the
important process of reproduction, similarities across species are expected, but
differences may reveal specificity in the actions of different mPRs. The
research to be performed is important for understanding of the actions of
progesterone, as well as other steroid hormones. This research will also provide
for interdisciplinary training of faculty to further develop their skills in
behavioral neuroscience and molecular biology. Post-doctoral, graduate,
undergraduate, and high school student trainees will work with two excellent
scientists in a project exploring an exciting new area of investigation that can
lead to breakthroughs in understanding actions of steroid hormones.