* 0957045
* EAGER:  A Metric Space Embedding of Object Fragments and Object Categories for Object Recognition and Segmentation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Benjamin Kimia, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 80,000.00

Recent developments in augmenting appearance-based approaches to object
recognition with shape have used local shape features in analogy to appearance
features. However, past work on shape has shown that shape is much richer than a
conglomerate of local features. Rather, shape is very high-dimensional and
defies global embedding in a reasonably-dimensioned Euclidean space. Thus,
Euclidean space concepts used in appearance-based recognition, such as formation
of visual words from k-means, vocabulary trees, etc. are no longer applicable.
This project is developing analogous concepts for efficient indexing with a
large number of categories in the context of a metric space for shape.

These concepts are being investigated in the context of an integrated bottom-up
and top-down object recognition and segmentation framework. First, a top-down
approach using a novel language for shape has already exceeded the state of the
art in the ETHZ dataset. However, the prototypical shapes are manually selected.

The project aims to use the concept of structural averaging to automatically
form prototypical shapes. Second, a fragment-based bottom-up approach has shown
state of the art performance for a one-category Weizmann Horse database. An
extension to the use of more categories requires an organization of the object
space and the space of object fragments. The project aims to capture the metric
structure of both spaces using a proximity graph, which is then used for
efficient indexing. These two developments will together enable an integrated
approach where bottom-up methods narrow a selection of categories which are then
examined by the top-down approach.

Broader impacts include aerial tracking and recognition of vehicles for defense
applications, segmentation of X-ray fluoroscopic images of the spine, and
indexing into databases, e.g., trademarks.