* 0957679
* Miocene Landscape, Temperature and Plant Biodiversity in the Neotropics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Carlos Jaramillo, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 05/31/2014
* USD 160,000.00

Miocene Landscape, Temperature and Plant Biodiversity in the
Neotropics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carlos Jaramillo, Smithsonian
Institution&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Understanding the Neogene history of Amazonia
is essential for understanding the evolution of the rainforest. This is one of
the most species diverse areas on Earth. The PI seeks a better understanding
about the paleogeography of the Amazon. He wishes to determine if during the
Miocene (25-5 Ma) the Amazon was a shallow sea inundated from the north by the
Caribbean Sea, or whether it was a giant freshwater lake. The PI also wishes to
determine if the temperature 17-14 Ma was 3-4Â° Celsius higher than today as it
was at higher latitudes. Commensurate with these hypotheses is whether plant
diversity was greater in the Miocene than today. The PI will study two areas in
the Llanos (with 4500 meters of stratigraphy) and one site in Urumaco (with 9000
meters of stratigraphy), Colombia. The PI wishes to determine whether the Amazon
was flooded by the Caribbean Sea from the north, or alternatively if the Amazon
was a giant freshwater lake during various intervals of the Miocene Epoch.
Palynology and sedimentology will be used as a proxy to identify a shallow sea
or freshwater lake. There will likewise be a study of Middle Miocene (17-14 Ma)
temperature to determine if it was tied to a major global warming event using
the TEX86 method. Oxygen isotope analysis of coexisting mammalian tooth enamel
and fish scales will also be evaluated. This project includes a well-developed
international collaboration involving scientists from the USA, Colombia, Panama,
Brazil, and Holland. Training of a graduate student and a postdoctoral
researcher represents important components of this grant. Their careers will
greatly benefit from international networking opportunities and the extended
exchange of ideas with PI and collaborators of this grant. This research will be
useful for biologists working in the Amazon, climate modelers, plant
physiologists, conservationists and evolutionary biologists. Chronostratigraphic
results of this project will improve the geological community?s understanding of
the regional structural geology and tectonics.