* 0957072
* Interactions Between Visual Working Memory Representations and Mechanisms of Perceptual Selection
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Geoffrey Woodman, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 06/30/2014
* USD 500,000.00

Geoffrey Woodman at Vanderbilt University will examine the long-standing
theoretical issue of how working memory and attention interact to determine what
subset of information we process from complex visual scenes. A growing number of
theories propose that during scene processing attention networks are guided to
process task-relevant information through top-down control exerted by template
representations in visual working memory. In this way, holding a representation
in visual working memory is sufficient to guide perceptual attention mechanisms
to select incoming information. In addition, some theories propose that
representations of attended items need to pass through visual working memory for
them to be categorized. But, the evidence for this direct linkage between visual
working memory storage and attentional guidance is mixed, perhaps because the
theories do not always consider the additional influence of long-term memory on
mechanisms of attention. This project will use behavioral and
electrophysiological methods to systematically explore the relative
contributions of working memory and long-term memory to the top-down control of
attention. By addressing these important questions regarding the interactions
between memory systems and perceptual attention, the findings of the experiments
in this project, will serve to constrain and shape the next generation of models
of attention and control of information processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
complex environment overloads our visual systems with a multitude of objects and
surfaces, only some of which are relevant for our task at hand. For example,
when driving we need to be attending to the cars that surround us and potential
hazards entering the roadway, while the trees and houses lining the road are
irrelevant for our task and should not be the focus of attention. Models of
attention accounting for such complex processing tasks propose that we optimize
information processing for task-relevant objects, like other cars on the
roadway, by maintaining a representation of these cars in working memory. A
better understanding of how our attention is controlled will allow us to predict
when the performance of critical tasks, such as driving or controlling air
traffic, will face potentially hazardous processing limitations. In addition, a
number of cognitive disorders appear to be due to a compromised ability to
control attention. Attention deficit disorder, reading disorders, and
schizophrenia all appear to have underlying causes in an impaired ability to
selectively process inputs and temporarily remember relevant information. The
research proposed in this project will allow us to understand how attention is
normally controlled and the methods developed here will provide tools for better
understanding the deficits that are due to abnormal attentional control and
selective memory storage.