* 0957074
* Hierarchical control of cognitive processes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Gordon Logan, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 06/30/2013
* USD 418,382.00

Psychologist Gordon Logan at Vanderbilt University will use the deceptively
simple task of typing to study "cognitive control," that is, how we plan and
execute complex actions. Skilled typists appear to effortlessly use an external
script (when copying) or an internally generated plan (when composing) to choose
the appropriate movement in the form of a key-press 5-6 times per second.
However, in a recent experiment, Logan showed that despite such virtuosity,
skilled typists do not even know which hand they are using to depress a key at
any given moment. The demonstration is clever and simple: try typing a sentence
using only your left hand and typing only those letters normally typed with the
left hand. Not surprisingly, this instruction slows people down, but it also
renders them greatly less accurate (5-6 times more errors are produced),
indicating that skilled typists are simply not aware of what they are doing at
the most basic level. Logan's theory of cognitive control as applied to typing
assumes that proficient typing is the result of the coordination between two
"nested feedback loops." The "outer" loop determines the sequence of words to be
typed and the "inner" loop translates the words into the appropriate keystrokes.
This explains the paradox that skilled typists are not aware of something as
basic as which hand they are using: the inner loop automatically and
effortlessly determines the sequence of key presses needed to produce the
sequence of words planned by the outer loop, but the outer loop does not know or
care how the inner loop performs its separate task. This project will examine
three aspects of this double-loop model of cognitive control: awareness (how
much does the outer loop know about what the inner loop is doing?), structure
(do words or some other level of organization, such as letters or phrases, serve
as the interface between the two loops?), and feedback (the outer loop is
hypothesized to rely on visual feedback while the inner loop is hypothesized to
rely on kinesthetic feedback).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of
the mechanisms of cognitive control could lead to improvements in the way
complex skills are taught and practiced. In the domain of typing, a detailed
understanding of the process could have implications for the design of keyboards
and other text-input devices. With the proliferation of computers in modern
culture, typewriting is an essential skill in the workplace, in schools and
universities, and in leisure activities. This project will also have an
important impact on the broader literature on cognitive control, which is
embroiled in a controversy over hierarchical processing. The outer-loop inner-
loop theory provides a new perspective on research on automatic and controlled
cognitive processes, which are often regarded as opposites. This project shifts
the research focus from whether processes are controlled to how processes are
controlled.