* 0957648
* Workshop/Collaborative Research:  Vision 2020: An Open Space Technology Workshop on the Future of Earthquake Engineering; St. Louis, Missouri; January 2010
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,11/30/2009
* Shirley Dyke, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 11/30/2009
* USD 111,164.00

This award supports a workshop in January 2010 to formulate a vision for
earthquake engineering in the United States for 2020. Workshop participants
representing the diversity of the earthquake engineering community will have the
opportunity to gather, distill, and formulate principal and potentially
transformative new directions in earthquake engineering research, practice,
education and outreach. The next ten years are crucial for development of this
engineering discipline. The lack of focus induced by damage in a major
earthquake is also a unique opportunity to set the stage for development of
areas of earthquake engineering that would not have emerged when driven by an
earthquake emergency, and to maximize the use of the state of the art NEES
research facilities. Open Space Technology will be used to conduct the two-day
workshop. This is a radically new way to conduct a workshop. It is based on a
single strong theme and relies on self-organization of the meeting participants
to generate, develop, refine, and formulate the meeting outcomes. The workshop
is facilitated by a professional facilitator and guided by the workshop
organizers to produce the desired outcomes.

Objectives and Broader Impacts: The objectives of the workshop are to: 1)
describe a desired state of earthquake engineering in 2020; 2) identify major
trends in earthquake engineering research, education and outreach to transform
the current state into the desired state; 3) identify the enabling theories and
technologies, as well as education and outreach methods; and 4) identify a set
of metrics to measure the progress along the identified path. The plan for
transformation of earthquake engineering will broadly impact the coming
generation of students through the identification of new research and practice
interests and new approaches for conducting multidisciplinary work. The workshop
report will be broadly disseminated through the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP) web site at http://www.nehrp.gov.

Intellectual Merit: The key to success of this workshop is the interaction of
experts from different disciplines that represent the entire earthquake
engineering ecosystem. This workshop will yield a new vision for earthquake
engineering: one of a complex system of interacting disciplines where new
knowledge is generated through intellectual efforts at the intersections of the
constituent branches of science and engineering.