* 0957285
* New methods for treating electrostatics and adaptive partitioning in QM/MM simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Qiang Cui, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2013
* USD 410,001.00

Qiang Cui of the University of Wisconsin, Madison is supported by an award from
the Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop accurate but
efficient quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) methods for use in
biological and complex chemical systems. The PI and his research group are
pursuing effective electrostatic treatments for QM/MM simulations that employ
finite sphere boundary conditions, thus helping to focus configurational
sampling to the active site and making ab initio QM/MM simulations cost
effective. They are developing a microscopic/mesoscopic model in which atoms
within a spherical region are treated atomistically while the rest of the
protein is represented by polarizable dipoles at the residue level; the bulk
solvent is a Gaussian field, which is equivalent to a dielectric continuum in
the static limit. One long term goal is to apply this new approach to identify
molecular factors that dictate transition metal binding specificity in systems
like metal chaperones and metal specific transcription factors. The methods are
also being applied to chemical processes that explicitly involve many water
molecules, either in bulk solution, the air/water interface or the interior of
biomolecules.

The novel computational methods that the PI and his research group develop may
be used to study a broad range of important problems in chemistry, biology,
medicine and environmental science that are currently difficult or impossible to
study. These theoretical/computational studies have the potential to reveal
surprising mechanisms at the microscopic level that help explain macroscopic
features of the systems. These methods are implemented in the popular simulation
package CHARMM and are widely used by other scientific groups.