* 0957849
* Novel acquisition and computation in vibrational spectroscopic imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Rohit Bhargava, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

Prof. Rohit Bhargava and his interdisciplinary team at the University of
Illinois are supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the
Division of Chemistry to develope comprehensive and innovative methods for
extracting knowledge from chemical imaging (CI) by (i) improving CI data both in
time (by compressed sensing) and in signal-to-noise ratio (by noise reduction);
(ii) developing novel data analysis algorithms that synergistically process
spatial and spectral information; and (iii) extracting information about complex
patterns and natural interactions that cannot be discerned currently by
examination of structure alone. The approaches are being optimized on existing
FT-IR and Raman imaging systems, and applied to study structure evolution in
complex human tissues during malignant transformation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imaging has traditionally focused on visualizing
structure. This project broadly focuses on effectively visualizing the chemistry
of materials by enhancing theory and computation in the emerging area of CI. The
data enhancement approaches developed in this project will be broadly applicable
to multiple analytical techniques and to all fields of application. Hence, the
project is expected to widely accelerate scientific discovery and technological
progress in, for example, materials science (e.g. in polymer composites),
biological sciences (e.g. in lethal cancer transformation), and forensics (e.g.
detecting prints). The developed tools and educational activities will enhance
infrastructure and help build the national and international CI community. Tools
and dissemination proposed here will help build partnerships between CI,
computational, and biomedical scientists - allowing for rapid dissemination of
results to industry and other practitioners. The project will train a diverse
group of undergraduate and graduate students in cross-disciplinary science,
including mathematics, physics, chemistry, engineering, biology, and computing.
Underrepresented groups will be involved and nurtured into this emerging area by
sustained mentoring. Finally, the developed techniques are expected to be
translated to commercial instruments, contributing to widespread use.