* 0957382
* Archive for the History of Southern California Aerospace
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Peter Westwick, Huntington Library, Art Collections, and Botanical Gardens
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2013
* USD 366,769.00

This project will create an archive on the history of southern California
aerospace. For the last hundred years Southern California has provided the
primary home for the U.S. aerospace industry. Although this geographic
concentration had important consequences for both aerospace and Southern
California, no systematic archive on the subject currently exists, and much
important historical material has been lost. The project will preserve
documentary collections and oral histories in an aerospace archive at the
Huntington Library.

Southern California aerospace illuminates crucial issues in science and
technology studies and in American history. It was a major sector of the U.S.
economy in the last century and employed a substantial fraction of American
scientists and engineers. Its history highlights disciplinary differences
between science and engineering and between design and production engineering,
and institutional relationships among universities, government labs, and
industrial corporations. Aerospace overlaid on these relations the differences
between civilian and military sectors, especially the issue of classification.
Finally, the industry's concentration in Southern California underscores the
effects of place in science and engineering: how technologies can reflect the
particular geographical context that produces them, and in turn how the
production of such technologies influences the broader context. The history of
Southern California aerospace thus combines history of science and technology
with scholarly interests including labor, industrial policy, gender and
ethnicity, art and literature, popular culture, and the environment.

This project will provide vital and lasting infrastructure for research,
teaching, and outreach. The aerospace archive capitalizes on the institutional
collaboration of the Huntington-USC Institute on California and the West,
combining the curatorial and scholarly resources of the Huntington Library and
the University of Southern California. The project includes strong outreach to
science writers and science museums, and it supports an ongoing "Teaching
American History" program for K-12 education at the Huntington Library. A
project website will help disseminate the archive's products. The project will
thus provide a sorely needed entry point for research into this vital aspect of
American history.