* 0957757
* Gas Phase Supramolecular Characterization
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* David Dearden, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2013
* USD 235,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program, Prof. David
Dearden and his group at Brigham Young University are devising new approaches to
the detection and characterization of prototypical molecular devices based on
pumpkin-shaped molecules (named cucurbiturils, after the Latin name for
"pumpkin") that constitute some of the smallest possible containers. The methods
being developed complement existing techniques by providing better sensitivity.
They include the first infrared multiphoton dissociation studies of these
materials, essentially using infrared laser light to take "snapshots" that
reveal the way the devices fit together. Cucurbiturils and related "containers"
are being investigated in other laboratories for potential applications in such
diverse areas as components of molecular machines; in drug encapsulation,
protection, and delivery; and in sensitive new analytical assays such as the
direct detection of insulin levels in the blood (relevant to the detection and
treatment of diabetes). It is widely recognized that the binding properties of
cucurbiturils are sensitively dependent on solvents and counterions, yet the
reasons for this dependence are not clearly understood. Hence, these fundamental
gas-phase studies of structures in the absence of solvent and counterions are
vital to gain understanding needed to facilitate future applications, addressing
questions such as how trapping molecules inside the cavity affects the binding
of cations on the rims, the mechanism of exchange of bound/trapped species, and
the origin of the large shifts in acidity that occur for trapped
guests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The characterization methods being developed will
enable applications of this "supramolecular" chemistry that may ultimately
impact manufacturing, computing, and medicine. The techniques will also be
immediately useful to biomolecular studies involving nature's "molecular
machines," proteins. The work will also have important educational benefits.
Graduate students will be trained in advanced techniques for high performance
mass spectrometry that are vital for the biotechnology industry and the emerging
field of proteomics. A parallel aim is to attract talented undergraduate
students to chemical research. Toward this aim, the instrumentation supported is
also used in undergraduate courses in analytical and physical chemistry,
providing direct experience with advanced techniques most students would not
otherwise see outside of graduate school.