* 0957054
* Isotopic Studies of Human Movement in the Prehistoric American Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* James Burton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2014
* USD 269,641.00

NSF funding will be used for the study of human mobility in the prehistoric
Southwestern United States. This area witnessed millennia of migration and
movement for various reasons, including colonization, conflict, and climate
change. Many questions regarding mobility in this area remain difficult to
answer, however, in part because archaeological methods have focused on
artifacts and architecture as proxies for people. Things and ideas can be
borrowed, stolen, or traded. A new method in archaeology involving the analysis
of isotopes in human tooth enamel, however, provides a direct measure of
movement. Prof. T. Douglas Price and colleagues will use isotopes of strontium,
oxygen, and carbon in tooth enamel to directly investigate human movement,
building on a successful earlier study at Grasshopper Pueblo, Arizona. The
principle of the method is straightforward and well documented. Enamel forms in
early childhood and incorporates the isotopic ratio of the place of birth.
Enamel is inert and resistant to contamination and decomposition, thus providing
an isotopic signature of place of birth. This signature is retained after death
and often after burial. Because the isotopic signal in bone is continually
updated during life it reflects recent residence. If the isotopic signal of the
place of death is different from the enamel, the individual must have moved to a
different geological location during his/her lifetime. Carbon isotopes reflect
diet. A pilot study of 32 teeth from 3 sites in three different areas documents
significant variability and the presence of non-locals. Related projects will
measure carbon and nitrogen isotopes in bone for paleodiet and ancient DNA for
genetic relationships in the same individuals. Samples will be shared among the
research groups to reduce the impact on collections. The three study areas for
this project, and some of the important research questions, are 1. The
introduction of agriculture into Four Corners region, and relationships between
Eastern and Western Basketmaker cultures. 2. Human movement and interaction in
Chaco Canyon and northwestern New Mexico where isotope studies of timber, maize,
and deer have documented long-distance transport. Fascinating questions concern
the origin, nature, and causes for this phenomenon. The relationship between the
Chaco Great Houses and their satellite communities remain one of the more
intriguing mysteries in American archaeology. Research will focus on the humans
at Pueblo Bonito and other Great House pueblos where evidence from burial
practices suggests social inequality. Samples from outlier communities will be
included for comparison. 3. Investigation of the Mimbres culture of southwestern
New Mexico will focus on the relationship between Mimbres and Hohokam and
Mogollon groups in the ancient Southwest. There are also indications of ties
with the large, regional center of Casas Grandes, some 200 km to the south in
northern Mexico. A more general question concerns the movement of Uto-Aztecan
groups from Central Mexico into the Southwest and their relationship with
indigenous populations. Isotopic analysis of human tooth enamel from these three
areas should provide substantial insight into many of these questions. This
research will help us understand the nature and extent of human movement during
the last 2000 years or so of prehistory in the American Southwest.