* 0957408
* Fiber Optic Cable on the Tundra:  placement techniques, environmental considerations and equipment longevity
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Rorik Peterson, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 08/31/2013
* USD 200,001.00

This project will investigate the feasibility of installing fiber optic cable
directly on the ground surface of Arctic tundra. For isolated northern
communities lacking road beds or power line routes to the outside world,
standard cable burial techniques are not cost-effective. Installing fiber optic
cable directly on the ground surface without burial in extreme northern climates
poses several engineering and environmental issues that must be investigated,
including wild fire, animals, vegetation impact, thermal strain, river ice, off-
road vehicle traffic, and lightning. The overall objective is to determine
whether this installation technique is feasible by addressing these issues with
field and laboratory tests. The project has six primary goals. (1) Perform a
literature survey of past experience in similar installations with electric
power cable and pipelines. (2) Perform industry standard characterization
measurements of the fiber optic cable performance using an optical time domain
reflectometer and optical spectrum analyzer. (3) Measure and record any signs of
deterioration and/or damage to the cable exterior armor due to the harsh Arctic
environment. (4) Observe and assess the environmental impact of the surface laid
cable on the tundra vegetation. (5) Design and test a suitable anchoring system
for stream and river crossings that can withstand ice rafting during spring
melt. (6) Document and assess the impact of wild animals on the cable, and any
reciprocal hazards the cable may pose to the wildlife. At the end of the two-
year project, a recommendation as to the feasibility of this installation
technique will be made based on a synthesis of all measurement data and
observations. A detailed report on the field and laboratory tests, results, and
conclusions will be written. The broader impact of this project is in helping to
find a cost-effective way to bring high speed broadband communication to rural
Alaska, and to remote research stations. If this project demonstrates that fiber
optic communication can be brought to rural high northern Alaska, it will make a
significant contribution to helping rural communities participate in the broader
community, national forums, and the global economy.