* 0957080
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Bruker 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer to Support Research at the University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* John Droske, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 255,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor
James Brummer and colleagues Robert C. Badger, Nathan Bowling, and John P.
Droske from the Department of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-Stevens
Point will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer capable of supporting one-
dimensional, two-dimensional, time-resolved, and temperature-dependent studies.
The instrument will be used to support research activities such as: 1) tuning
luminescence properties of Re(I) and W(0) complexes; 2) coordination driven
planarization of aryleneethynylenes; 3) synthesis and characterization of
polymers containing disulfide crosslinkers; 4) structural elucidation of
synthesized indole alkaloidal natural products and prodrugs; 5) study of metal-
metal quadruply bonded complexes; 6) study of germanium coordination compounds
and germanium nanoparticles; and 7) deposition of nanowires onto diamond
surfaces using ionic liquids.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials
chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching
as well as research.