* 0957963
* Priming in Arabidopsis Systemic Acquired Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Jean Greenberg, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 09/30/2015
* USD 495,683.00

Upon infection with certain microbes, plants become more resistant to subsequent
infections with a broad spectrum of disease-causing agents. Characterization of
this phenomenon, called systemic acquired resistance or SAR, has great societal
impact through the development of environmentally friendly and sustainable
methods for protecting crop plants from disease. In the previous NSF-sponsored
project, SAR was found to be associated with defense priming through the
increased production and long distance transport of a plant metabolite called
azelaic acid. When plants are primed due to exposure to azelaic acid, they
activate their defenses more quickly and to higher levels when a new infection
ensues. The current renewal project aims to use genetics, biochemistry and
molecular biology to (1) examine the characteristics of the primed state of
plant cells and (2) discover which plant components are important for the
production and action of azelaic acid. This research will result in the creation
of essential new knowledge that can be exploited for crop protection strategies.
Specifically, the research will discern the degree to which the primed state is
associated with changes in proteins called histones that bind genetic material
and enable specific genes to be readily deployed for defense activation. The
research will also define where and how SAR-associated components act in the
priming pathway activated by azelaic acid. The project will provide excellent
educational opportunities for a postdoctoral fellow as well as under-represented
undergraduate and high school students who will be recruited to the project.