* 0957289
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Lake Erie Watershed Research and Education Network
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Joseph Koonce, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 02/29/2012
* USD 49,729.00

A research and education network will be created to address critical problems
linking watersheds and the ecology of the Lake Erie ecosystem. Problems of
interest include loss of fish and wildlife habitat, urban sprawl, and disruption
of natural flow regimes of Lake Erie tributaries. The network's goal is to
establish a research component for an existing watershed-based service learning
initiative focused on linking watershed stewardship activities with
undergraduate STEM course work at colleges and universities throughout northeast
Ohio. Products will include coordination of education initiatives and creation
of a web-based portal to provide educators access to research data. Core
participants are affiliated with an undergraduate, environmental service
learning network, CLEAN (Collaborative Learning for Environmental Action
Network). Academic institution partners include Case Western Reserve University,
Cuyahoga Community College, Baldwin Wallace College, University of Akron, Hiram
College, Lake Erie College, Lakeland Community College, Oberlin College,
Cleveland State University, and Kent State University. Agency partners to be
invited to engage in strategic planning for the network are the Cuyahoga
Regional Action Plan, Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District, Northeast Ohio
County Soil and Water Conservation Districts, the Western Reserve Resource and
Conservation and Development Council, and community-based watershed stewardship
organizations. Broader impacts of this project will include improved
coordination of and access to educational resources, initially to a diverse set
of partner colleges and universities, and ultimately to all educational
institutions in the Lake Erie watershed. Public outreach and education
opportunities will be provided at institutions such as the Great Lakes Science
Center, Cleveland Museum of Natural History, and nature centers located in the
region's Metroparks. By involving agency partners, the project will add to the
science basis of management and policy decisions in watershed management. This
project is supported jointly by the Biological Sciences Directorate and the
Division of Undergraduate Education.