* 0957750
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory Planning Visit to Kottamia Astronomical Observatory
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Charles Alcock, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2010
* USD 0.00

This planning visit is under the direction of Dr. Charles Alcock, Smithsonian
Institution Astrophysical Observatory (SAO), in cooperation with Drs. Salah
Mahmoud and Hamed Ismail, from the National Research Institute of Astronomy and
Geophysics in Helwan, Egypt. The purpose of the planning visit is to undertake a
thorough evaluation of the optics and support system of the Kottamia Telescope
and to make recommendations for its repair and
restoration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SAO proposes to partner with The Kottamia
Astronomical Observatory for the purpose of advancing astronomy and
astrophysical collaboration between the United States and Egypt. Specifically,
SAO will undertake an engineering planning visit to the site of the Kottamia
Astronomical Observatory (KAO), home to the 1.8-meter Kottamia Telescope, south
of Helwan, Egypt. The KAO is the largest telescope in North Africa and Middle
East. The purpose of this site visit is to assess how best to bring the Kottamia
Telescope, which has not provided stable astronomical images for ten years, back
to its full capabilities. In addition to this NSF award, the Egyptian Science
and Technology Development Fund has allocated resources for the telescope
repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once the necessary repairs have been completed and
the telescope has been re-commissioned, the SAO and KAO partners will explore
avenues for continued research collaboration, which may include joint observing
programs with the telescope, graduate student exchanges, and joint workshops and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded under the US-Egypt Joint
Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to undertake cooperative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;