* 0957293
* Protein-Mediated DNA Looping under Intrinsic and External Constraints
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Jens Meiners, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 09/30/2014
* USD 360,000.00

In this project the PI will study the effects of mechanical constraints on
transcription regulation in a model system based on the lactose repressor in E.
Coli, using single-molecule techniques. This system is a paradigm for protein-
mediated DNA looping a major theme in the regulation of transcription and
replication and is biochemically and structurally well characterized. The PI
will look into three mechanical constraints that a cellular environment might
impose, and their role in protein-mediated DNA looping. First, the PI will study
the effect of constraining the angular orientation of the operator sites on the
DNA with respect to the protein using DNA constructs with specially designed
bends and single-molecule competition assays. These experiments will shed light
on the origin of a three-order of magnitude discrepancy in loop lifetimes
measure by bulk competition assays and single-molecule tethered-particle
microscopy and give insight into how supercoiling enhanced loop formation.
Second, the PI will study how noise from a fluctuating cellular environment
affects the robustness of the loop formation process, which will help to
understand how a loop-forming genetic switch can work reliably despite its
extreme sensitivity to small forces. Third, the PI will look at loop formation
and breakdown in gels that mimic cellular environments with particular emphasis
on understanding why DNA-protein complexes are significantly more stable in gels
even when the pore size is so large that the gel should hardly be an obstacle
for protein diffusion. The PI will train graduate and undergraduate students in
biological physics, using a highly interdisciplinary approach. Special emphasis
will be placed on the recruitment of underrepresented minority students and the
PI will also engage in a broad range of outreach efforts that include public
lectures on topics of general interest in biological physics, and participation
in a Single-Molecule Roadshow for high schools.