* 0957641
* Inducing molecular single file diffusion by co-adsorption in one-dimensional channels for gas separations and catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Sergey Vasenkov, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 12/31/2013
* USD 371,546.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professors Clifford R. Bowers and Sergey
Vasenkov of the University of Florida will employ advanced nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) techniques to characterize the transport of gases in nanoporous
materials. Pulsed field gradient NMR (PFG-NMR) and xenon-129 hyperpolarization
techniques will be applied to materials with one-dimensional nanochannels
composed of dipeptides, gallium molecular wheels, and aluminum-germanium and
aluminum-silicon. The primary goals of the project are (1) to realize the
conditions under which a transition between normal and single-file diffusion can
be induced by one-component in a multi-component gas mixture inside one-
dimensional nanochannels, and (2) to understand the relationship between
diffusion and exchange of gases between the bulk and channel-adsorbed phases in
such systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed research may
have impacts on the development of new strategies for highly selective
separations of mixtures of gases and catalysis. These are two of the most vital
industrial processes of our day, with applications to renewable/clean energy.
The educational plan integrated into this research project will emphasize the
mentoring of undergraduate women and underrepresented minority students, and
involvement of high school students in coordination with the University of
Florida?s Center for Precollegiate Education and Training.