* 0957626
* Determinants of Chiral Helicity in a Group of Novel Macrocycles: Elucidation and Utilization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Mark Peczuh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 445,000.00

Macrocycles are molecules that contain many atoms in their rings relative to
"normal" ring sizes (5-7 atoms. Rings containing eight or more atoms in their
ring are macrocycles. One consequence of the ring's size is that it may twist
into different semi-rigid shapes that can be either right- or left-handed. This
proposal aims to define what factors determine the handedness of macrocyles on
an atomic level. If a given molecule is equivalent to a hand (by analogy), then
the proposed work will look at how fingers (local features) affect the contours
of a hand (global shape). For example, the location of a thumb can be used to
differentiate between a human hand and a canine hand (paw). The objectives will
be accomplished through chemical synthesis of a group of related macrocycles
followed by a detailed analysis of their structures. Once local-global
structural correlations can be cataloged, they can be utilized. They will
motivate drug discovery efforts and the development of novel liquid crystalline
displays (LCDs) and molecular electronic devices. The principles developed in
this investigation will a priori facilitate the prediction of structures (and
ultimately function) of macrocyclic molecules; they will also provide guidance
to chemists as to how these molecules should be synthesized.&lt;br/&gt; There
are a number of broader impacts associated with the proposed project. Identified
determinants can be applied to the design of new macrocyclic drugs and inducers
of chiral liquid crystals for molecular electronic devices. Students will gain
excellent conceptual knowledge and technical experience in synthetic and
characterization technique, and the PI is actively engaged in a number of
outreach and engagement activites that benefit the university, local, and
national communities.