* 0957992
* Collaborative Research:  Climatic and Biotic Transformations of Neogene Mammalian Faunas of Pakistan
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Anna Behrensmeyer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 200,448.00

Collaborative Research: Climatic and Biotic Transformations of Neogene Mammalian
Faunas of Pakistan - Catherine Badgley, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI&lt;br/&gt;Thure Cerling, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, David
Pilbeam, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators from four
institutions will address the ecological and evolutionary responses of mammals
from the Miocene fossil record of Pakistan to changes in global climate, sea
level, tectonic barriers, and immigrant species. The Siwalik record consists of
highly fossiliferous Neogene sediments deposited in the Himalayan foreland basin
from Pakistan to Myanmar. In the Potwar Plateau of Pakistan, this record
provides an unparalleled history of faunal and environmental change in a
continuous sequence of strata spanning the last 18 million years. During this
time period, mammalian paleocommunities exhibited a changing mixture of
cosmopolitan groups, endemic lineages, and relict taxa. Environmental processes
that may have driven these faunal changes are known from deep-sea cores and
other geological evidence. These processes occurred at different biogeographic
scales, ranging from those of the global climate system and sea level to
regional (South Asian) tectonism to the local floodbasin and its vegetation and
local climate. The proposed analyses will test the relationship between
environmental processes and biological responses by (1) evaluating mammalian
faunal change under different geodynamic and climatic conditions over the
interval between 18.0 and 5.5 million years ago, and (2) integrating multiple
indicators of changing paleoclimate from the Siwalik record, including a new
geochemical method for estimating soil moisture using iron oxides, information
from snail opercula about seasonality of precipitation, stable isotopes from
tooth enamel and soil carbonate, and measures of diet and body size for extinct
mammals using functional morphology.