* 0957920
* Linking Information about Self-motion to Multi-joint Coordination of Upright Stance
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,01/31/2014
* John Scholz, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 01/31/2014
* USD 309,590.00

How is sensory information used to coordinate the many joints of the body during
stable standing, while simultaneously allowing for the performance of other more
dynamic movements? This project will examine the influence of visual information
on muscle and joint coordination related to the control of the body's center of
mass and head position. The generality of sensory influences on multijoint
coordination will be assessed by modifying tactile information from the support
surface. Finally, the work will examine how postural stability is maintained
when some of the body's segments are prevented from moving, analogous to what
may occur as a result of injury and some disease
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poor standing balance is a leading contributor
to falls and subsequent hospitalization of the elderly and this project may
provide important insights to guide the development of new treatments. The
project will also provide laboratory experiences for undergraduate students
(through the University of Delaware's Undergraduate Research Program) and for
high school students (through the STEM program of Cecil County, Maryland). The
work fosters an international collaboration between investigators at the
University of Maryland and the University of Delaware and those at the
University of Bochum in Germany, including international research experience for
a graduate student from each of the two participating U.S.
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is co-funded by SBE/BCS, EPSCoR,
and the Office of International Science and Engineering.