* 0957108
* Self-regulation, precaution and collective decision
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Mariam Thalos, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2012
* USD 259,360.00

The PI plans to develop an alternative to the theory of expected utility
(cost/benefit analysis), which is pervasively used in making decisions. She aims
to use the following as inspiration for the alternative theory: The capacity of
biological organisms to avoid catastrophe through the use of triggers or
reference points. The project will explore how regulation by reference points
could be used to generate decision theory principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cost-
benefit analysis grew out of 20th century British moral theory, especially
Utilitarianism, culminating in the publication of von Neumann and Morgenstern?s
seminal doctrine, the theory of expected utility (EU). According to EU, to be
rational in practical matters is simply to maximize expected utility. But EU
treats risk evenly wherever it finds it: increments of hangnail risk are treated
on a par with same-size increments of catastrophic risk. This seems to be
irrational, especially if the catastrophic outcome in question is irreversible.
This leads to the question as to whether there is a better, more precautionary,
model of approaching catastrophic risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physiology
suggests such a model of caution by way of organic systems that organize their
activities around reference points or triggers. When an approaches a reference
point, a self-regulatory mechanisms triggers the damping of further activities
in the direction of catastrophe. That is to say, physiological systems possess
cautionary mechanisms designed explicitly for "putting on the brakes." As a
result, organisms are enormously stable, capable of regulating internal
environments to within very narrow tolerances of ideal values for temperatures
and toxicity. This project will study the theoretical foundations of regulating
social and decisional systems (either individual or communal) via reference
points. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the core of this project is
philosophical, the results of it will be significant to a broad range of
researchers pursuing theoretical inquiries on risk and the conduct of ordinary
life in the face of risk, such as risk analysts, decision theorists, economists,
philosophers of economics, motivation psychologists, and philosophers of
practical reason. The study will also promote interdisciplinarity (joining risk
analysis with physiology, for instance). The findings of this project will be
broadly disseminated to scholars, activists and policy-
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;