* 0957205
* RCN-UBE: Promoting Concept Driven Teaching Strategies in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology through Concept Assessments
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2016
* Margaret Johnson, American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* christopher meyer
* 05/31/2016
* USD 369,650.00

A network will be created to develop, test, and distribute assessment tools
specific to the fields of biochemistry and molecular biology. These tools will
be used to evaluate prior knowledge of students entering biochemistry and
molecular biology classes from various backgrounds. A central web-based resource
for biochemistry and molecular biology educators will be created featuring these
assessment tools to help facilitate educational approaches focused on
foundational concepts, discipline specific knowledge, and essential research
skills, all of which are necessary to prepare students to take on the challenges
of the 21st century. Support will be provided for pedagogical approaches based
on validated assessments of outcomes. The network has four specific aims: 1)
Identification of foundational concepts in terms of core knowledge and
foundational principles, research and skills, 2) Creation of a taxonomy of
foundational concepts and skills, linked to topics outlined in the undergraduate
curriculum recommendations of ASBMB, 3) Development and evaluation of
appropriate assessment tools, and 4) Creation of a toolkit that can be easily
accessed by the academic community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the project will include bringing faculty from community colleges, primarily
undergraduate institutions, research institutions that serve diverse populations
of students and institutions serving under-represented minorities together to
form teams that will address specific assessment issues. The first large working
group, which will include a wide range of experts in content, concept
development, pedagogy, and assessment, will meet to define the framework and
needs of the concept assessment network. A smaller working group will meet each
year to continue development assessment resources. Undergraduate Affiliated
Network (UAN) groups from six regions in the country will meet to both
contribute to the development of assessment resources and provide feedback to
inform the smaller working group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported jointly by the Biological Sciences Directorate and the Division of
Undergraduate Education.