* 0957330
* Estimation of Jump-Tails: Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Tim Bollerslev, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 05/31/2015
* USD 279,600.00

The recent turmoil in financial markets has highlighted the importance of
obtaining a better understanding of the likely occurrence of rare disasters, or
so-called "tail" events, and their transmission across different assets and
markets. The main theme of the proposed research activities relates to the
reliable econometric estimation of such events based high-frequency intraday
financial data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The availability of
high-frequency intraday asset prices has spurred a large and rapidly growing
literature concerned with the analysis of this potentially rich new data source.
This project aims to further expand on our ability to extract useful information
about important economic phenomena from such data through the development of new
econometric procedures and empirical applications thereof. Specifically,
combining the insights from traditional Extreme Value Theory (EVT), developed in
the context of actuary science under the assumption of independent occurrence of
rare events, with so-called realized variation measures, designed to account for
empirically realistic volatility clustering in financial markets, the new
econometric estimators that we seek to develop as part of the proposal hold the
promise of delivering much more accurate estimates for extreme "tail" events
than any currently available procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The proposed research program has a number of important broadly defined
implications for the theoretical and empirical analyzes of economic and
financial data, and should be of interests to theoretically oriented
econometricians, as well as applied macroeconomists and financial researchers
and regulators alike with an interest in the estimation of "tail" events. In
particular, the most important and difficult to manage financial market risks
are invariably associated with rare events. Hence, the ability to more
accurately measure and possibly forecast the "tails," holds the promise of
improved risk management procedures that are better geared toward controlling
large risks, leaving aside the smaller "continuous" price moves. By enhancing
our understanding of the types of economic "news" that induce large price moves,
or "jumps," in financial asset prices, the empirical implementations of the new
procedures will also help shed new light on the fundamental linkages between
asset markets and the real economy. The lack of investor confidence and fear of
"tail" events are often singled out as one of the main culprits behind the
massive losses in market values in the advent of the Fall 2008 financial crises,
and the idea that rare disasters may help explain apparent mis-pricing has
spurred a rapidly growing recent literature. The key arguments put forth in that
literature typically hinge on probabilities of severe events that exceed those
materialized in-sample, or probabilities calibrated to reflect an unusually
broad set of assets and/or countries. Instead, our proposed econometric
procedures hold the promise of reliable estimating the likely occurrence of
"tail" events in a given market based on actually observed high-frequency data,
without resorting to "peso" type explanations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
results will be disseminated broadly at seminars and conferences. The project
will also seek to integrate research and education by involving both graduate
and undergraduate students in the proposed research activities. All of the
research results, including new computer programs and databases, will be made
easily available through the web.