* 0957131
* Doctoral Dissertation: The Science of the Endangered Species Act: The Committee on Rare and Endangered Wildlife Species, 1964-1973
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2011
* Johnny Winston, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2011
* USD 9,984.00

While histories of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 are abundant, there is
little discussion concerning the role of science in the construction of the Act
and particularly the contributions of the Committee on Rare and Endangered
Wildlife Species. The Committee, by virtue of the organizational structure of
the US Bureau of Sports Fisheries and Wildlife, was designated as the scientific
authority on endangered wildlife and used that authority to develop endangered
species science that was translated into policy culminating in the Act. This
project explores this understudied and critical piece of science-policy and
environmental history. The Committee's central role in developing the science of
the Act is demonstrated by the committee's development of the criteria for
listing that shaped the endangered species lists used in the implementation of
the Act. The Committee was also involved in writing draft legislation of the Act
and its predecessors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This history of science project is
largely intellectual, drawing on archival materials to trace the conceptual
approach used by the Committee to create endangered species science and policy.
However, the range of conceptual approaches open for discussion was importantly
constrained by the institutional organization of the federal government at the
time. This project offers a richer understanding of the historical development
of an important and still highly influential piece of environmental legislation,
particularly as it relates to the use of science in the development of policy.
Furthermore, the current debates concerned with the role of biodiversity science
in the creation of environmental policy represent a modern version of the
science-policy interaction as it relates to species and extinction. The episode
to be explored is a rich area of study for providing important insights
concerning the ongoing interactions between science and society. &lt;br/&gt;