* 0957643
* Self-Assembled Catalysts for Asymmetric Ring Opening Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2014
* Sukwon Hong, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2014
* USD 380,000.00

This project will develop novel dinuclear catalysts for asymmetric ring opening
reactions such as hydrolytic kinetic resolution (HKR) of terminal epoxides. It
employs a highly attractive supramolecular approach which enables rapid
construction of multinuclear systems in solution via self-assembly of monomeric
units. It aims to develop a highly efficient, green process of HKR of epoxides
by enabling solvent-free conditions, very low catalyst loading and catalyst
recovery/recycle. First, new Schiff base ligands capable of self-assembly
through urea-urea hydrogen bonding will be designed and synthesized. Second, the
effectiveness of the self-assembled dinuclear catalysts in hydrolytic kinetic
resolution of epoxides will be evaluated. Third, detailed self-association
studies will be conducted on the bis-urea functionalized Schiff base metal
complexes in solution to investigate the correlation between self-assembly and
HKR reaction rate. In addition, organometallic gelation will be explored by
introducing additional noncovalent bonding interactions to the bis-urea
functionalized Schiff-base metal complexes.

With the support of this award from the Chemical Synthesis Program, Professor
Sukwon Hong, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Florida, is
developing highly efficient, environmentally friendly processes to convert
inexpensive feedstocks to valuable synthetic building blocks under solvent free
conditions using small amounts of recyclable catalysts. The proposed research
takes a highly innovative approach by merging two different disciplines of
chemistry: supramolecular chemistry with transition-metal catalyzed
transformations. This interdisciplinary strategy using hydrogen bonding to
assemble metal catalysts will provide a new efficient way to bring two metal
active sites in close proximity which is a prerequisite for the bimetallic
transformations to occur. This novel strategy can be applicable to a wide range
of asymmetric reactions and can have a significant impact on the development of
more efficient, environmentally friendly industrial processes for important
chiral molecules. In addition, this project will provide an excellent
opportunity to educate and train undergraduate and graduate students including
underrepresented groups owing to its multidisciplinary nature.