* 0957872
* Slice Imaging Studies of Vibration, Rotational and Electronic Mediated Photodissociation and Photoionization of C2
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* William Jackson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2013
* USD 373,307.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor William Jackson and his research
group at the University of California at Davis will explore how light
dissociates the diatomic molecule C2. This molecule absorbs light in the near
infrared and visible region, which is unlike the other homogenous diatomic
molecules, such as H2, N2, and O2, that are also made up of cosmically abundant
atoms. As a result the C2 molecule is unique in that it will readily undergo
optical pumping in the collision less environments that are characteristic of
certain regions of planetary atmospheres, comets, and the interstellar medium.
This leads to higher populations in excited rotational and vibrational levels
for this molecule compared to others in this group. This can change the
thresholds for photodissociation, and photoionization, for branching between
electronic states of the atomic products, and for the coupling between the
singlet and triplet manifolds of the excited electronic states of C2.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A focused ArF laser is used to prepare C2 in excited
vibrational states of the ground singlet sigma state and the first excited
triplet pi state in a seeded pulsed supersonic molecular beam. Then an unfocused
ultraviolet (UV) and/or vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) laser sources will be used to
prepare C2 in a particular excited electronic state from which the C2 radical
can be either be photodissociated or photoionized. If it is photoionized the C2+
product can be detected via the time-of-flight mass spectrometer (TOF-MS).
Photodissociation will produce carbon atoms in the triplet P, singlet D and
singlet S electronic states. These atoms can be ionized with the VUV and UV
lasers in the interaction region of the slice imaging apparatus. This strategy
will allow us to investigate how electronic, vibrational, and rotational energy
affect the threshold energy for photodissociation into carbon atoms in the
triplet P, singlet D and singlet S electronic states, and determine precise
thresholds for photoionization of C2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
reveal the properties of the C2 molecule, which remains unstudied relative to
other cosmically abundant diatomic molecules such as hydrogen (H2) and oxygen
(O2). The research has implications for our understanding of the evolution of
the universe and the origins of life because the ratio of carbon to oxygen in
the interstellar medium determines whether the region will be oxygen rich or
oxygen poor. The oxygen poor regions will evolve and produce carbon rich grains
that will have the components that can form the basis of life. The studies in
the Jackson laboratory will help to determine the ultimate stability of this
molecule since it will define just how fast it will decay when exposed to UV
radiation in the interstellar and interplanetary media. Participants in this
research program include postdoctoral associates, graduate and undergraduate
students.