* 0957262
* Standard Research Grant - International Adoption of Conservation Technologies (IntACT): Towards a New Theory of Transferring Technology in the Face of Conservation Crisis
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Patrick Christie, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Layne
* 01/31/2014
* USD 345,794.00

Fishery managers around the world use marine conservation technology (i.e. a
device that protects organisms and/or habitat) to address high levels of bycatch
(i.e. non-target species caught or harmed in the course of fishing). Recent U.S.
legislation requires that countries with bycatch of certain protected species
adopt conservation technology or else risk embargos. The United States is a
leader in the development of conservation technologies and is currently
exporting them to other countries and contexts. The results, however, have been
mixed.

This study will explore the key factors related to successful cross-cultural
promotion of marine conservation technologies by investigating two technologies:
turtle excluder devices (TEDs) and circle hooks. Both techniques are used to
reduce bycatch of sea turtles. The research will pursue the following research
objectives: (1) Describe the types of technology promotion programs used by U.S.
agencies and organizations to encourage the adoption of TEDs and circle hooks by
fishers outside the U.S. and by fishers of distinct cultural communities within
the U.S.; (2) Determine which aspects of these promotional transfer efforts
helped or hindered the promotion and adoption processes, especially in regards
to differences in language, culture, or levels of country development.; (3)
Describe and codify specific methods used by individuals acclaimed for their
abilities to successfully promote adoption of conservation technologies cross-
culturally. To meet these objectives, the project uses a multi-method approach
that includes participant observation, in-depth interviews, surveys, document
analysis, and imitation games.

Research findings will be used to create a best practices framework and to make
policy recommendations for the transfer of marine conservation technologies to
other countries and contexts. This study will yield insights into the
applicability of the theories of technology transfer, diffusion of innovations,
cross-cultural communication, and interactional expertise to marine conservation
technology as well as develop a theory specific for the international use of
conservation technologies. Such a theory will provide a deeper understanding of
technology transfer in cross-national situations, for example, the exportation
and use of alternative fuels and energy efficient technologies to address
climate change.