* 0957098
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Planning a Research Network on Assessing Learning Technologies in Undergraduate Biology Education
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Lee Hughes, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 01/31/2011
* USD 47,676.00

This project will plan a research collaboration network to explore and share
strategies used in assessing the effectiveness on student learning of technology
interfaces between faculty and students in undergraduate biology education. New
technologies, especially those involving distance-learning and Web 2.0 tools,
are being incorporated into biology education, making many previous learning
assessment tools ineffective. Thus new research tools and assessments must be
developed to determine whether these technology-enhanced teaching strategies
indeed improve student learning. For the purpose of this project, we will limit
the definition of "technology in biology education" to those technologies that
serve as an interface between and among faculty and students. These technologies
include web-based lessons, video conferencing, podcasting, social networking and
other similar technologies. This project will fund two planning meetings which
will identify the major research and assessment concerns on this topic in order
to prepare a proposal for a Research Collaboration Network to address these
issues. The planning meetings will be held at the University of North Texas in
Denton, Texas in the spring and early summer of 2010. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity includes bringing together experts
from biology, instructional technology, assessment, and virtual networking. The
group will plan the necessary infrastructure and assessments that will be needed
to support and disseminate an interdisciplinary research community focused on
assessing the effectiveness of learning technologies in undergraduate biology
education. Since a growing number of undergraduate students are exposed to
technology-enhanced instruction in their biology courses, this project will have
broader impact by determining the types of assessments and collaborations needed
by the community of scholars who are engaging in research on technology-enhanced
biology education. The planning workshops and focus groups will engage biology
and education researchers from across the country who represent a variety of
institutions, disciplines, and backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported jointly by the Biological Sciences Directorate and the Division of
Undergraduate Education.