* 0957794
* Roles of Membrane Trafficking and Receptor-Kinase Signaling during Plant Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2010,05/31/2012
* Sarah Liljegren, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Alexander McClure
* 05/31/2012
* USD 482,424.00

Sarah Liljegren&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0957794&lt;br/&gt;Title: Roles of Membrane
Trafficking and Receptor-Kinase Signaling in Plant
Development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants rely on signaling pathways to coordinate
their growth and development as well as elaborate mechanisms to control the
movements of proteins within their cells. Key regulators of protein movement in
plant and animal cells include members of the ADP-ribosylation factor GTPase
activating protein (ARF GAP) family which promote efficient loading of protein
cargo into membrane-bound vesicles. Studies of an Arabidopsis ARF GAP, NEVERSHED
(NEV), have revealed an essential role for regulating protein movement during
the programmed process of cell separation that leads to flower abscission. A
sensitized genetic screen has led to the identification of a set of three
receptor-like kinases, EVERSHED (EVR), SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE
KINASE1 (SERK1), and CAST AWAY (CST), that function to prevent abscission. The
primary focus of this project is to characterize the roles of the EVR, SERK1,
and CST receptor-like kinases as temporal and spatial inhibitors of organ
separation, and to determine whether they control abscission by regulating the
localization or activity of other receptor-like kinases known to activate
abscission. The secondary objective of this project is to analyze the functions
of NEV and another closely-related ARF GAP during cell expansion and plant
growth. A combination of molecular, genetic, biochemical and cell biological
approaches will be used to carry out these research objectives. The expected
results are that both the timing and extent of the loss of cell adhesion in
plants are tightly controlled by complex interactions between receptor-like
kinases. This research is likely to provide novel insights into how abscission
could be controlled in crop plants and has the potential to enhance our
understanding of fundamental questions in plant biology such as how the
availability of the transmembrane receptors that activate diverse signaling
pathways is regulated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;