* 0957254
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Willamette Valley Biological Education Network (WVBEN): Using Regional Pedagogical Communities to Improve Undergradaute Learning Environments in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2010,06/30/2010
* C Reiness, University of Portland
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 50,000.00

The Willamette Valley Biological Education Network (WVBEN) project entails the
planning and initial development of a sustainable regional pedagogical community
to engage faculty members in professional development activities that improve
undergraduate biology education and provide a model for development of other
regional networks. The pedagogical community will include public, private,
2-year, and 4-year institutions with faculty members from biology, chemistry,
education and mathematics. This faculty development project emerges from the
belief that individual faculty members acting alone generally do not have the
knowledge, will, time, support or resources to mount and sustain pedagogical
reform. The goal is to lower these barriers to reform by establishing a regional
pedagogical community that is sustained over time, collaborative, and focused on
evidence about student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WVBEN will contribute to
the growing base of data on the value of networks by documenting its progress
and disseminating the lessons learned. It will develop and implement pedagogical
audit and needs assessment surveys and assess the impact of activities on
participants. The leadership team will document how well the organizational
structure is working and determine how it can be improved. In addition, the
number of institutions contacted and the response of those institutions to
joining a regional pedagogical community will be
documented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance the infrastructure
for education in biological sciences by establishing a regional pedagogical
network. By assessing, documenting and disseminating its work it will foster
understanding of how we change institutional cultures and faculty activities
through creating communities of practice. The network will be designed to serve
as a model for other regions, contribute to data about the value of communities
of practice, and serve as the foundation for the larger regional Northwest
Biological Education Network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
jointly by the Biological Sciences Directorate and the Division of Undergraduate
Education.