* 0957430
* Stochastic Modeling of Post-Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression in Bacteria
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Rahul Kulkarni, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2013
* USD 351,758.00

In this project the PI will develop quantitative stochastic models for
modulation of gene expression by post-transcriptional regulation using a
combination of analytical approach and stochastic simulations. The specific aims
are to: 1) Develop an analytical framework for modeling intrinsic noise in gene
expression focusing on post-transcriptional regulation by proteins. 2) Develop
analytical and computational models for post-transcriptional regulation of gene
expression by small RNAs. 3) Model post-transcriptional regulation of gene
expression by the quorum sensing (QS) and carbon storage regulator (CsrA)
pathways. The project will contribute several significant results to the
theoretical framework for interpretation and analysis of experiments focusing on
stochastic effects in gene expression. The exact results obtained will connect
mRNA and protein distributions with general models of gene expression. The
interdisciplinary aspects of the proposed research will lead to important
advances in biological research. The proposed modeling of the QS and the CsrA
regulatory networks will provide important insight into coordination and
coregulation of gene expression by these pathways. At a broader level, the
proposed research will contribute to a quantitative understanding of cellular
pathways in which posttranscriptional regulation plays a critical role. The
project will involve mentoring physics and biology students in interdisciplinary
research on biological systems. In addition to training the graduate and
undergraduate students performing the research, the proposed work will modernize
an existing course in biological physics with the integration of results from
current research into the coursework. All course material and computer programs
developed during the course of the proposed work will be made freely available
to the scientific community via Web interfaces thereby accelerating the pace of
discovery. The results obtained during the course of the proposed research will
be important inputs in guiding strategies aimed at controlling the QS and CsrA
pathways.