* 0957177
* CAREER: Genomic Analysis of Pheromone-Mediated Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 02/28/2009,08/31/2014
* Christina Grozinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2014
* USD 647,043.00

Chemical communication is a complex process in which a chemical signal is
translated into a distinct behavioral or physiological response. The
environmental context, physiological state, or genotype of the receiving animal
can profoundly affect how the animal responds, but the molecular bases for this
modulation are largely unknown. This project is designed to study the genetic
and physiological factors that modulate how honey bees respond to queen
mandibular pheromone (QMP), the main pheromonal regulator of bee behavior and
colony organization. QMP is unusual in that it induces a variety of responses.
These studies will characterize the effects of physiological factors and genetic
variation on three responses, but also determine if primer and releaser
pheromone responses are coupled, and if specific brain gene expression patterns
are associated with different responses. This project will provide insight into
how an external chemical cue is translated into a behavioral or physiological
response by the brain, and will also address the physiological, genotypic and
evolutionary factors that modulate these processes. The studies will serve as a
platform for integrated education, training and outreach activities. In
particular the behavioral assays will be the cornerstone of a program aimed at
engaging high school students in hands-on scientific research, by allowing them
to create, design, and analyze their own experiments using honey bees. The
microarray studies will be used in two new courses, Insect Neurogenomics and
Molecular Techniques in Ecology and Evolution, to both demonstrate to students
the opportunities available in interdisciplinary molecular research on non-
genetic model systems and to familiarize them with cutting edge molecular
techniques. Lastly, these studies will help build and support an active research
program that engages K-12 students, undergraduates, graduate students and post-
doctoral researches, and integrates their work with a number of collaborative
ventures both within and between departments at NCSU, and nationally and
internationally.