* 0958630
* 2010 Gordon Research Conference on Thin Film and Small Scale Mechanical Behavior; held July 25-30, 2010.
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2011
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 02/28/2011
* USD 20,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on "Thin Film and Small Scale Mechanical
Behavior" will be held from July 25 to 30, 2010, at Colby College in Waterville,
Maine. Financial support will help defray the conference fees and travel costs
for invited speakers and discussion leaders as well as graduate students, post-
docs and junior faculty members.&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit is based on
the fact that the topic of the conference is highly trans-disciplinary,
involving scientists with backgrounds in materials science and mechanics as well
as colleagues from neighboring areas including condensed matter physics,
electrical engineering and even biology. It is well established that the
mechanical behavior of materials changes when they are geometrically confined to
a small scale in at least one dimension. This may affect elastic, plastic and
time-dependent deformation as well as degradation mechanisms such as fracture,
fatigue and wear. The fundamental mechanisms and scientific understanding of
these changes, however, require continued investigation and are the subject of
many research projects. The study of small scale mechanical behavior has
benefitted from fundamental studies of physical mechanisms linked to materials
science and engineering reaching towards modern applications ranging from
optical and microelectronic devices and nano- or micro-electrical mechanical
systems (NEMS/MEMS) to devices for energy production and storage. This research
area has always taken advantage of recent progress in atomistic and
micromechanical modeling, as well as materials characterization and in-situ
measurements at small length scales. As such, the study of small scale
mechanical behavior has fertilized many aspects of research in the fields of
materials science and applied mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;Previous meetings have always
led to intense discussions of new and unexpected results and observations, and
in many cases new research and collaborations between attendees have been
initiated. The 2010 Conference will continue to cover topics of lasting
significance to the field such as elasticity, plastic deformation, and fracture
in small structures. In addition, it will highlight topics of growing
importance. Particularly, emerging topics in the area of energy conversion and
storage, such as materials for batteries, will be highlighted.&lt;br/&gt;This
GRC will have a broad impact on knowledge dissemination, stimulation of new
ideas and research collaborations. At previous GRC meetings on this topic, more
than 100 international experts on the subject came together, with backgrounds in
the areas described above and with a large portion of participants coming from
Europe and Asia. Typically, more than half of the participants are students or
young researchers from academia, national laboratories, and industry. The
meeting brings these young scholars into direct contact with experts in the
unique atmosphere of a GRC, stimulating not only their specific research
interests but even more importantly integrating them into a scientific
community. &lt;br/&gt;We will make a strong effort to invite speakers and
discussion leaders and to support students who are diverse in background,
gender, and race. Also, it is anticipated that all invited speakers will be
presenting for the first time at this GRC. After each oral presentation, there
will be ample time for questions and in-depth discussions. For this, the
discussion leaders are very important and will be carefully chosen. They are
either speakers from previous GRC meetings who can provide an overarching
perspective and/or very experienced people who have done distinguished work and
are adept at posing stimulating questions. It is further planned to have summary
discussions at the end of each session. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;