* 0958144
* RAPID:  Commuter Risk Perceptions after the Washington DC Metrorail Collision
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Pamela Murray-Tuite, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2010
* USD 34,857.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) funds the collection of
important, perishable data on how risk perceptions after a vivid event that
received widespread media coverage 1) influence travelers' selection of
transportation mode in the near, medium, and long term; 2) change the tradeoffs
transit users are willing to make among safety, speed, frequency of service,
cost, and reliability after such an incident; and 3) attenuate or sharpen over
time and geographic distance from the accident. This grant allows a small team
to collect shifting traveler perception and decision data through three waves of
a survey of Metrorail and Park-and-Ride bus commuters. Our hypotheses are that
in the aftermath of the accident, changes in risk perceptions over time and
space?the amount of time since the June 22nd accident and the distance of
commuters from both the accident site and the line on which it
occurred?influence mode and route choices, as well as preferences for different
characteristics of transit. We will administer a set of choice experiments in
each wave to test these hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To the best of our
knowledge, studies of mode choice and system preferences in the aftermath of a
major disruptive event do not exist. The data will allow (1) consideration of
safety in mode choice models and (2) systematic examination of the attenuation
of intense feelings (resulting from the crash) over space and time and their
role in decision making. This study also provides attitudinal and preference
data in the context of major incidents and allows analysis that policy makers
and transit agencies can use to plan appropriate alternative transit-based modes
for captive riders. Such planning will help minimize personal economic impacts
associated with the event and psychological impacts of temporary loss of
connectivity. Furthermore, this research will improve the partnership between
social science and engineering.