* 0958214
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer for studies in biogeochemistry at Southern Oregon University.
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2010,09/30/2013
* John Roden, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2013
* USD 490,737.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation-
Recovery and Reinvestment (MRI-R2) award funds the acquisition of a stable
isotope ratio mass spectrometer with an elemental analyzer interface at Southern
Oregon University (SOU). The instrumentation provides a powerful tool for
understanding the fluxes of water, carbon and nitrogen though biological
systems. Stable isotope analysis has permeated most sub-disciplines in biology,
chemistry, geology as well as environmental and forensic science. Faculty and
students are increasingly utilizing isotopic concepts and applications in both
research and teaching. The instrument serves as both a pedagogical tool and a
resource for research projects than span many disciplines. With access to this
instrument, local scientists explore innovative new projects and obtain
preliminary data that enhances research infrastructure and prospects for
competitive funding. SOU has a strong commitment to teaching excellence. All
scientific instrumentation is available for use in instruction. Students learn
about stable isotopes in lecture and are able to enhance their understanding of
this complex topic through active-learning exercises and hands-on research
experiences. Acquisition of this technology enhances the instrumentation
infrastructure at SOU for both the Biology and Chemistry departments and
provides students with a powerful tool that can be utilized in senior
independent research projects. Some of the potential projects listed above could
benefit society through an increased understanding of climate variability and
change, forensic applications that enhance criminal investigations and a greater
appreciation for environmental issues facing aquatic and forest ecosystems.
Results from the studies enabled by the new equipment will be disseminated by
student and faculty presentations at regional and national meetings, and through
publication in peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;