* 0958402
* Workshop on Hybrid Neuro-Computer Vision Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Shih-Fu Chang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2011
* USD 50,000.00

Human visual systems represent the most complex information processing machines,
with unique capabilities in recognizing objects at a glance, under varying
poses, illuminations and scales. Recent advances in neuroimaging and sensing
device makes this an exciting time in vision research. We can now see the brain
"in action" while it performs complex visual recognition and scene
understanding. Modalities such as EEG, MEG, fMRI, and eye tracking have yielded
identifying neural correlates underlying information processing strategies used
by the human visual processor. Recent efforts of computer vision research have
also yielded some promising successes, though mostly for constrained problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop brings together world-leaders in the fields
of visual neuroscience, neural computing, and computer vision to discuss our
current understanding of how the brain is able to rapidly recognize objects and
analyze a visual scene relative to the capabilities of state-of-the-art computer
vision systems. Emphasis is placed on identifying synergies between human and
machine vision and potential neural interfaces that could be used to create
hybrid vision systems. An additional focus is on rapid scene analysis and
recognition, rather than reasoning and higher level cognition. The workshop aims
at broader impacts in facilitating fruitful interaction among experts from three
separate fields. The major outcome includes a report that documents in detail
the grand research challenges, opportunities, and concrete recommendations of
actions for NSF and other funding agencies.