* 0958514
* II-NEW: GreenIT: Testbeds for Real-time Data Center and Platform Energy and Thermal Management
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Hsien-Hsin Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 02/28/2013
* USD 450,000.00

GreenIT: Testbeds for Real-time Data Center and Platform Energy and Thermal
Management - CRI Proposal 0958514 The projected power demand for data centers
and servers in the US is expected to grow to about 100B kWh by 2011, and even
expected efficiency improvements projected by the EPA are insufficient to cap
steady growth in IT energy demand. In order to reign in this growth, the
'GreenIT' cross-cutting and cross-disciplinary project seeks solutions that span
multiple disciplines (mechanical, civil, electrical, and computer science) and
multiple technologies (chips/packaging, operating systems/software, cooling
technologies and thermal/fluid modeling, at multiple length and time scales).
The project approach is measurement-based, establishing a 'GreenIT' testbed for
energy efficient IT. The testbed will operate at `data center scale', because it
is coupled with ongoing efforts at Georgia Tech that are providing us both with
(1) a large-scale, commodity IT infrastructure, i.e., racks of machines and (2)
new facilities used for a multi-site collaboration in cloud computing. Commodity
equipment and instrumentation are housed in the CEETHERM lab, in Mechanical
Engineering at Georgia Tech, which offers dynamically controllable air cooling
capabilities. This permits joint control of cooling and IT power consumption.
Additional researcher-accessible measurement stations target new facilities and
next generation multicore platforms. A common thread in this research is its use
and promotion of coordinated management 'across the energy stack', where
management actions taken at different levels of the energy stack are performed
in a coordinated manner. The outcome is holistic data center management for
improved power efficiency.