* 0958317
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Development and Testing of Digital Beamforming Antennas
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Richard Wolff, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 04/30/2013
* USD 401,086.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009. I
also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does not
support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery Act.
"See Section I.B. above for additional information on implementation of ARRA
Section 1604&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This
instrumentation supports research and development of adaptive digital beam
forming antennas and related digital signal processing techniques to enable
reliable high-speed wireless communications in ad hoc and mesh networks. This
project explores the use of smart, adaptive antennas in conjunction with a high
bandwidth radio system to yield improved range and also to suppress potential
interference from unwanted signals. The goal is to develop a compact, low cost,
light weight, smart, adaptive antenna system using digital signal processing
techniques that can readily inter-work with new chip-scale radio technologies.
This technology has commercial and government application in remote sensor
networks, fixed and mobile ad hoc networks, intelligent transportation networks,
and high-speed internet access and backbone networks. The facilities will serve
as a center of excellence for the test, measurement and characterization of
analog and digital communication equipment and systems, providing unique
research and training opportunities in the Rocky Mountain
west.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation
provides design and system-level training to graduate students, postdoctoral
students, research staff and undergraduates in the use of state-of-the-art RF
and digital test equipment and methodology. This instrumentation further enables
interdisciplinary work combining RF design, embedded systems, digital signal
processing and telecommunications. This instrumentation grant leverages REU and
other programs designed to encourage graduate education for Native American
students, providing additional educational opportunities. The instrumentation is
foundational to continued curriculum development for RF design,
telecommunications and embedded systems courses at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels.