* 0958907
* Inherent Predictability of Observed Seasonal Mean Precipitation Variations Over the Continental United States
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Guido Salvucci, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 07/31/2014
* USD 405,249.00

This project seeks to quantify the inherent predictability of observed
precipitation variations over the U.S. on seasonal to multi-decadal timescales.
The questions to be addressed include: 1) What amount of observed seasonal-mean
precipitation variability is uniquely related to variations in the background
state of the observed system during a given time-period? 2) When and where do
these inherently predictable variations in seasonal-mean precipitation occur
within the U.S.? 3) What is the inherent predictability of short-term
(&lt;12-months) and long-term (&gt;12-month) drought occurrences? 4) Do
numerical climate models adequately reproduce the inherent predictability of
precipitation variations over the U.S.?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer these
questions, the investigators will (i) construct stochastic weather-generation
models based upon observed station-based daily precipitation, which can be used
to establish the envelope of variability that arises solely from the random
behavior of precipitation events, (ii) identify observed interannual to multi-
decadal scale variations in seasonal-mean precipitation across the U.S. that lie
outside this envelope produced by chance, (iii) use the observed and
stochastically-generated daily-precipitation time-series to detect inherently-
predictable variations in the severity of drought, as represented by the
Standard Precipitation Index, and (vi) evaluate numerical model capability in
reproducing the observed inherent predictability of seasonal-mean precipitation
and drought over the U.S., using daily precipitation estimates from numerical
model representations of the climate of the 20th
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project will include
improving our confidence in climate forecasts for many regions of the U.S by
identifying "hot-spot" regions of historical predictability that are strongly
influenced by climate-change processes. Further it will establish the groundwork
for a better understanding of the role that regional- and large-scale
atmospheric circulations and ocean- and land-surface forcings play in modifying
regional precipitation on interannual to multi-decadal time-scales. It will also
guide future investigations into numerical model systems' portrayal of physical
mechanisms that give rise to observed predictability. Finally, it will help
determine the applicability of using stochastic weather-generation models for
identifying and analyzing inherently predictable precipitation variations in
other regions of the world.