* 0958696
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Computer Cluster for Undergraduate Research and Teaching in Computational Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Carol Parish, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Carol A. Parish and her colleagues Erin E.
Dahlke, Kelling Donald and Eugene Y. Wu will acquire a computer system to expand
and support undergraduate research and teaching opportunities in computational
chemistry for students and faculty at the University of Richmond (UR), Hampton
University, Loras College and Randolph Macon College. It will support research
in a number of areas including the study of structural preferences across
phases, probing DNA polymerase dynamics, investigation of the metabolism of
flavanoids by cytochrome P450, investigation of motor proteins and HIV
inhibition, prediction of products in gas phase ion-molecule reactions and
infrared spectra, study of quantum tunneling effects on the nitrogen inversion
in aziridines, singlet studies of the formation of diradical intermediates in
Bergman-like cyclizations, investigation of the nonlinear optical properties of
nanostructured organic semiconductors, and, modeling dehydrogenase
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemists and biochemists employ computer systems
and clusters of computers to investigate reactions and properties using
theoretical models and programs. These calculations, often used along with
experimental data, allow them to model and better understand many types of
complex chemical and biological phenomena. Calculations are also used to predict
results and guide experiments. This resource will be used in research and in
course work by students and faculty at four undergraduate institutions training
them in computational chemistry methodology with an well designed computer
system.