* 0958805
* MRI-R^2: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Union College
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Joanne Kehlbeck, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 04/30/2013
* USD 309,950.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor
Joanne D. Kehlbeck and colleagues Susan Kohler, Laura A. MacManus-Spencer and
Laurie Tyler from Union College will acquire a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectrometer. The instrument will be used to support research
activities such as: 1) understanding and using hyperpolarized agents for
magnetic resonance imaging and NMR spectroscopy, 2) determining molecular
conformations, 3) identifying bioactive natural products, 4) advancing knowledge
of nanoparticle structure and function, 5) increasing knowledge of J-coupling in
inorganic transition metal complexes, and 6) understanding fluorocarbon/protein
binding in the environment. The acquisition will foster collaborations between
student and faculty researchers and increase student access to modern
instrumentation in laboratory courses, summer programs, and community outreach
activities.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials
chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching
as well as research.