* 0958548
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Eighteen Degree Water from CLIMODE Observations and its Climate Implications
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Peter Ortner, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2014
* USD 254,671.00

Subtropical Mode Water (STMW), an isothermal layer that forms on the equatorward
side of western boundary current (WBC) in response to wintertime cooling, is
central to understanding climate variability in mid-latitude regions because it
integrates anomalies in both the ocean and atmospheric to contribute to climate
system memory. The STMW region has a large capacity to store heat, and its heat
storage rate has been shown to depend both on air-sea fluxes and on ocean
circulation. The volume of STMW is so large that several years of air-sea
interaction alone cannot dissipate it; after formation, it is partially re-
entrained in subsequent winters to again interact with the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many processes have been identified that could
affect STMW formation or its subsequent destruction. A primary goal of the NSF-
funded CLIMODE (CLIVAR Mode Water Experiment) is to quantify the processes
contributing to the evolution of the STMW of the western North Atlantic,
commonly referred to as 18-degree-water (EDW) because of its nearly constant
temperature. An extensive set of measurements has been obtained over the two-
year field program; analyses and modeling of the observational period can help
evaluate the relative importance of the processes contributing to EDW evolution.
A primary motivation is that CLIMODE analyses will lead to improvements in
climate modeling. This study aims to provide a link between the CLIMODE-specific
analyses, longer period variability, and the need for metrics to evaluate and
verify climate models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The EDW region
with its large heat storage and air-sea fluxes, variable poleward heat
transport, and energetic ocean circulation is a prime candidate for memory in
the atmosphere-ocean system. The proposed research is an examination of the
interannual-to-decadal variations in EDW volume, of the processes that
contribute to it, and its impact on air-sea interaction. Some competing
processes in EDW evolution (warm water advection by the Gulf Stream, mixing, and
oceanic heat loss through air-sea fluxes) have variability linked to climate
indices such as the North Atlantic Oscillation. The investigators will examine
whether important processes can be monitored using proxy variables and thus link
the field program results to the longer climate record to evaluate the
importance of each process, the predictability of EDW evolution, and the ability
of EDW to contribute to climate memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: To
be successful in predicting climate variability and change, models must be able
to simulate those processes that produce interannual-to-decadal climate impact.
An effective climate observing system must monitor the variables needed to
characterize those fundamental processes and improve model parameterization and
simulation. For example, the EDW region is a center of rapid intensification of
mid-latitude storms that may be responding to changing ocean conditions, in
particular, to ocean heat storage. Simulation and verification of climate
predictions (such as changes in storm intensity) depend on developing a series
of metrics that measure how well the model simulates important processes (heat
storage). For the processes that are important to EDW evolution and its climate
impact, critical measurements will be identified in order to develop simple and
appropriate metrics with which to evaluate climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a contribution to the U.S. CLIVAR
(CLImate VARiability and predictability) program.