* 0958739
* Collaborative Research: The Late Devonian Tetrapodomorph Tiktaalik roseae
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Edward Daeschler, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2014
* USD 199,990.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Title: &lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Research: The Late Devonian Tetrapodomorph Tiktaalik roseae
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Edward B. Daeschler, Associate Curator of Vertebrate
Zoology, Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, 1900 Benjamin Franklin
Parkway, Philadelphia, PA 19103&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Neil H. Shubin, Robert
R. Bensley Distinguished Professor, Department of Organismal Biology and
Anatomy, 1027 East 57th Street, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tiktaalik roseae is a fossil fish from the
Late Devonian Period (385-362 million-years-ago) that was discovered in 2004 on
Ellesmere Island, Nunavut, Canada. This species is the finned animal that is
most closely related to tetrapods (limbed vertebrates). As an intermediate form,
T. roseae helps us to recognize the sequence of morphological changes across the
fish-to-tetrapod transition and can teach us about the forces that were driving
these important evolutionary changes. T. roseae was first described in 2006 and
has provoked a great deal of interest among evolutionary biologists. To date,
however, the only published reports on this species have been short papers in
Nature. With continued study and documentation of the abundant and well-
preserved material of T. roseae, we will fill the need for a detailed
investigation of this important fossil at the cusp of the fish-to-tetrapod
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary contribution of this research will be
a detailed publication on a wide range of topics about T. roseae. The core of
this publication will be a thorough morphological description including
extensive figures of many of the 50+ specimens. We will also investigate the
internal structure of bones in the fins for the first time, further document the
ancient environment where T. roseae lived, and produce new studies of the
evolutionary tree across the fish-to-tetrapod transition. The other major
contribution of this project will take advantage of the quality of T. roseae
fossils to assess the functional anatomy of the fins and skull. Evaluation of
the hypothesis that the fins were capable of body support will involve detailed
analysis of joint structure and the relative motions possible between bones, fin
rays, and scales of the front fin and shoulder. The second set of analyses will
explore the relationship between skull architecture and different stresses and
strains in the skull related to movement, breathing and feeding. At the
conclusion of this study, all T. roseae specimens are to be returned to the
Government of Nunavut, and so the timely publication of these data via print and
websites is of particular importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery and
description of T. roseae has received considerable attention from educational
organizations and media internationally; as a textbook transitional fossil it
has become a powerful tool in the communication of evolution to the general
public. The PIs have a record of public lectures and development of web-based
educational resources. We will make use of this research project to further
communicate the results of the work, as well as the scientific process, to a
broad audience and thereby help people get a better grasp of how evolution
works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;