* 0958016
* The Role(s) of the Cation Transporter Nramp in the Intracellular Survival of Protistan Parasites
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Gerardo Vasta, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 02/28/2015
* USD 558,671.00

The protozoan parasite Perkinsus marinus causes "Dermo" disease in the eastern
oyster, and is responsible for the catastrophic decline of natural and farmed
oyster populations. This has resulted in severe damage to the estuarine
ecosystem along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts of North America. Because iron is
essential for growth, intracellular parasites such as P. marinus must acquire
iron from their hosts for successful proliferation. Until recently, however, the
mechanisms involved in iron uptake by intracellular parasites have remained
obscure. The iron requirement for P. marinus proliferation has been demonstrated
and the iron transporter Nramp (Nramp; Natural resistance-associated macrophage
protein)cloned from both the parasite (PmNramp) and its oyster host (CvNramp).
This has led to the hypothesis that PmNramp represents a mechanism for iron
uptake that enables the parasite's successful invasion and proliferation within
the oyster host. This project will use molecular, genetic, and biochemical
approaches to characterize Nramp in P. marinus to gain insight into its role in
virulence, and the impact of competition for iron on the outcome of the
parasite/host interaction. it is anticipated that this project will lead to new
insights into their role(s) in the virulence of parasites of medical and
veterinary relevance. Given the regional relevance of oyster disease, this
project is significant in that it will contribute to development of novel
intervention strategies to restore natural and farmed oyster populations. From
the educational standpoint, the oyster-P. marinus system is well suited for
classroom integration of fundamental scientific principles related to host-
parasite biology, and this project will involve the participation of
undergraduates and high school students and teachers mostly from
underrepresented minorities from the Baltimore area, both as interns at the
bench and in the classroom, through training programs such as ExPERT (NSF),
Chesapeake Teacher Research Fellowship (NOAA), Living Classrooms, Ingenuity,
Baltimore Community College, and mentorship programs from Howard, Prince George,
and Baltimore Counties.