* 0958266
* SBIR Phase II:   Knowledge Discovery based on Personal Web Content Annotation
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,10/31/2012
* Victor Karkar, skribel, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 10/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a Recommendation System that offers users links to relevant pages as they browse
the Web. As users interact with a Web page annotation platform, they use tools,
such as highlighters and sticky notes, to annotate pages. The System is able to
leverage these annotations to accurately model the user's information need, and
to deliver high-quality recommendations. This Phase II project builds upon a
prototype developed in Phase I, applying techniques from the information
retrieval and natural language processing research communities to improve
recommendation quality. This project encompasses primary research in document
modeling, index representations and retrieval models. Further, the project
proposes interesting synergies by drawing in methods from the text
categorization, topic detection and tracking and collaborative filtering
communities.

The Broader Impact of this work lies in its potential to positively impact the
task of doing research on the web. The company's nascent Web annotation Platform
promises to save users time, reducing cost and frustration by providing content
management and organizational structures that allow them to preserve state
between web research sessions. The next step is to deploy the Recommendation
System to bring users the next page they need before they even realize they need
it. Individual users and businesses alike will derive value from the time
savings provided by the company's Platform and its Recommendation System.