* 0958985
* Systematic Sampling of  the Gray Fossil Site Vertebrates:  A Unique Mio-Pliocene Fauna from the Southern Appalachians
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Steven Wallace, East Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 04/30/2016
* USD 342,509.00

Systematic Sampling of the Gray Fossil Site Vertebrates: A Unique Mio-Pliocene
Fauna from the Southern Appalachians&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steven C. Wallace and
Blaine Schubert, East Tennesse State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North America experienced dramatic
environmental and biotic shifts during the late Miocene. However, the fossil
record of these changes comes almost exclusively from Florida - west to the Gulf
Coast - then north through the Great Plains - and eventually to the Northwest,
leaving most of eastern North America unrepresented. The late Miocene-early
Pliocene Gray Fossil Site (GFS) of eastern Tennessee provides a unique and
significant opportunity to further our understanding of the evolution of the
North American biota (specifically the southern Appalachians) during this
important period. Scientific questions to be addressed include: was there a
connection between the forested ecosystems of eastern Asia and those of eastern
North America (as indicated by the Asian components of the GFS biota), until at
least the late Miocene? If so, how long was this connection present, and what
were the dynamics of its breakup? Did the Appalachians act as a forested
refugium while the remainder of North America underwent large-scale ecological
transition? Moreover, because of its isolation, will the GFS preserve species of
mammals which are disjunct from their closest Eurasian relatives (as observed in
North American and Asian plant communities)? Lastly, what taphonomic processes
resulted in such a dramatic accumulation of fossils in the first place? This
project will undertake systematic excavations of the GFS which will undoubtedly
significantly augment the fossil content, species diversity and abundance. The
new on site Natural History Museum, supported both by state and local
governments is a superb facility for growing the fossil collections, assuring
their professional preparation, study and publication. There has been and will
continue to be extensive student training and education on material collected at
the Gray Fossil Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;