* 0958950
* MRI-R2: Development of Magneto-Optics Kerr Effect for in-situ dynamic studies of film growth
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2013
* Dereje Seifu, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 03/31/2013
* USD 199,594.00

Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magneto-
optics Kerr effect (MOKE) for in-situ dynamic studies is an indispensable tool
to probe size effects, surfaces, and interfaces of thin films and multi-layers
during deposition by magnetron sputtering. This project aims to develop an
instrument that will provide the capability to grow and characterize materials
under controlled environment which is ideal to gain critical and fundamental
understanding of optical, electronic, and magnetic properties of multifunctional
materials, multiferroic materials, and filled carbon nanotubes. The proposed
instrument will be developed and operated out of the Department of Physics at
Morgan State University. This instrument will be used to enhance outreach
programs to assure the maximum opportunity for training and research by minority
students. The Unique aspect of this proposal is samples of interest prepared and
studied with MOKE in-situ and ex-situ will further be studied using advanced
x-ray techniques such as x-ray magnetic circular dichroism and x-ray element
mapping spectrometry at the National Synchrotron Light Source of the Brookhaven
National Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magneto-optics Kerr effect (MOKE) used in
preparation chamber of materials is an indispensable tool in controlling the
magnetic properties of materials that are useful to advance technology such as
ultra high-density data storage for next generation personal computers and in
developing fast, miniaturized, and reliable electronic devices. This project
aims to develop an instrument that will provide capability to grow and
characterize materials under controlled environment which is ideal to gain
critical and fundamental understanding of optical, electronic, and magnetic
properties of materials useful in all areas of science and technology. The
proposed instrument will be developed and operated out of the Department of
Physics at Morgan State University. This instrument will be used to enhance
outreach programs to assure the maximum opportunity for training and research by
minority students. The Unique aspect of this proposal is materials of interest
prepared and studied with MOKE in-situ and ex-situ will further be studied using
advanced x-ray techniques at the National Synchrotron Light Source of the
Brookhaven National Laboratory.