* 0958705
* Life Cycle Locational Choices, Voting, and Fiscal Federalism: Theory and Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Richard Romano, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 02/28/2013
* USD 443,568.00

Objective: Extensive research has established that school quality is a key
factor influencing households' choices of where to reside within a metropolitan
area and that housing price premiums prevail for neighborhoods with public
schools that have high-achieving students. Research to date has focused largely
on comparisons across local municipalities and school districts at a given point
in time. Our research will extend this analysis to study how household
residential location decisions vary over the life cycle. It is natural to expect
that households will prefer locations with good quality public schools when they
have school-age children while preferring locations with lower housing prices
and lower quality public schools when their children have left school. Household
preferences for types of public services can also be expected to change over the
life cycle, with young households valuing education and older households placing
greater value on social services. Older households may also favor lower taxes in
preference to expenditures for education. Our research will study the dynamics
of location over the life cycle and the associated potential for a generational
divide about local tax and expenditure policies within communities. We have
already begun research on this topic. Our proposed work will advance the agenda
we have begun. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: First, we will
incorporate variation in family size, home ownership, and preferences.
Incorporating variation in family size will permit us to contrast life cycle
housing consumption and location choices of households with differing numbers of
children. Incorporating home ownership will permit study of the extent to which
concerns for capital gains and losses induce owner occupants who do not have
children ("empty nesters" and young households without children) to support
spending for education that increases property values. Incorporating preference
variation will permit us to account for factors such as differences in the
extent to which attachments to friends, neighbors, and familiar surroundings
influence decisions about whether to relocate over the life cycle. Second, we
will explore the implications of public provision of different types of goods
for voting, household sorting across communities, and life cycle mobility
patterns. Third, we will assemble a new data set to study differences in
demographic composition across communities, changes in community demographic
composition over time, and changes in tax and expenditure patterns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: There are a number of policy issues that
can be addressed with our proposed research. Important issues in education
reform include the study of alternative school choice plans, the effect of
expenditure equalization programs, and the competitiveness of large urban school
districts. We also plan to evaluate housing market policies such as programs
that are aimed at increasing housing ownership among lower income households or
relocation subsidies similar to those used in "moving to opportunity" programs.
We will study implications of an aging U.S. population for household relocation
decisions, the composition of communities, the expenditure patterns of
communities, and access to economic opportunities.