* 0958615
* ARRA: Identifying Objects Within Scenes: Combining Context and Features in Visual Object Recognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Elan Barenholtz, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 09/30/2013
* USD 196,647.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Despite nearly half a century of research, the human ability to recognize
objects visually remains a largely unsolved puzzle. Previous research on object
recognition has primarily considered cases in which the target is viewed in
isolation. However, the visual system can use contextual information -- such as
the presence of other objects in the scene or knowledge about the kind of
environment in which the object is found -- to determine the identity of an
object as well. The contribution of this kind of information is especially clear
when the image of the object itself is insufficient on its own. For example, a
small yellow patch might be identified as a partially obscured banana in the
context of a fruit bowl or as a leaf in the context of a tree. In an NSF-funded
research project, Dr. Elan Barenholtz at Florida Atlantic University will use
behavioral and computational techniques to examine two central questions
regarding the role of context in object recognition: 1) How do people acquire
knowledge about the relations between objects and their contextual scenes (for
example, the likelihood of specific objects appearing in a certain type of
context)? 2) How is this knowledge put to work in recognizing objects whose
images have been degraded and cannot be recognized on their own? This research
will employ two experimental methodologies: The first will use computer-
generated artificial scenes in which participants must first learn the
object/context relations from scratch and later use this knowledge in a
recognition task. The second technique will test object recognition abilities in
photographs of real world environments, including pictures of participants' own
homes or workplaces. In this case, subjects will have knowledge about the
expected object/context relations, based on their long-term experience,
particularly when the environment is highly familiar to them. Human performance
in these tasks will be assessed using statistical methods to assess the
contribution of contextual information in object recognition.

Understanding human visual object recognition holds great promise for brain
science -- as much as a third of the human cortex is thought to be devoted to
visual processing. Such understanding is also important for designing artificial
vision systems, which carry an enormous array of potential applications.
However, previous theoretical techniques, which focused on specialized
algorithms for extracting 3-dimensional structure from individual objects, have
proven largely unsuccessful. Dr. Barenholtz's research represents a strong
departure from earlier approaches, as it assumes that visual recognition relies
on inferential strategies that draw on an individual's broad knowledge about the
world and his or her experience with specific environments. This approach treats
vision as relying on similar tools as other cognitive processes, such as
inference and decision-making, suggesting that there may be a great deal of
previously unexplored common ground across these different disciplines. By
putting the "cognition" back into "recognition," this research has the potential
to contribute to some long awaited breakthroughs in the field of visual
recognition.