* 0958047
* Role of MYB305 in the Function of the Floral Nectary
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Harry Horner, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2012
* USD 120,000.00

In many species of flowering plants, a floral nectary gland secretes rich nectar
that attracts visiting pollinators such as honeybees to the flower. These
visiting pollinators then transfer pollen from flower to flower which not only
increases the number of seeds set in the fruit, but also increases the diversity
of plants by increasing the degree of 'genetic-outcrossing' for the plant. This
project involves the study of the floral nectary gland and specifically a
transcription factor, MYB305, that mediates the development of this important
floral organ. The investigators have previously developed knockout mutants of
MYB305 in a tobacco model system. The knockout mutants fail to properly develop
and they do not produce nectar. This project will focus on a comparison between
the knockout mutant plants with wildtype plants that do produce nectar.
Initially the investigators will evaluate the genes that are expressed in the
developing nectary gland of both wildtype and mutant plants to identify targets
of MYB305 action. The project will also examine nectaries from a number of
additional species of solanaceous plants to evaluate the degree to which the
tobacco model system can serve to predict the biochemistry and genetics of this
very important plant family. Identifying and understanding the molecules that
regulate nectary development could lead to novel and dramatic improvements in
both nectar quantity and quality that could enhance pollinator visitation,
cross-pollination, and ultimately increase plant productivity (yield).

Broader Impacts Various aspects of this proposal are directed towards graduate
and undergraduate education and training. Information is disseminated via the
Nectary Gene Expression website (www.bb.iastate.edu/necgex/). This website is
popular with gardeners, students and laymen. Site hits and resulting emails
suggest it is a truly successful outreach to the general population and has been
a fruitful educational extension for this project. Further, by enhancing the
function of nectaries, increased cross-pollination of insect pollinated fruits,
vegetables, nuts, berries, oilseed and other crops will result.