* 0958107
* Molecular Functions of Protein Disulfide Isomerases in Redox-metabolism and Protein Folding Pathways in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2010,05/31/2014
* David Christopher, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 05/31/2014
* USD 842,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project investigates the roles and modes of
action of the enzyme protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) in plants. PDI-regulated
processes are important for seed formation and endosperm filling, which are
central to agricultural yields and grain nutrition. New knowledge by which PDIs
transfer electrons between proteins will advance the understanding of basic
redox enzyme biochemistry. In Arabidopsis there are 12 genes for members of the
PDI family. These 12 PDIs differ in the position and number of thioredoxin
domains and in the presence of transmembrane domains. This project has
demonstrated some PDIs are located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) where they
interact with, and correctly fold, substrate polypeptides. In the protein
folding process, PDIs use their thioredoxin domains to catalyze the reversible
formation and rearrangement of disulfide bonds in substrates. Proper polypeptide
folding is necessary for the activity, transport and assembly of the substrates.
PDIs have also been shown to chaperone and regulate the activity of substrates
outside the ER. PDI5 chaperones and inhibits cysteine proteases during
trafficking from the ER to the Golgi apparatus and the vacuoles, where the
proteases play essential roles in seed and embryo development. However, little
is known about the roles of other members of the PDI family, their biochemical
mechanisms of action, interacting partners, and subcellular locations. This
research will define the functions and biochemical activities of PDIs, determine
where they are located within cells, and identify substrate proteins with which
they interact. A variety of molecular, cellular, biochemical, and genetic
methods will be used to achieve these goals including yeast two hybrid assays,
affinity-tag purification, fluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy, protein
refolding activity assays and complementation of protein folding mutants in E.
coli and yeast. The physiological, morphological, and cellular effects of over-
expressing and eliminating PDIs will also be measured. This basic research forms
the underpinnings for understanding fundamental and essential cellular processes
common to all plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Methods to
manipulate PDI activity as developed in this research will provide solutions for
enzyme stability problems for environmental remediation, treating crop diseases
and industrial uses. New biochemical knowledge will facilitate the design of
novel catalysts and protein folding and stabilizing reagents for agricultural,
environmental, food processing and bioenergy uses. Understanding and regulating
protein folding is critical for over-expression of valuable proteins in
transgenic plants. The graduate student exchange between Hawaii and Florida will
promote interdisciplinary training in molecular genetics and cell biology.
Central to the mission of this project is to integrate the resulting
technologies with learning experiences that will inspire faculty and student
development from small colleges lacking research programs. The project will
partner with community colleges to continue a successful summer workshop
(http://abe.leeward.hawaii.edu/). Faculty members obtain certificates of
professional development, while students obtain mentoring, course credit and
training in experimental problem-solving. Participants become aware of the
fascinating array of activities and career choices in modern life sciences.
Hands-on training in molecular biology, genomics, bioinformatics and cellular
biological research coupled with synergistic interactions, partnerships and
collaboratively developed teaching resources will have far-reaching educational
impacts on faculty and students of Pacific Island and Asian decent.&lt;br/&gt;