* 0958483
* CI-ADDO-EN:  Major Equipment Upgrade and Improved Operations Support for the ORBIT Open Access Wireless Networking Testbed
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Dipankar Raychaudhuri, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John Brassil
* 02/29/2016
* USD 2,025,000.00

The ORBIT open access testbed for next-generation wireless networking at Rutgers
was developed to address the challenge of supporting realistic and reproducible
wireless networking experiments at scale. The 400-node ORBIT radio grid was
released as a community resource in 2005, and can be accessed by researchers via
an Internet portal (www.orbit-lab.org) which provides a variety of services to
assist users with experiment setup, control and measurement. This project is
aimed at a major hardware upgrade of the computing equipment and measurement
instruments which make up the ORBIT testbed. Specific equipment items being
upgraded are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- All 400 ORBIT radio nodes which serve as
the primary computing platform for experimenters.&lt;br/&gt;- Computing/storage
servers and switching equipment in the ORBIT backend cluster.&lt;br/&gt;- RF
measurement instruments for spectrum monitoring on the radio
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also includes resources for ongoing
maintenance and software support necessary for continued 24/7 operation of the
ORBIT facility as a community resource. The proposed equipment upgrade will
prepare ORBIT for anticipated higher performance experiments on emerging
wireless technologies and network architectures. Specific areas of experimental
research that will be enabled by the upgraded ORBIT testbed include dynamic
spectrum access, cognitive networking, wireless security, delay-tolerant routing
protocols and network virtualization. As an open community facility, ORBIT helps
lower the barrier for experimentation on wireless networks, thus improving
teaching and research productivity in the field. The testbed currently serves as
an important platform for wireless aspects of future Internet architecture
research in the NSF computer science and engineering communities.