* 0958406
* CI-ADDO-NEW: Collaborative Research: Development of DARwIn Humanoid Robots for Research, Education and Outreach
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,11/30/2015
* Dennis Hong, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 11/30/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This project develops the DARwIn-miniature-humanoid-robot platform with advance
computational power, sophisticated sensors, high payload capacity, and dynamic
motion ability to enable many exciting research, education, and outreach
activities. Two models of DARwIn robot, DARwIn-HP (High Performance) and DARwIn-
LC (Low Cost), will be designed, fabricated, and built for distribution to 11
partner universities (including major research universities, RUI institutions, a
women's college, and two local high schools) to establish a humanoid-robotics
community. The project engages the humanoid-robotics community in a concerted
effort to advance humanoid robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results
from the humanoid-robotics community will find applications in assistive
robotics technology for the elderly, intelligent humanoids, and homeland
security and the military. The partner universities will utilize DARwIn robots
in their classroom teaching and projects as well as outreach activities to
recruit high-school students and encourage them to select computer science or
engineering for their career choices. An annual workshop will be organized and a
website will be developed to broaden the DARwIn project and disseminate results.
Public demonstrations of the robots at various high-impact events such as FIRST
robotics competitions will capture the minds of K-12 students and promote
interest in computer science and engineering among them.