* 0958392
* CI-ADDO-EN: Flexible Machine Learning for Natural Language in the MALLET Toolkit
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Andrew McCallum, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 05/31/2016
* USD 650,000.00

Natural language processing, information extraction, information integration and
other text processing solutions are central components of computer science, and
key tools for addressing the ever-increasing problems in information overload.
Issues of information overload are not only personal problems, but critical for
business productivity, national defense, and increasingly government decision-
making and transparency.

State-of-the-art natural language processing is increasingly based on machine
learning. However, the methodologies can be complex, and software infrastructure
necessary for such systems is generally difficult to develop from scratch. To
address this need we have created MALLET (MAchine Learning for LanguagE) and
FACTORIE (Factor graphs, Imperative, Extensible), open-source software toolkit
that run in the Java virtual machine. They provide many modern state-of-the-art
machine learning methods, specially tuned to be scalable for the idiosyncrasies
of natural language data, while also applying well to many other discrete non-
language tasks.

The project will fill three critical gaps: (1) broadening these toolkits'
applicability to new data and tasks (with better end-user interfaces for
labeling, training and diagnostics), (2) greatly enhancing their research-
support capabilities (with infrastructure for flexibly specifying model
structures), and (3) improving their understandability and support (with new
documentation, examples, online community support).

The project will have a direct positive impact on NLP and other machine learning
research, on teaching, and on collaborative research activities. Well-designed
toolkits not only help researchers avoid duplicate implementation effort, but
(a) they encourage sharing of algorithms and code, and thus also cultivate
increased collaboration and intellectual flow of ideas; (b) they foster the
communication of detailed clarity of algorithms and scientific reproducibility;
(c) they help "level the playing field" by providing state-of-the-art
implementations of foundational building blocks and recent methods to top-tier
and small institutions alike; (d) they supply a teaching tool, not only by
making it easy for students to experiment with the supplied research
methodologies. Furthermore, by providing multiple ready-to-use systems, non-
programmers will have access to modern, scalable implementations of text
processing tools that will spread knowledge and use of these techniques across
fields, to the social sciences, humanities, and bio-medical fields.

For further information see the project web site at the URL:
http://www.cs.umass.edu/~mccallum/nsf-mallet