* 0958270
* A History of Behavioral Genetics
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2015
* Kenneth Schaffner, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 198,514.00

This award will enable the PI to complete research for a book that will provide
a general history of behavioral genetics focusing on the period from 1960 to
2005. The PI will focus on human studies, and will deal with classical
quantitative methods as well as the molecular methods developed since the early
1990s.The history will cover conceptual and intellectual developments, as well
as salient social dimensions of the discipline. It will include four topical
areas of special importance in the field: IQ and mental functioning, personality
and temperament genetics, psychopathology (including schizophrenia, depression,
Alzheimer's Disease, and autism), and aggression (impulse problem/criminality)
studies. The major articles published in the field in this time period
(1960-2005) will be re-reviewed, and intercalated with the results of archival
studies and of fifty interviews with both major and minor contributors to
behavioral genetics and critics of behavioral genetics. Ongoing plans are for
the recordings and transcripts from the 50 interviews to be deposited at the
American Philosophical Society for other scholars to access for future
projects.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Behavioral genetics generates both intense
public interest as well as social concerns, based on earlier abuse of putative
behavioral genetic traits in sterilization programs and in the Holocaust, as
well as intense debates about IQ and race. In spite of major scientific
developments since the 1960s, there is no written general history. A critical
and inclusive history can provide a framework for understanding the complexities
of genetic, environmental, and gene-environmental interplay contributions to
human traits. Materials developed have and will continue to be tested in the
PI's and others' courses and articles will be submitted to widely read popular
journals. The PI will continue to work closely with various organizations and
professional societies to make available historical background materials for
social policy utilization. The diversity of the methods employed in behavioral
genetics should shed light on the ongoing debate in philosophy of science about
unity and diversity of methods in science.&lt;br/&gt;