* 0958865
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Health in Shaping Zoning Policy Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Katherine Smith, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 02/28/2011
* USD 11,171.00

This study examines the political, legal, and pragmatic considerations in
addressing health issues via zoning policy. The investigators aim to address 1)
whether, how, and in what contexts the language, mapping, and process of zoning
can address contemporary health concerns; 2) the role health considerations play
in zoning policy makers' decisions; and 3) the consequences of efforts to
include provisions that address health in a comprehensive zoning rewrite . These
aims will be addressed through an ethnographic case study of TransForm
Baltimore, the City's first comprehensive zoning rewrite since 1971. Interviews
will be conducted with developers, local decision makers, and experts on land
use policy and law, environmental justice, and healthy city design. The project
will also include an examination of comparable zoning issues in New Zealand to
serve as a point of comparison.

While research has shown that the built environment influences health outcomes,
little discussion addresses how those involved in shaping land use policy
understand the connection between land use and health. Given that the original
purpose of zoning was to promote "health, security, morals or general welfare,"
scant data exist on whether and why "promoting health" functions as a guiding
principle. This research aims to understand the inner workings of the rezoning
process, whether zoning is viewed as a means to address social problems, how
stakeholders respond to proposed health-promoting measures, and if tools or
processes can be developed to ensure that zoning decisions address health
concerns wisely and fairly.

Contributing to discussions of the relative influence of governance, innovation
and power when changing urban settings, particularly those that face shrinking
population levels and sizable health disparities is a central goal of this work.
Finally, this study intends to produce considerations for what an equitable use
of zoning as a police power might entail and address the limitations of
employing a regulatory process like zoning to combat the complex factors that
create health disparities.