* 0958000
* Roles of Dissolved Methane and Sulfide in Sedimentary Dolomite Formation
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,10/31/2013
* Huifang Xu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 10/31/2013
* USD 209,448.00

Investigation on the roles of dissolved methane and sulfide in dolomitization
PI: Huifang Xu, University of Wisconsin ? Madison EAR-0958000

Most hydrocarbon reservoirs in the US are related to sedimentary dolomites which
are abundant in the geologic record, yet scarce in Holocene and modern marine
sediments. The formation mechanism for sedimentary dolomite is still under
debate. Although ankeritic dolomites have been reported in cultured media of
sulfate-reducing bacteria and methanogenic groundwater, dolomite and
protodolomite have not been synthesized inorganically or abiotically at room
temperature. The main factor inhibiting dolomite and disordered dolomite
nucleation and crystallization is the strong hydration of aqueous Mg2+ ions. PIs
hypothesize that protodolomite and disordered dolomite can nucleate and grow in
solutions containing dissolved sulfide and /or organics with low molecular
dipole moments. The dissolved molecules with low molecular dipole moments behave
as catalysts that weaken the bonds between the water dipoles and Mg2+ therefore
lowering the kinetic energy barrier of dehydration of the hydrated Mg2+. In
order to test the hypothesis, PIs propose to carry out the following sets of
experiments: (i) a systematic investigation on the effects of temperature and
concentrations of dissolved organics and sulfide on Mg incorporation into
dolomite and HMC. (ii) Study on Ca-Mg ordering kinetics in dolomite. (iii)
Computer modeling of the effect of dissolved methane on surface Mg2+ dehydration
using Density Function Theory (DFT) in order to understand the role of neutral
species of methane in lowering the kinetic energy barrier of dolomite
crystallization. All of the precipitates will be carefully characterized using
X-ray diffraction, SEM, and transmission electron microscope (TEM) with
associated chemical and structural analysis techniques. Because dissolved
methane and other low dielectric organics serve as catalysts for lowering the
kinetic energy barrier of dehydration and dolomite crystallization, sedimentary
dolomites and sandstones with dolomite cementation may be directly related to
hydrocarbon source rocks or rocks influenced by hydrocarbon-bearing fluids. The
proposed dolomitization mechanism may also shed new light into practical
problems of hydrocarbon source rocks and reservoirs and long-term performance
evaluation of sites for carbon sequestration. The proposed study will help
choose appropriate sites for carbon sequestration.