* 0958676
* LTREB: The population dynamics of forest understory invasion: mechanistic experiments with generalist herbivores, natives, and invaders
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Susan Kalisz, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2015
* USD 588,142.00

Using long-term experimental plots that exclude deer (native plant consumer) and
garlic mustard (allelopathic forest invader), this investigator previously
demonstrated that 1) over-abundant deer facilitate forest invasion by garlic
mustard, 2) the presence of both garlic mustard and deer cause native perennial
herb populations to decline, and 3) deer and garlic mustard negatively affect
forest soil characteristics. The proposed research will extend and expand the
seven-year dataset on key focal native herbaceous forest understory species to
analyze the effects of deer and garlic mustard on population demography of the
focal species. Integral Projection Models, a powerful new demographic method,
will be employed to predict the long-term persistence or extinction of the focal
species under different deer and invader scenarios generated by these
experiments. This research will return novel insights into the direct, indirect
and synergistic interactions of the powerfully disruptive duo, deer and garlic
mustard, on the sustainability of forest native plant populations and the forest
plant community as a whole. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invasive species and
overabundant deer threaten the functional integrity of native ecosystems and
cause billions of dollars in economic losses annually. Results of this research
will yield needed information on the effects of deer and garlic mustard to
forest ecosystem managers by expanding our basic understanding of multi-species
trophic forest interactions (deer, invader and natives). These researchers will
continue outreach efforts and community engagement via public lectures, the
development of a high school teacher workshop based on our findings, service on
a non-profit board and community organizations, and through continued
development of Virtual Trillium Trail (VTT), a computer gaming platform that
provides a virtual field trip through our field site based on our field data.
The effectiveness of VTT as a learning tool has been rigorously assessed with
middle school students. Research training will include undergraduate and
graduate students and a post-doctoral fellow.