* 0958533
* Collaborative Research: CI-ADDO-NEW: TrustHub: Design of Trust Benchmarks, Hardware Validation Platforms and a Web-based Dissemination Portal
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Mark Tehranipoor, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2012
* USD 40,000.00

Hardware trust has become important and has seen major growth over the last
several years. There is a large and active group of academic and industry
researchers working on various aspects of the hardware trust problem. However,
most research in this area is currently carried out in an ad-hoc fashion and
results are reported using figures of merit that prevent objective cross-field
comparisons of Trojan detection schemes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A few benchmark
circuits infected with hardware Trojans (called trust benchmarks) are developed.
The trust benchmarks pass a thorough test procedure and several detection
techniques. To support further validation of the trust benchmarks, hardware
platforms are developed to validate trust benchmarks and a web portal is set up
to make the benchmarks and hardware platforms available to help accelerate
research in hardware security and trust. Technical meetings are scheduled to
collect feedbacks from experts in the community about the benchmarks and
hardware platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
proposal include development of (i) a detailed taxonomy for Trojans, (ii) a set
of static trust benchmarks, (iii) a number of hard-to-detect Trojans, (iv)
hardware platforms for hardware emulation and validation of Trojan detection
methods, and (v) a repository called Trust-Hub. A trust benchmark is selected
for fabrication using the MOSIS program.