* 0958668
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Volumetric 3-Component Velocimetry (V3V) System
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2012
* Ajay Agrawal, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 04/30/2012
* USD 501,680.00

0958668&lt;br/&gt;Lang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of five faculty actively engaged in fluid dynamics
research from the College of Engineering at the University of Alabama (UA)
proposes to acquire a TSI V3V measurement system. The V3V system is unique,
compared to planar two-dimensional and even stereoscopic particle image
velocimetry (PIV) systems, because it is capable of measuring the instantaneous
three-component velocity vector field within an entire fluid volume. The
instrument uses a system of three cameras to track the three-dimensional
coordinates of individual particles; the data are then interpolated onto a
regularly spaced Cartesian grid. As a result, other three-dimensional flow
properties (such as vorticity, local strain rates, and Reynolds stresses) are
easily calculated from the measurements. The major advantage of the system is
its ability to fully capture the velocity field spatio-temporally while only
requiring limited optical access as compared to planar DPIV, thus allowing for
greater insight into the flow physics for the proposed studies. UA would be the
first university in the Southeast to purchase this state-of-the-art system and
would become one of less than ten in the country to acquire one. &lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition of the V3V will enable the faculty team, which has combined
experience of 23 years using planar PIV systems, about 60 years with laser-based
techniques, and over 80 years with optical measurement techniques, to form a
new, active working group that focuses on optical diagnostic techniques in
experimental fluids, aerodynamics, combustion and engines (eFACE Working Group).
The V3V will provide the infrastructure cornerstone of the newly formed working
collaboration.