* 0958908
* MRI-R2 Acquisition of Enhanced Antenna Measurement Facilities for Emerging RF and Millimeter-Wave Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Ahmad Hoorfar, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 02/28/2013
* USD 568,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;The Antenna
Research Laboratory at Villanova University is a unique regional and national
facility existing in only a handful of US Universities. The existing facility is
capable of automated antenna pattern, gain and radar measurements from 2 to 40
GHz, and has supported numerous projects in this frequency range. This 10-year-
old facility, however, is rapidly becoming dated, and needs upgrading if it is
to continue to be a useful means to conduct leading academic research and
training. Our objective is to expand the&lt;br/&gt;capability of this facility
to include measurements from 500MHz to 110GHz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the new instrumentation is in
expanding the performance of the existing facility to enable future leading edge
research dealing with scale model measurements of antennas on large platforms,
millimeter-wave antennas and arrays, Global Positioning Systems, wireless
communication and RFID Systems, and Imaging Systems, all areas of interest to
federal and industry sponsors and potential users of the
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the new facility is supporting innovations in antenna design across many
engineering practices. The quantum leap in the antenna lab measurement
capabilities will enable development of research and education activities in
commercial communications, wireless receiver localization, RFID, and
RF/millimeter-wave imaging. In addition to clear benefits to our graduate and
research programs, we intend to design project modules relevant to the new
facilities and incorporate them into the undergraduate curricula. We intend to
utilize these modules in recruiting and broadening the participation of females
and minorities in engineering research