* 0958602
* Collaborative Research: Late Cenozoic Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoenvironments of the Tibetan Plateau (China)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Yang Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 04/30/2014
* USD 107,018.00

This is a multidisciplinary, international collaborative project to study
Cenozoic vertebrate fossils and paleoenvironments of the Tibetan Plateau. The
uplift and growth of the Tibetan Plateau have been linked to regional and global
climatic and environmental changes during the past 20 million years.
Progressively cooler and drier conditions, possibly linked to the development of
East Asian winter monsoon, seem to be a long-term trend and left deep marks on
biological communities. Our preliminary explorations in Zanda, Kunlun Pass, and
Qaidam basins in Tibet, funded by a prior NSF grant, have resulted in a
tantalizing collection of fossil vertebrates including mammals, fishes, and
turtles. Pliocene fishes from the Qaidam Basin are highly sensitive to the
drying of Tibet and fossil mammals from the Zanda Basin suggest the origin of
Ice Age megafauna elements from high plateau. Collectively these fossil
assemblages hint at the emergence of an endemic fauna sometime in the late
Miocene to Pliocene (12-2.6 million years ago). &lt;br/&gt;This new grant will
allow us to greatly expand our research program that strives to gain a detailed
understanding of zoogeographic barriers and environmental volatility resulting
from the growth of the high plateau and how these profound changes have affected
mammals in that region. An international team of paleontologists, structural and
sedimentary geologists, stable isotope geochemists, and paleomagnetists, all
experienced in fieldwork in Tibet, will attempt to achieve several objectives:
(1) systematic collections of fossil mammals and fishes in these basins; (2)
establishment of a regional chronologic framework based on the integration of
biostratigraphy and magnetostratigraphy; (3) reconstruction of depositional
environments and basin history and their relationships to the uplift of
surrounding mountains and biologic events; (4) studies of the plateau drainage
systems based on genealogical relationships of fossil fishes; (5) analyses of
stable isotopes to explore changes in the diets of mammalian herbivores, plant
communities, and regional climate and hydrological cycle; and (6) explorations
of environmental implications related to the rising of the Tibet based on
information of faunal successions, sedimentation, and stable isotopes.
&lt;br/&gt;Results of our paleontological exploration are likely transformative
because the poorly explored Tibetan Plateau yields unique fossils that are
instructive about environmental changes and adaptations, zoogeographic barriers,
and Ice Age megafauna origins. Fossil vertebrates fill a crucial missing piece
of the puzzle in the current debate on past biological world and
paleoenvironments in the region as the Plateau elevated to a critical height to
form a formidable barrier for animal migration, to forge new drainage systems,
and to fundamentally affect the climate of the northern hemisphere during the
late Cenozoic. These new data are expected to afford testing of several
hypotheses regarding systematic relationships of several unique mammals
restricted to the plateau, timing and rate of growth of the plateau,
environmental implications of the tectonic upheaval, and biogeographic
consequences for mammals, fish and plants &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;