* 0958723
* Collaborative Research: Filling the Triassic geochronologic gap: A continuous cored record of continental environmental change in western North America
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Roland Mundil, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2017
* USD 80,000.00

Collaborative Research: Filling the Triassic Geochronologic Gap: A Continuous
Cored Record of Continental Environmental Change in Western North America.

Paul Olsen, Lamont-Dougherty, EAR-0958976 George Gehrels, University of Arizona,
EAR-0959107 Randall Irmis, University of Utah, Ear-0958915 Dennis Kent, Rutgers
University, EAR-0958859 Roland Mundil, Berkeley Geochronology Laboratory,
EAR-0958723

ABSTRACT The Triassic Period was punctuated by two of the largest mass-
extinctions of all time and witnessed the evolution of most elements of the
modern biota, as well as the advent of the age of the dinosaurs. One of the
richest archives of the biotic and environmental changes on land for this period
is on the Colorado Plateau, which despite over 100 years of study still remains
poorly calibrated in time and poorly registered to the rest of the global
record. To provide this desiderata, we will drill a continuous a ~500 m core
through nearly the entire Triassic age section (Chinle and Moenkopi formations)
at Petrified Forest National Park (PFNP), Arizona, USA, one of the most famous
and best studied successions of the continental Triassic on Earth. A continuous
sampling (core) is needed to place this spectacular record in a reliable
quantitative and exportable time scale, which has proved impractical in outcrop.
The Petrified Forest core will provide a quantitatively sound reference section
in which magnetostratigraphic, geochronologic, environmental, and paleontologic
data are registered to a common thickness scale with unambiguous superposition
and will provide pristine unweathered samples. With such a reference section in
hand the entire voluminous assemblage of outcrop data from the PFNP and the
surrounding region can be integrated into the global framework. The hole will be
deviated 30Â° from vertical to provide core-bedding orientation intersections for
an azimuthal guide; additionally, the orientation of the core will be registered
to the hole wall using whole-core-scans and compass-oriented acoustic and
optical televiewer images and dipmeter surveys. Core orientation will facilitate
the recovery of a high-resolution magnetic polarity stratigraphy for correlation
to the fossil-rich outcrop sections. The polarity sequence will be calibrated by
a series of high-precision U-Pb zircon dates obtained from discrete levels in
the core, and will provide critical data to fill the geochronologic gap in
global terrestrial and marine time scales for the Late Triassic. The age-
calibrated chronostratigraphy of the PFNP core will be used to address major
issues of early Mesozoic biotic and environmental change. These include whether
marine and continental biotic turnover events in the Late Triassic were coupled;
was the largest magnitude faunal turnover event on land during the Late Triassic
synchronous with the giant Manicouagan impact; Is the NSF-funded Newark basin
astronomically-calibrated time scale consistent with high precision U-Pb zircon
age data from the Chinle Formation; and was the cyclical climate change recorded
in the Newark basin lacustrine record paced by Milankovitch climate change? In
addition to the science generated by the core and its integration into the local
and global environmental and biotic framework, the project will have a major
education and outreach component. The Petrified Forest National Park is a major
tourist destination, averaging 600,000 visitors a year. We plan to leverage this
huge resource by developing a permanent exhibit on the coring project and its
important scientific results for the park. We will involve numerous student
groups during the actual coring activities, including Native American geoscience
concentrators at The University of New Mexico/Gallup and K-12 students from
throughout the Gallup area. In addition, we will sponsor several workshops at
the Park and will reach out to the general public for their participation. The
project involves six co-PIs from different institutions and will last 24 months
and is intended to provide an initial synopsis of basic stratigraphic, logging,
magnetic polarity, and geochronologic data for utilization by the international
scientific community for further research and integration with other studies, as
well as a major platform for outreach, and a better understanding of how the
modern world came to be.