* 0958314
* II-New:  Towards Green Data Centers:  A Testbed for Thermo-Computational Dynamics
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Indranil Gupta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Weisong Shi
* 02/28/2015
* USD 293,893.00

This project develops a testbed for experimentation with energy saving in data
centers via holistic management of both the computing and cooling subsystems. It
instruments a large computing cluster at the University of Illinois that
reproduces representative dynamics of energy consumption in data centers.
Understanding heat and energy dynamics in large computing systems requires
detailed sensing and control on both the computing and cooling side. The goal is
to produce models and algorithms that significantly contribute to energy
optimization research leading to reductions in carbon footprint and operating
costs of contemporary computing clusters. The testbed developed in this project
focuses primarily on understanding and improving software-controlled mechanisms
for energy optimization in systems that exhibit non-trivial coupled thermal and
computational dynamics, called thermo-computational systems, towards better
energy management of data centers. When complete, it is likely to become the
first and largest open testbed geared for enabling high quality research on
large thermo-computational systems. The project is motivated by the increasing
energy cost of data centers, which is estimated at more than $4.5 billion
annually and is expected to grow at a rate of 12% in the absence of
intervention. According to the EPA, most of this cost is avoidable. If
successful, the project will therefore contribute significantly to both the
economy and the environment by resulting in savings in both energy cost and
carbon footprint.