* 0958333
* EAGER:  Doubling Minority PhDs in Physics
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Theodore Hodapp, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 03/31/2011
* USD 131,717.00

Physics as a community ranks at the bottom of science disciplines in educating
the growing US population of African-Americans, Hispanic-Americans, and Native-
Americans. Not only do these ethnic groups remain significantly under-
represented at all levels in physics, but there has been essentially no
improvement in their relative numbers over the past decade. PhD awards to Black,
Hispanic, and Native American citizens are at 1/7th the rate of awards to white
and Asian citizens relative to the size of their underlying population. There
are 180 PhD programs in physics in American Universities. If 10% of these
programs were able to increase their citizen Black and Hispanic graduates by two
per year this would double the annual production of minority PhDs in physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Physical Society, working together with the
larger physics community, is taking a leadership role and in activating programs
to double the number of PhDs awarded to under-represented minorities (URMs)
within the next decade by establishing effective and sustainable bridge programs
between top research universities and institutions where undergraduate URMs are
educated. There is a substantial body of knowledge that has resulted from
several decades of efforts to increase the effective participation of under-
represented groups (and all groups) in higher education in STEM fields. In
physics there are a growing number of physics education research groups
producing important gains in understanding about undergraduates' conceptual
difficulties in learning basic physics. Because most of these groups are at
major research universities, they are in a position to directly influence
physics TA training, which will positively impact the instructional
effectiveness in undergraduate physics courses in these institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;The focus on doctoral students will have a multiplier effect on
attraction and retention of under-represented minority students at the
undergraduate, masters, and PhD levels. Successful doctoral students will form a
cadre of leaders who can catalyze change throughout the country. Doubling the
number of PhD graduates from these groups will create a greater corps of
individuals who can take on important leadership roles. &lt;br/&gt;To begin this
process APS is reaching out to the students and faculty at minority-serving
institutions to establish effective, personal links. It is gathering detailed
data directly from these individuals to inform the larger process. Following
data collection, APS will bring together leaders from top research universities
committed to establishing effective bridge programs. Existing programs and
leaders within the physics community are guiding this process. Throughout this
process guidance is being provided by a steering committee of knowledgeable
individuals committed to improving the attraction and retention of under-
represented groups in physics higher education, who have the wherewithal to move
the project forward thoughtfully and deliberately. The outcome of this effort
will be a set of concrete plans to establish such programs. &lt;br/&gt;