* 0958772
* MRI-R2: Acquistion of Microwave Network Analyzer for Studies of Global Statistics of Waves in Random Media
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Azriel Genack, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 02/29/2012
* USD 125,747.00

0958772 Genack CUNY Queens College

Technical Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The N5242A Microwave Network Analyzer from Agilent Technologies will provide the
speed and dynamic range needed to collect massive sets of high-quality microwave
data on wave propagation in random systems that will dramatically advance this
field. Measurements of the transmission coefficients between a large number of
points on the input and output of random sample configurations will allow us to
determine the matrices for transmission through random samples and to determine
their eigenvalues and eigenstates. This will provide the links between the
statistics of field, intensity, total transmission, and transmittance and will
thereby bridge the gap between optical transmission and electronic conductance.
Among the eigenstates of the transmission matrix for opaque media are states
with transmission approaching unity. We will find these states and will thereby
be able to probe the interior of random systems. We will also be able to
determine the eigenvalues of the underlying electromagnetic quasi-normal modes
and their speckle patterns in transmission. This will provide a full description
of static and dynamic wave properties and will foster advances in imaging and
photonics. The success of this work will strengthen the CUNY Photonic Center
established to enhance the technological base of the New York City metropolitan
area. Students from local high schools and undergraduates as well as graduate
students and a postdoc will utilize this equipment to conduct research at the
forefront of the field of transport. This will expose a diverse group of
students to the excitement and power of research at an early stage of their
careers.

Layman Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

We explore and control our environment and stay in touch with one another via
waves. In addition to light and sound, we rely increasingly on electron waves
and microwave radiation for communication. The shared wave character of light
and electrons is behind the rapid growth of the photonics industry and the
promise it holds for continued device miniaturization and increased speed. At
the same time, the transport of multiply scattered quantum and classical waves
in disordered systems remains a crucial issue in communications and imaging.
Important examples of propagation in random media are electron flow in
conductors and insulators, light scattering in paint, the atmosphere and
biological tissue, and acoustic scattering in the earth's crust. The use of the
proposed advance microwave measurement system will allow us to decompose the
measured microwave field into the fundamental modes of oscillation of waves of
randomly scattering systems. This will provide a full description of the
transmission of steady-state and pulsed radiation. We will also find ways to
combine incident fields to achieve high transmission through opaque systems.
This work will advance the understanding of wave scattering and find
applications in electronics, medical imaging, and geological exploration for oil
and gas. The availability of the advanced microwave source and detector will
strengthen the Photonic Center of the City University of New York established to
enhance the technological base of the New York City metropolitan area. Students
from local high schools and undergraduates as well as graduate students and a
postdoc will utilize this equipment to conduct research at the forefront of the
field of transport. This will expose a diverse group of students to the
excitement of research at an early stage of their careers.