* 0958308
* Collaborative Research: Graptolite Biogeography, Paleo-GIS, and Evolutionary Dynamics of Early Paleozoic Zooplankton
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Charles Mitchell, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 05/31/2015
* USD 155,288.00

Collaborative Research: Graptolite Biogeography, Paleo-GIS, and Evolutionary
Dynamics of Early Paleozoic Zooplankton

Daniel Goldman, Dayton University, EAR-0958372 Charles Mitchell, SUNY, Buffalo,
EAR-0958308 H. David Sheets, Canisius College, EAR-0957672

ABSTRACT Deep-time perspectives on climatic and oceanographic change are
critical for understanding the long-term controls on environmental processes.
This is particularly the case for the 'tipping points' that lead to episodes of
climatic extremes, events that are often associated with episodes of profound
biodiversity change. The spatial and temporal distribution of planktic organisms
has proven to be critical to the reconstruction of climatic and oceanographic
conditions during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic. The oldest geological period for
which there is a diverse and abundant record of zooplankton is the Ordovician,
and that record is provided by graptolites. PIs objectives are to analyze the
changing biogeographic distribution patterns in graptolites from the mid-
Ordovician into the lower Silurian using newly developing global databases,
ecological modeling, and paleo-GIS techniques. Graptolite spatial distribution
patterns should help understand the relationship between ancient ocean
structure, climate, and zooplankton biogeography. Strong parallels have recently
been drawn between the glacial-interglacial cycles of the Late Ordovician-Early
Silurian and those of the late Cenozoic. Therefore, understanding the
biogeographic and biodiversity changes associated with these climatic cycles
will provide insights relevant to our understanding of biotic response to recent
and modern climate change. Although this study will focus on the Ordovician and
Early Silurian biosphere and its interconnections, the questions PIs propose to
pursue - how range area and spatial patterning of faunas affect or respond to
changing environmental history and species evolutionary dynamics - are
fundamental questions that biologists and paleobiologists are pursuing across
our traditional disciplinary boundaries of taxon, age, and conceptual approach.