* 0958774
* Coordinating Workshops for the NEES/E-Defense Collaborative Research Program in Earthquake Engineering (Phase 2)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Stephen Mahin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2015
* USD 320,000.00

In recognition of their common threat from earthquakes and the similar
approaches used to mitigate society's vulnerability to these threats, U.S. and
Japanese researchers have a tradition of working together to accelerate progress
in earthquake engineering research and to disseminate the knowledge learned. The
U.S.-Japan Cooperative Earthquake Engineering Research Program utilizing Large-
Scale Experimental Facilities was initiated in the 1970s by NSF and the Building
Research Institute of the Japan Ministry of Construction. U.S. and Japanese
researchers worked together on projects organized into seven phases involving:
reinforced concrete buildings, steel braced frame buildings, ductile masonry
buildings, prestressed concrete structural systems, composite and hybrid
structures, smart systems, and urban disaster mitigation. With the development
of the multi-site, shared-use experimental laboratories by NSF as part of the
George E. Brown, Jr., Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES), and
the large E-Defense shake table in Miki, Japan by the National Research
Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention (NIED), NSF and Japan's
Ministry for Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT)
initiated in 2005 the NEES/E-Defense Collaborative Earthquake Engineering
Research Program. The first phase of this program, lasting through 2010, focused
on critical high priority challenges in earthquake engineering related to
bridges and steel buildings. This program is judged to be highly successful,
resulting in innovative approaches to resist earthquake effects and producing
high quality laboratory shake table data upon which design concepts could be
validated and computational models for design and research could be verified and
improved.

A second phase of the NEES/E-Defense Collaborative Earthquake Engineering
Research Program is currently being planned. This phase plans to focus on
resilient and sustainable structures and communities. This focus is one of the
main goals and strategic priorities of the 2009-2013 strategic plan developed
for the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP), available at
http://www.nehrp.gov. The Phase 2 effort will strengthen the collaborative
nature of research between U.S. and Japanese researchers and improve the seismic
resilience of four important classes of structures. These structural classes
will be finalized at a planning meeting to be held in Japan in September 2009.
The first planning meeting for the second phase (held in January 2009)
identified two ways for improving the implementation of the second phase. The
participants recommended that "theme structures" be developed by the community
to facilitate collaboration by different research teams, and that these
culminate in a series of joint U.S.-Japan experiments on the E-Defense shake
table. To strengthen and broaden collaboration, it was recommended that a more
formal program of communication among interested researchers and practitioners
be developed around regular workshops in the U.S. and Japan. The specific
objectives of this activity are thus to (1) convene, in conjunction with
Japanese counterparts, a series of regular workshops for sharing research
results and ideas, fostering coordination and collaboration by research teams,
and developing community priorities for theme structures and other details of
the NEES/E-Defense research effort; (2) provide sustained technical support to
maximize utility of the NEES/E-Defense workshops; (3) encourage participation in
the NEES/E-Defense program by the NEES and NEHRP communities; and (4) facilitate
researchers to develop and disseminate, through reports, special conference
sessions, conference presentations, and journal papers, the overall findings of
the NEES/E-Defense Collaborative Earthquake Engineering Research Program.

Intellectual Merit: The research problems to be addressed by the NEES/E-Defense
Collaborative Research Program are technically challenging and critical to
enabling one of the main strategic priorities of the NEHRP Strategic Plan. The
workshops will synergistically generate new ideas and innovative concepts
leading to seismically resilient and sustainable engineered structures, and
improve program outcomes.

Broader Impacts: Workshop coordination broadens awareness of and participation
in NEES/E-Defense activities by the NEES and NEHRP communities, with special
emphasis on ensuring broad national participation by graduate students, early
career researchers, engineering practitioners, and representatives from federal
and state agencies.