* 0958733
* Reevaluation of 'Friasian' mammal faunas from Argentina, Bolivia, and Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,06/30/2015
* Darin Croft, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 06/30/2015
* USD 206,993.00

Reevaluation of Firasian Mammal Faunas from Argentina, Bolivia and Chile

Darin Croft, Case Western Reserve University

Roughly 80% of South America is in the tropics, the low-latitude area on either
side of the Equator that includes rain forests, deserts, and a variety of other
habitats. This vast area the Neotropics harbors most of South Americas
biodiversity, as well as a significant part of the earths biodiversity as a
whole. The increasing encroachment of humans into the Neotropics and other
factors such as climate change have made this an area of highest conservation
priority. But what is the best strategy to preserve this biodiversity not only
the present biodiversity, but that of the future? One way to answer this
question is to study patterns of ancient biodiversity to better understand
factors that affect numbers and types of species in particular places at
particular times. Our project will take just such an approach by investigating
the evolutionary and biogeographic histories of some of the most important and
conspicuous members of Neotropical communities: mammals. In particular, we will
address three hypotheses about how the modern mammal communities of South
America developed over the past 20 million years: (1) mammal species tend to
originate in the tropics and then disperse to higher latitudes; (2) the tropics
act as a museum for mammal species by preserving species that have gone extinct
elsewhere on the continent; and (3) global cooling was the main driver of
habitat change and mammal evolution in South America between about 20 and 10
million years ago. Evaluating these hypotheses will allow us to better predict
how biodiversity might change in the future, permitting conservationists to make
more educated decisions about the best strategies for preserving biodiversity.
Most of our project will be devoted to collecting the primary data that will
allow us to evaluate the hypotheses described above. Although South America has
a good fossil record of mammals overall, most localities are from outside the
Neotropics, and the time slice from about 15-10 million years ago is not well
represented. We will address both of these issues through fieldwork at two
relatively new fossil localities in Neotropical Bolivia that pertain this time
interval: Cerdas and Quebrada Honda. Fossils collected from these sites will be
taken to Potosí, Bolivia, where they will be cleaned and curated. The specimens
will then be compared with those from similarly-aged but generally unstudied
faunas from southern Chile and Argentina. We will revise the mammals from all of
these localities through detailed comparisons, phylogenetic analyses, by
assessments of individual dental variation based on new studies of modern and
fossil populations. The results of our proposed research will be broadly
disseminated through a variety of media including public lectures, museum
exhibits, our local science café, and the internet. Bolivian and US students
will gets hands-on paleontological experience through participation in
laboratory and field aspects of this research, and the project will support the
career development of a US-based Ph.D. student.