* 0958826
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Simultaneous Thermal Analyzer for Undergraduate Research
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Benjie Blair, Jacksonville State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 12/31/2012
* USD 38,002.00

0958826&lt;br/&gt;Gryko&lt;br/&gt;Jacksonville State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: The Simultaneous Thermal Analyzer combining Differential Scanning
Calorimetry and ThermoGravimetrical Analysis (DSC/TGA) will be coupled with
Perkin-Elmer mass spectrometer and FTIR to study new materials and thermal
signatures of biological specimens. The materials research will focus on novel
aluminum-based alloys with open-framework silicon clathrates. DSC studies of
these materials provide a unique opportunity to determine phase diagrams of
aluminum alloyed with two different crystallographic forms of silicon. Open
silicon framework is broken at the clathrate surface resulting in a large number
of Si dangling bonds, which, in turn, form strong connections with the aluminum
matrix, resulting in better aluminum alloys. Furthermore, since large varieties
of substituted clathrates are possible, DSC studies may result in synthesis of
"designer alloys", and open new routes to tailor properties of these materials.
Combined DSC/TGA-mass spectroscopy of biological samples will concentrate on
thermal transitions exhibited by spores and bacteria. Main goal of these studies
will be to develop new methods for fast identification of selected biological
species in addition to recently developed luminescence-based approach. DSC will
be also used to measure the effect of growth medium and environmental conditions
on the ultrastructure of selected environmental bacterial samples. The
acquisition of the DSC/TGA will make significant impact on undergraduate
research and education in rural area of northeastern Alabama by expanding
educational and multidisciplinary research opportunities for a diverse student
population of Jacksonville State University, which is 60% female and 29% African
American.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: Demand for better materials and
fast identification of biological samples is increasing. Thermal analysis plays
an important role in these areas. In this method, thermal response of the
sample, and/or sample mass is recorded as a function of temperature. Such
thermal signature is often unique for many biological specimens. In conjunction
with other methods, such as optical fluorescence, thermal data allow for a fast
identification of unknown spores or bacteria. Thermal analysis is also
indispensible in search for and understanding of new materials. In this project,
thermal methods will be used to determine stability of new class of aluminum
alloys. These novel alloys are built around silicon "scaffolding" forming a
silicon-reinforced aluminum. In fact, these alloys structurally are quite
similar to the reinforced concrete. Since silicon scaffolding can be modified by
incorporating other atoms, such as copper or nickel, these alloys can be
tailored for a particular application. Hence, detailed studies of these
materials could improve aluminum alloys which are widely used from aerospace
industry to manufacturing household items. The acquisition of thermal analyzer
will make significant impact on undergraduate research and education in rural
area of northeastern Alabama by expanding educational and multidisciplinary
research opportunities for a diverse student population of Jacksonville State
University, which is 60% female and 29% African American.