* 0958796
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS)
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2013
* David Bocian, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 03/31/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

MRI-R2 &lt;br/&gt;0958796&lt;br/&gt;Zaera&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This proposal
requests funds for the purchase of a new analytical X-ray photoelectron
spectrometer (XPS) for the University of California, Riverside (UCR). This will
be the first instrument of its type at UCR. XPS provides vital information of
the nature and composition of solid surfaces and has become an essential tool in
materials science research. The new instrument, to be acquired from Specs, will
be based on a mu-metal ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) spherical chamber turbopumped to
pressures below the 10^-9 Torr range, and will be equipped with a twin anode
X-ray source and a 150 mm hemispherical energy analyzer, an ion source for
cleaning, depth-profiling, and low-energy ion scattering, and rasterable and
flood electron guns for Auger electron spectroscopy and to compensate for sample
charging, respectively. It will also include a sample manipulator with linear
movements in the x, y and z directions, a preparation chamber, and a load-lock
system for quick sample introduction. The instrument will be set for remote
control and automation for cyber access, with capabilities that include
motorization of UHV manipulator for all 4 axis (x, y, z and polar rotation), an
interface for remote control of the X-ray source, a special modification of the
power supply for remote control of the flood gun, and the SpecsControl software
package for full measurement control, including sample positioning, analyzer
control, X-ray source, flood gun and ion source. The new XPS will be maintained,
operated and administered by the Analytical Chemistry Instrumentation Facility
(ACIF) of UCR. It will be available for use to PIs, students, and postdoctoral
fellows at UCR, and also to outside partners, including a number of local
colleges (the California State University Los Angeles, San Bernardino and San
Diego campuses, the University of La Verne, Westmont College).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;With the advance of new
nanotechnologies and miniaturized microelectronics, the interfaces between the
different elements that constitute those devices are becoming a larger part of
their total volume, and the corresponding surface physics and chemistry is
playing an increasing role in their performance. Surface chemistry is also
prevalent in problems related to environmental issues, biological and analytical
applications, catalysis, and tribology, to mention only a few. No modern
materials-science laboratory is complete nowadays without appropriate analytical
tools to study solid surfaces. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, also known
as ESCA) in particular has become a ubiquitous tool in materials-science
research. XPS relies on the detection of the photoelectrons ejected from solid
samples upon excitation with X-rays. The approximate kinetic energies of the
photoelectrons can be converted into electron binding energies and used to
determine the elemental composition of a given sample, and more accurate
measurements to obtain information on the chemical environment surrounding
particular surface atoms, in particular their oxidation state. The photoelectron
yield provides quantitative information on the composition. The power of XPS is
that it relies on the detection of electrons, a fact that renders it quite
surface sensitive. Most typical analytical techniques are based on the use of
photons, which penetrate deep into solid samples and yield information about the
bulk. The small free path of electrons through solids, by contrast, allows for
the discrimination of the signal from the topmost layers. Combined with
controlled sputtering for the removal of material over time, XPS can be set up
to provide a depth profile of the composition and chemical nature of solid
samples. At UCR, XPS will be used to study problems related to porphyrin-based
molecular memories, grapheme derivatization, biomimetic-based solar harvesting
devices, zeolite coatings and nanoparticles, atomic layer deposition of thin
films, and catalyst development, among others.