* 0958095
* The Ethics of Geoengineering: Investigating the Moral Challenges of Solar Radiation Management
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,04/30/2014
* N. Dane Scott, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 375,272.00

The Ethics of Geoengineering:&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the Moral Challenges of
Solar Radiation Management&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geoengineering, planetary-scale
engineering in response to climate change, is increasingly part of the
scientific and public debate. Scientists and politicians around the world are
asking if deployment of large scale technologies might be necessary to reduce
the effects of global warming while carbon reduction strategies take effect.
This project focuses on those geoengineering technologies that manipulate solar
radiation, proposals to brighten clouds, enhance terrestrial albedo, engineer
sulfate particles for the upper atmosphere, or deploy space mirrors. Because
such proposals involve manipulation of Earth?s climatic system at an
unprecedented scale and may involve significant risk and uncertainty, they raise
challenging ethical issues. Should humans take intentional control of the
climate? What level of risk of unintended consequences is acceptable? Given the
uneven nature of the winners and losers, would the potential benefits to any one
group be allowed to trump the potential harms to another? Does geoengineering
distract attention from important mitigation tasks? This project will contribute
to deliberations over solar radiation management through an investigation of
important questions concerning social and procedural justice, the role of
technology in solving environmental problems, risk and uncertainty, and public
trust in science. The project is interdisciplinary, combining philosophical and
social science research, guided by an advisory panel of geoengineers, climate
scientists, and policy experts. Interviews with a diversity of stakeholders from
around the world, including marginalized and vulnerable populations, will be
integrated with ethical research to produce an analysis of the moral issues that
the global community needs to address prior to any decision to proceed with
geoengineering. Ethics, biophysical science, and social science will be
interwoven in a variety of products (a book, scholarly articles, and an
interactive web resource) that engage multiple audiences in a dialogue about the
very real ethical concerns raised by the possibility of the unprecedented step
of intentionally engineering the climate.&lt;br/&gt;