* 0958172
* Experimental and Computational Systems Analysis of Stress Responses in Lactococcus
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Eberhard Voit, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2014
* USD 703,719.00

The goal of this research is to provide a deeper understanding of the responses
of Lactococcus lactis to fluctuations in its environment and to alterations in
its genomic and metabolic make-up. Cross-disciplinary investigations of genomic
and metabolic control in this bacterium will combine experimental studies using
noninvasive in vivo nuclear magnetic resonance techniques with mathematical,
statistical and computational modeling. Novel computational and statistical
methods of genome inference, metabolic analysis, and model construction will be
developed from experimental time series data. Analytical methods for
understanding the bacterium's control of glycolysis will be extended to include
noisy or incomplete data, and toward predictions with respect to multi-level
control and regulation under untested experimental conditions. This project will
result in a detailed understanding of sugar and energy metabolism in L. lactis
and generate hypotheses about the underlying design and operating principles of
physiological control tasks. These will have relevance beyond this particular
organism and advance our understanding of fundamental mechanisms that are
central to the evolution of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the project includes the multi-faceted involvement in systems biological
research of students with diverse backgrounds. First, the research will serve as
a teaching and training tool for students and postdocs who are intrigued by the
multi-disciplinary nature of systems biology. Second, the research is part of a
test bed for an innovative cognitive study of the learning processes that must
be mastered by any newcomer to the complex field of systems biology. Third, the
research constitutes an emerging comprehensive case study for a graduate program
in integrative systems biology that is being developed at Georgia Tech for
students with different scientific backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is co-funded by the Cellular Systems Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Physiological and Structural Systems
Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.