* 0958951
* Collaborative Research: Bighorn Basin Coring Project (BBCP) - Targeted Continental Drilling of Paleogene Hyperthermals
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Katherine Freeman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2014
* USD 156,093.00

Bighorn Basin Coring Project (BBCP)&lt;br/&gt;W. Clyde, Lead PI, University of
New Hampshire&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The Bighorn Basin Coring
Project will collect ~200 meters of core from each of three sites (Polecat
Bench, Gilmore Hill, Basin Substation) in the Bighorn Basin of Wyoming to better
constrain the causes and effects of Paleogene hyperthermal events. Hyperthermals
are abrupt, large-magnitude global warming events associated with extreme
perturbations to the Earth's carbon cycle. Two events in particular will be
targeted - the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM, ETM1) and the Elmo (ETM2)
event. The PETM is the best documented hyperthermal and involved the release of
2,000-6,800 gigatons (Gt) of carbon from an unknown reservoir over less than 10
thousand years (ky) causing the earth to warm by 5-9ºC for a period of 100-200
ky. For comparison, the entire fossil fuel resource base on earth today is
estimated to be ~5,000 Gt. Elmo is a smaller amplitude event that occurs after
the PETM and just below the Chron C24N/C24R polarity reversal in marine records
but remains poorly documented in continental sections. By applying a variety of
sedimentological, geochemical, and palynological methods to the proposed cores
we hope to better understand what caused these events, study the biogeochemical
and ecological feedbacks that operated during them, and reveal precisely how
they impacted continental environments. The Bighorn Basin preserves the most
expanded stratigraphic records of the PETM and Elmo yet known, so these cores
will provide an opportunity to study hyperthermals at unprecedented resolution.