* 0958728
* NSF Support for U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) Support Activities
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Ronald Martin, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 03/31/2014
* USD 2,521,471.00

Since 1994, the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) has
supported the implementation of the U.S. Global Change Research Program through
three major activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- U.S. Global Change Research
Program Integration and Coordination Office (USGCRP ICO); &lt;br/&gt;- USCGRP
International Program; &lt;br/&gt;- Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change
(IPCC) Technical Support Unit (TSU). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCAR will continue
operation of the USGCRP ICO, the USGCRP International Program activity and the
IPCC TSU. The USGCRP ICO fosters program integration, planning, and
coordination. The USGCRP International activity will assist in coordination of
global change research activities with other nations (bi- and multi-lateral).
The IPCC TSU will prepare comprehensive and up-to-date assessments of policy-
related scientific, technical and socio-economic information relevant for
understanding the scientific basis of climate change, potential impacts, and
options for mitigation adaptation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: It
is important for the scientific community to document and understand changes in
our global environment and to predict its future evolution. This UCAR activity
will play a critical role in the global state of awareness and acceptance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This set of activities will culminate in
publications as well as decision support and communication tools and activities
to inform a wide-range of climate-related discussions and decisions in the
community. There is now increasing concern about how global change will affect
the lives of the Earth's inhabitants and how the nations of the Earth can make
decisions about how to reduce the future magnitude of, minimize the impacts of,
and adapt to global change for the future. The reports, assessments, and
interactions will help the nation and the world to understand, assess, predict,
and respond to human-induced and natural processes of global change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentoring: UCAR provides students just out of high school
or college, with the opportunity to work on its projects through short-term
positions. These students interact with staff and visiting scientists and work
on specific activities, including websites, reports to stakeholders, for periods
of a few weeks to three months. Post-docs and early-career scientists are
involved in workshops and meetings that provide them with the opportunity to
interact one-on-one with senior scientists.