* 0958417
* Collaborative Research: Improved Constraints on Holocene Retreat History of the Laurentide and Scandinavian Ice Sheets from Cosmogenic Dating and Implications for Sea-level Rise
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Peter Clark, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2015
* USD 251,887.00

Collaborative Research: Improved constraints on Holocene retreat history of the
Laurentide and Scandinavian Ice Sheets from cosmogenic dating and implications
for sea-level rise&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anders E. Carlson (U. of Wisconsin-
Madison) EAR-0958872 &lt;br/&gt;Peter U. Clark (Oregon State U.)
EAR-0958417&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;A major objective of ice
sheet and climate research is to understand the responses of ice sheets to
climate change. Ascertaining the past rates of ice-sheet retreat and
contributions to sea-level rise under climate that was naturally warmer than
present provides context for the future Greenland Ice-Sheet response to global
warming. Here, this research team proposes to improve the deglacial chronologies
and investigate retreat rates of the Laurentide (LIS) and Scandinavian (SIS) Ice
Sheets during the early to mid-Holocene (&lt;11.7 ka), a period of time that
provides an excellent natural experiment where these terrestrial ice sheets
deglaciated under a climate warmer than present but potentially similar to the
end of this century. This project proposes to directly date the retreat of the
southeastern and eastern LIS margins and the southern, eastern, and northern SIS
margins during the early to mid-Holocene using in situ cosmogenic surface
exposure ages, significantly improving the chronology for the largest of the LIS
domes and the majority of the SIS. The resulting chronologies will be combined
with already existing cosmogenic chronologies from western Quebec, northeastern
Labrador and southern Finland, and existing minimum limiting radiocarbon dates
and varve records. These data will allow calculations of LIS and SIS retreat
rates and sea-level rise contributions during the early to mid-Holocene, with
the remainder of sea-level rise largely attributable to the Antarctic Ice Sheet.
The results will provide estimates of the natural rates at which ice sheets can
melt under radiative forcing that may be analogous to the climate of the end of
this century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Given that the
greatest uncertainty in predicting future sea-level rise in response to global
warming are the contributions from the remaining ice sheets, it is critical to
constrain melt rates under warmer than present climates. Results of this
research will provide climate scientists with estimates of the retreat rates and
attendant sea-level rise contributions from terrestrial ice sheets under a
climate naturally warmer than present. The information gained from this research
will be of significant importance for policy decisions and of interest to a
broad range of earth scientists and the public in general. This research
proposal will support 2 Ph.D. students who will be exposed to a multi-
disciplinary scientific approach that includes paleoclimatology, glacial
geology, cosmogenic isotope geochemistry and paleoceanography. It will also
provide support for an untenured, early career Assistant Professor furthering
his academic career.