* 0958441
* II New: A Network of Open Experimental Testbeds for Surgical Robotics Research
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Blake Hannaford, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 02/29/2012
* USD 635,045.00

While areas of the US such as California and the East coast have major medical
centers near every population center, there are many areas, even in developed
countries, with a widely dispersed patient population with significant obstacles
to advanced medical care. Victims of large scale natural disasters and
battlefield casualties also lack state of the art care. Telesurgery could
potentially meet these needs. There is a growing interest in computational
research on intelligent telesurgery. Today's telesurgery systems do not
integrate with medical imaging or have intelligent functions to assist the
surgeon. This project is building seven teleoperated surgical robot and surgeon-
interface systems powerful and precise enough to support research on advanced
robotic surgery techniques at seven major research universities. University of
Washington and University of California Santa Cruz are building the seven robots
and will distribute them to Harvard, Johns Hopkins, University of Nebraska, U.C.
Berkeley, and UCLA. When completed, the seven research lab robots will be
networked together for sharing of software, interoperability, and on-line
telesurgery experiments.

Impact

The results of this project will enable a network of researchers to prototype
advanced surgical robotics techniques, and evaluate them in realistic contexts
including appropriate animal procedures. Besides new and less invasive cures,
such a technology can provide easier access to care in remote parts of the US,
and the developing world. The seven cooperating labs, and external partners will
be able to interconnect their systems, share modules of software, and replicate
each others experiments.