* 0958939
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer at Chicago State University
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* LeRoy Jones II, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 279,990.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor
LeRoy Jones II and colleagues Elmer J. Gentry, Asare Nkansah, Melany P. Puglisi-
Weening and Felix M. Rivas from the Departments of Chemistry and Physics at
Chicago State University will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer with variable
temperature capabilities. The instrument will be used to support research
activities such as: 1) preparation of chiral transition metal catalysts for
olefin metathesis reactions; 2) development of dendrimers and polymers for drug
delivery; 3) synthesis of antibacterial peptides; 4) synthetic modification of
antimicrobial compounds for altered spectrum and potency; 5) antimicrobial
chemical defenses of marine plants and algae; and 6) isolation and
characterization of the CNS-active constituents of nutmeg.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials
chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching
as well as research.