* 0958988
* Acquisition of a Hyperspectral Imaging System (HIS) for Multidisciplinary Research
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Maureen Clayton, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2013
* USD 167,950.00

Sugumaran&lt;br/&gt;0958988&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI-R2 award provides NSF funding over 24
months to acquire a hyperspectral imaging system (HIS) which will be used for
geological, environmental, biological, and geographical sciences. The HIS will
enable wavelength scanning from 400 to 2500 nm allowing non-destructive
materials imaging in both laboratory and field settings. The HIS will be applied
to understanding materials by developing spectral image libraries under
laboratory and field settings. It will be instrumental in understanding and
modeling seasonal changes in materials using field-based observations. In
addition the HIS system will be used to ground truth satellite and airborne
hyperspectral remote sensing data. Applications for the HIS include crop residue
modeling, water quality measurements and modeling, forest species identification
and differentiation, lithography and dopant research, understanding lithography,
lake core mapping and understanding urban infrastructure. The HIS is proposed
for additional STEM research outside the geosciences to include dye and fabric
detection and classification, wetland modeling, plant stress analysis, invasive
species and wildlife monitoring and modeling, and art restoration and
conservation. This effort will establish a capability serving a broad range of
disciplines and departments at an undergraduate university. Impacts will span
research, education, training, commercial partnerships and infrastructure.
Summer workshops will provide outreach to K-12 students. Eight classes from
Geography, Biology, Earth Science and Environmental Studies and the Physics
Departments will be directly supported. The PI will have overall responsibility
for administering the instrumentation. A 20%-time research associate will be
allocated to oversee day-to-day operations and maintenance. Existing newly-
renovated space will be used to house and store the instrument. The University
has committed to purchase a four year extended warranty for the system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;