* 0958245
* Collaborative Research:  MSB: Defining Plant-Associated Metagenomics
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2015
* Jeffery Dangl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2015
* USD 2,496,169.00

All land plants grow in association with complex microbial communities both on
above&lt;br/&gt;ground plant organs (called the phyllosphere) and below the
ground on roots (called the&lt;br/&gt;rhizosphere). The relationships between a
microbiota (the community of microbes&lt;br/&gt;intimately associated with a
plant) and its host can vary from pathogenic to symbiotic.&lt;br/&gt;The
microbiome (the set of genes encoded by any particular microbiota) can
perform&lt;br/&gt;ecosystem services by providing the host plant with critical
nutrients, protection from&lt;br/&gt;pathogens, production of functional plant
hormones, and provision of tolerance to&lt;br/&gt;stressors like heat. The
plant, in turn, provides the microbiome with an improved&lt;br/&gt;environment,
including a complex array of energy sources released by deposition
of&lt;br/&gt;plant-based sugars into the soil. Decaying plant tissue and carbon-
rich root exudates&lt;br/&gt;redirect large amounts of fixed atmospheric carbon
to the soil, making the rhizosphere a&lt;br/&gt;large carbon sequestration zone,
important in the balance of carbon in a changing&lt;br/&gt;environment. Site
specific characteristics of climate and soil that influence the yield
of&lt;br/&gt;maize and other crops and the productivity of any plant community
rely in part on the&lt;br/&gt;respective rhizosphere microbiome. This research
will ultimately lead to agricultural&lt;br/&gt;practices designed to increase
plant health and productivity, carbon sequestration, and&lt;br/&gt;disease
resistance through the rational utilization of the probiotic capacity of soils
and&lt;br/&gt;the local environment. The project team is a collaborative
interdisciplinary group from&lt;br/&gt;UNC-Chapel Hill, Cornell and the DOE
Joint Genome Institute. The experiments to be&lt;br/&gt;carried out will define
the rhizosphere microbiota and associated microbiome using
two&lt;br/&gt;important model plant species: Arabidopsis thaliana, the premier
model for rapid&lt;br/&gt;discovery in plant biology, and Zea mays, the premier
model for genetic dissection of&lt;br/&gt;complex traits in crops. Data
generated by the project will be made freely available
(http://www.bio.unc.edu/dangl/lab/projects/Metagenome_2-3-10.htm;
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/), and will provide starting points for a
variety of deeper studies into the complexities of host-microbe interactions.
The project will provide training opportunities for undergraduates, doctoral
students and post-doctoral fellows.