* 0958184
* Collaborative Research:  MSB: Defining Plant-Associated Metagenomics
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2016
* Ruth Ley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2016
* USD 951,307.00

All land plants grow in association with complex microbial communities both on
above ground plant organs (called the phyllosphere) and below the ground on
roots (called the rhizosphere). The relationships between a microbiota (the
community of microbes intimately associated with a plant) and its host can vary
from pathogenic to symbiotic. The microbiome (the set of genes encoded by any
particular microbiota) can perform ecosystem services by providing the host
plant with critical nutrients, protection from pathogens, production of
functional plant hormones, and provision of tolerance to stressors like heat.
The plant, in turn, provides the microbiome with an improved environment,
including a complex array of energy sources released by deposition of plant-
based sugars into the soil. Decaying plant tissue and carbon-rich root exudates
redirect large amounts of fixed atmospheric carbon to the soil, making the
rhizosphere a large carbon sequestration zone, important in the balance of
carbon in a changing environment. Site specific characteristics of climate and
soil that influence the yield of maize and other crops and the productivity of
any plant community rely in part on the respective rhizosphere microbiome. This
research will ultimately lead to agricultural practices designed to increase
plant health and productivity, carbon sequestration, and disease resistance
through the rational utilization of the probiotic capacity of soils and the
local environment. The project team is a collaborative interdisciplinary group
from UNC-Chapel Hill, Cornell and the DOE Joint Genome Institute. The
experiments to be carried out will define the rhizosphere microbiota and
associated microbiome using two important model plant species: Arabidopsis
thaliana, the premier model for rapid discovery in plant biology, and Zea mays,
the premier model for genetic dissection of complex traits in crops. Data
generated by the project will be made freely available, and will provide
starting points for a variety of deeper studies into the complexities of host-
microbe interactions. The project will provide training opportunities for
undergraduates, doctoral students and post-doctoral fellows.