* 0958561
* CI-P: Towards a Consensus Representation for Understanding Structure of Multiparty Conversations
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Nelson Morgan, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/29/2012
* USD 100,000.00

Meetings provide unique knowledge sharing opportunities and are an efficient way
of interaction between people with different expertise areas. Such human
communication in stored audio form has rapidly grown in recent years, providing
ample source material for later use. In particular, the increased prominence of
search as a basic user activity has meant that the ability to automatically
browse, summarize, or graphically visualize various aspects of the spoken
content has become far more important. There are several studies on
representation and detection of various types of events in multiparty
conversations, such as agreement/disagreements and decisions. However, there is
no consensus on how to represent structure of meeting discussions, to be used
later for human browsing or in further automatic processing, such as
summarization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project works towards a
research infrastructure for a better understanding of meeting structure, and
aims to organize a community effort in the form of a workshop, to identify the
consensus needs of the meeting processing research and education community, for
enhancing the existing and widely used ICSI meetings corpus with annotations of
structure of meeting discussions. Such annotations are critical in initiating
research on automatic detection and annotation of meeting discussions, and would
also be useful for research on meeting visualization, browsing and
summarization. Furthermore, such an infrastructure would provide students and
researchers in natural language and speech processing a framework to experiment
with and enable social scientists interested in interactional structures to
develop more robust analysis mechanisms. The workshop discussions will
contribute to the decision on an annotation schema and the design of annotation
guidelines, with a small set of sample annotated meetings, which will be made
publicly available.