* 0958783
* A Partnership for Minority Education and Research on Black Hole and Neutron Star Binaries
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Edward Robinson, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* joan wrobel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 570,039.00

This PAARE grant will strengthen an existing partnership between researchers at
the University of Texas at El Paso and the University of Texas at Austin. The
research areas of the proposed work are related to interacting binary stars, in
particular the study of accreting black holes and neutron stars in X-ray binary
systems. Observations will be conducted primarily at the McDonald Observatory
which is operated by UT-Austin; however, this research will be supplemented by
work done at the UTEP campus observatory. The proposed research has broad
scientific impact since the formation and growth of massive black holes is
related to the formation of galaxies, quasars, and gamma-ray bursts in ways that
are not yet understood.

The partnership will strive to attract and include Hispanic astronomers and
educations to the program through access to the front-line research capabilities
of McDonald and the well-known reputation of UT-Austin as a center for astronomy
research. The main goal of this partnership is the development of a sustainable
astronomy and astrophysics program at UTEP that emphasizes both astrophysical
research and a culture of education and outreach within the program. The team
will reach out to the local Hispanic community by providing direct observational
experience to students at UTEP and McDonald, by providing promising students a
path to a career in astronomy through UTEP to UT-Austin or other schools, and by
establishing the UTEP astronomy program that will continue on after this PAARE
grant is finished. An additional ~500 students per year will gain astronomy
experience by performing night-time observing at the UTEP facility.