* 0958490
* EAGER: An integrative approach to exploration of dynamic protein-protein interaction networks in human platelets
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Mitsunori Ogihara, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Recent technological advances have produced large data sets of protein-protein
interactions (PPI). These data are often presented as graphs where nodes
represent proteins and edges indicate the linkage between proteins with
experimental support. This representation reveals that PPI networks are non-
randomly organized, but unfortunately offers little insights on the dynamic
nature of protein interactions inside the cell. The goal of this project is to
develop generic methods for exploring the dynamics of PPI networks using human
platelet cells as target and by integrating various information sources, with
the eventual goal of being able to identify novel signaling pathways and
networks in human platelets.

In this project a new graph model will be developed for capturing the dynamic
nature of protein-protein interaction in the following manner. (a) Each node is
not an individual protein but a protein-protein pair and each node is labeled
with terms representing contexts in which the interaction should be observed.
Each interaction node will be mapped to a real vector of fixed dimension using
amino-acid sequence similarity and co-evolution as basis spectral clustering as
a mapping tool. (b) Based on gene ontology, groups of interaction nodes will be
presented as hyper-edges over the nodes. (c) The problem of inferring
interaction will be translated as the problem of assigning labels to each node.
(d) The label assignment problem will be solved as a label-ranking problem
combined with a label number predicting problem. (e) The method will be
validated using wet-lab experiments with human cells and human platelet data.
Computational tools will be developed using the high-performance computing
facility in the Center for Computational Science at the University of Miami.
Undergraduate and high school students from the underrepresented groups will be
actively recruited. Courses on computational biology and on chemical biology
will be developed and taught at the University.