* 0958498
* US-Middle East: Regional Workshop On Emerging Networking Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Azer Bestavros, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 12/31/2013
* USD 165,352.00

This collaborative workshop is being organized by Dr. Azer Bestavros, Boston
University, and Dr. Magdy Nagi, Bibliotheca Alexandrina in Egypt, in order to
identify opportunities for US-Middle East cooperation on networking
infrastructures, technologies, and applications. The proposed workshop will
bring together leading US and Middle East networking researchers to discuss
areas of mutual interest and to develop a vision for future collaborative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The following are three
examples of broad thematic topics for the workshop:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future
Networking Research Infrastructures: Emerging networking architectures are
moving away from the model/view of a federated set of "autonomous systems" to a
model in which regional, multinational infrastructures are shared in support of
virtualized applications. The global nature of this shared infrastructure poses
important research and development challenges that must be addressed, including
appropriate mechanisms for pooling resources and for designing regional testbeds
and experimental infrastructures related to future generation
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networking Technologies for Emerging Wireless and
Ad-Hoc Applications: The wide penetration of smart devices in the Middle East
region presents opportunities for the development of novel services and
applications. Such services and applications may have significant economic
impacts, as well as impacts on quality of life and emergency response.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networking Support for Scalable and Secure Distributed
Information Systems: Increasingly, networking researchers have been concerned
with problems that go beyond traditional communication needs (e.g., transport
and routing) to include network measurement and characterization, network
security and privacy, information discovery, management, and mining in emerging
social networks, among others. Localization (including multi-lingual and
transliteration issues) will be addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The workshop will be organized as a peer-to-peer meeting of researchers from the
US and the Middle East, with an emphasis on activities designed to facilitate
tangible outcomes, including expanding existing collaborations, stimulating new
research partnerships, and identifying priority areas for future research.
Junior scientists from the US and from the region will participate in the
workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Division of
Computer and Network Systems and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.