* 0958926
* Modeling motor behavior in the lobster stomatogastric system
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Scott Hooper, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2015
* USD 405,734.00

PROJECT TITLE: Modeling Motor Behavior in the Lobster Stomatogastric
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Scott L. Hooper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
NUMBER: IOS 0958926&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how nervous systems
generate behavior is a central goal of neuroscience, and much about how nervous
systems work is now known. However, this knowledge is insufficient to understand
how behavior is produced because nervous systems drive muscles, which in turn
move the effectors (typically limbs) that produce behavior. Different muscles
respond differently to nervous system input, and limbs with different anatomies
respond differently to given amounts of muscle activation. Since neuro-muscular
systems evolve as a unified whole, nervous system properties will vary as a
function of muscle and limb properties. Understanding how nervous systems
generate behavior thus requires studying the muscles and limbs that nervous
systems control. The proposed work will address this issue in an extremely well-
understood nervous system, the nervous system that drives the movements of the
lobster stomach. The lobster stomach is more similar to vertebrate limbs than to
human stomachs in that it has neurally-driven muscles and bone-like effectors
called ossicles. The neural output and make-up of the stomach nervous system are
completely described and a great deal about the electrical properties of its
neurons is known. The stomach muscles have individual and complex responses to
neural input, and a quantitative, three-dimensional description of the stomach
ossicles is available. All information necessary to connect nervous system make-
up and output to behavior is thus available in this system. The proposed work
will characterize muscle, ossicle, and joint properties in detail so as to allow
later development of a computational model of the generation of behavior in this
system. Due to the analogous natures of behavior generation in this and many
other systems noted above, conclusions from this work should be widely
applicable, including to understanding how human nervous systems generate
movement. The proposed work will also provide training on both undergraduate and
post-doctoral levels.