* 0958247
* Collaborative Research:  II-EN:  Development of Publicly Available, Easily Searchable, Linguistically Analyzed, video Corpora for Sign Language and Gesture Research
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Dimitris Metaxas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2011
* USD 20,000.00

American Sign Language (ASL) is used by as many as two million people in the
United States, with additional users elsewhere in North America. The purpose of
this "planning grant" is to enable the PI and her multi-institutional team to
explore the case for a possible future NSF investment in an annotated, publicly
available, and easily searchable corpus consisting of terabytes of ASL video
data (deriving in part from prior work by the PI and her colleagues), including
diverse types of content such as dialogues, narratives, elicited sentences
illustrating specific grammatical constructions, and isolated signs. The PI
contends such a resource would constitute an important infrastructure that would
be exploited by a broad research community to advance the fields of linguistics
(the structure of ASL), computer vision (machine recognition of gestures),
indexing of visual information (through the expansion of mark up vocabularies),
and education. The PI notes that the potential value of the existing corpora
remains largely untapped, notwithstanding their extensive and productive use by
her team and others, due to hardware and software limitations that make it
cumbersome to search, identify, and share data of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The new resource would be easily
accessible by the research community and the broader public, via a user-friendly
Web-based interface. Availability of the resource online would allow ASL
teachers and users, and others, to access the data directly. Users would be able
to look up an unknown sign by submitting a video example of that sign. Students
of ASL would be able to retrieve video showing examples of a specific sign used
in actual sentences, or examples of a grammatical construction. ASL instructors
and teachers of the Deaf would have easy access to video examples of lexical
items and grammatical constructions as used by a variety of native signers, for
use in language instruction and evaluation.