* 0958002
* Dispersed Volcanic Ash and Terrigenous Matter in Sediment from the Northwest Pacific
* GEO,DPP
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2015
* Andrew Kurtz, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 05/31/2015
* USD 374,055.00

Pelagic and hemipelagic muds, which cover the floor of most of the world's
oceans, have always been thought to be primarily of continental origin. We now
know that undersea explosive volcanism is not as rare as we once thought and
there is a distinct possibility that these muds may, in fact, have large
volcanic ash components. This research unravels the origin of these muds and
employs a novel, new, statistical approach to determine quantitatively the
amount and origin/source of the volcanic ash component in them. The work is
potentially transformative in terms of our understanding of seafloor sediments
and could completely change how we characterize and understand deep sea
sedimentation. It may also allow us to determine seafloor volcanic eruption ash-
dispersal patterns and understand, for the first time, how important undersea
volcanic eruptions are to the global seafloor sediment budget and geochemical
cycling. Broader impacts of the work include support of a graduate student whose
gender is under-represented in the sciences and undergraduates. The work is
relevant to the NSF-funded MARGINS and Ocean Drilling Program missions and
science plans. Resulting data will be publicly available through the NSF-funded
SedDB data portal and data archive.