* 0958052
* Collaborative Research: A Workshop and Science Plan for the Arctic in Rapid Transition (ART) Initiative
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Karen Frey, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 08/31/2010
* USD 9,238.00

The Arctic in Rapid Transition (ART) Initiative seeks to further climate
understanding through integrative, cross-boundary studies of the Arctic. It
formed in response to the last International Conference on Arctic Research
Planning (ICARP), which stressed the need for synthesis activities in Arctic
change science. The first ART workshop, to be held in Fairbanks at the
International Arctic Research Center from November 7-9 2009, will focus on
linkages within the marine system, including contributions from coastal zones,
shelf seas, straits, and the deep ocean. Emphasis will be placed on not only
geographical feedbacks, between the margins, shelves, and deep ocean, but also
on physical, biogeochemical, and cryospheric interchanges. A range of time
scales will also be explored, from paleoclimate to the rapid change currently
being observed in the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The culmination of this
workshop will be a science and implementation plan, addressing key questions in
sea ice variability, land-ocean transport, and ecosystem responses. Leadership
of and participation in the workshop includes several international early career
scientists, who have drafted a white paper on the ART-related science to support
systematic treatment of Arctic climate change. Representatives from northern
stakeholder communities will also be included in the workshop to help draft an
implementation plan, which will address the effects of near-term and projected
climate change on the marine ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;