* 0958465
* II-New: A Computational Infrastructure for Scalable Transactional Memory  Abstractions in Managed Languages
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Jan Vitek, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2014
* USD 556,300.00

This proposal supports the acquisition of an Azul Vega 3 compute
appliance&lt;br/&gt;for research on developing an open-source general-purpose
transactional&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure for high-level managed languages. This
appliance is equipped&lt;br/&gt;with hundreds of processor cores, substantial
memory, and bandwidth&lt;br/&gt;availability. The cores compute in a flat SMP
configuration, simplifying&lt;br/&gt;programmability and management. The
appliance has a number of novel&lt;br/&gt;features including hardware support
for concurrent garbage collection, and&lt;br/&gt;optimistic lock elision that
provide critical building blocks for efficient&lt;br/&gt;transactional memory
(TM) support. The project's research agenda is to&lt;br/&gt;explore new
approaches to scalable parallel program construction that&lt;br/&gt;exploits
underlying hardware primitives that mask or mitigate
critical&lt;br/&gt;bottlenecks that have thus far hampered effective scalable
software&lt;br/&gt;transactional memory systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will use the novel features of the Azul appliance to (i)
explore&lt;br/&gt;new language abstractions with special focus on scalability of
transactional&lt;br/&gt;applications; (ii) understand how primitive support for
garbage collection&lt;br/&gt;and transactions influence algorithm and
application development built using&lt;br/&gt;these abstractions; (iii) examine
the impact of these mechanisms on&lt;br/&gt;compiler and runtime design; and
(iv) develop a large number of benchmarks&lt;br/&gt;and workloads to better
understand TM performance characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
part of a larger NSF-funded effort to catalyze TM research,&lt;br/&gt;which in
turn is a key technique to improving software development for&lt;br/&gt;general-
purpose parallel computers. Widespread adoption of new
scalable&lt;br/&gt;concurrency abstractions such as transactional memory is an
essential&lt;br/&gt;component in the technology roadmap of major industry
players, and the focus&lt;br/&gt;of much attention in academia.