* 0958973
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an LCMS System to Enhance Undergraduate Research that Interfaces Chemistry and Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Daniel Downey, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 299,810.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major
Research and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Kevin P. Minbiole and colleagues
Daniel M. Downey, Reid N. Harris, Gina M. MacDonald and Debra L. Mohler of James
Madison University will acquire a liquid chromatograph interfaced mass
spectrometer (LC-MS). The instrument will be used in undergraduate research
activities and in advanced undergraduate chemistry classes. Projects to be
investigated include characterization of anti-fungal metabolites from the skin
bacteria of frogs and salamanders, determination of endocrine receptor compounds
in the Shenandoah River watershed, measurement of neurotransmitter metabolites
in blood, and studies of the interactions between DNA and chromatin.
Collaborations with Gallaudet University and Mary Baldwin College will allow
deaf and hard of hearing students as well as substantial numbers of women to
participate in important research endeavors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A LC-MS
combines the physical separation capability of liquid chromatography with the
mass analysis ability of mass spectrometry. The liquid chromatograph separates a
mixture into its molecular components. These components flow into a mass
spectrometer where their masses, and those of their fragments, are measured.
This highly sensitive technique allows detection and determination of the
structure of molecules in a complex mixture. The instrumentation provided by
this award will provide faculty and undergraduate students the opportunity to
pursue significant collaborative investigations at the interface of chemistry
and biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;