* 0958574
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of High-Voltage Transmission Electron Microscope
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Martin Katz, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 05/31/2012
* USD 1,255,008.00

0958574&lt;br/&gt;Katz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Missouri, Columbia, proposes to
acquire a 300 kV transmission electron microscope (TEM). To meet the needs of a
large user group, this microscope will be equipped with the following features:
scanning transmission accessory, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, electron
energy loss spectroscopy, high-angle annular dark field imaging capability,
electron energy loss spectroscopy, energy filtering, cryo stage, and tomography
function. The instrument will be housed in the University Electron Microscopy
Core Facility (EMC). The director and staff of the EMC will be responsible for
maintaining the instrument and for assisting and training users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will primarily serve a diverse group of
scientists and engineers whose work involves fabrication and characterization of
materials at the nanometer scale. For example, one of the research groups that
would use the instrument is involved in the fabrication of nanopores that would
regulate the permeability of membranes in response to the binding of specific
ligands and thus would serve as detectors for the ligands. The instrument will
be used to characterize the nanopores and nanopore-ligand interactions. This
will aid in the optimization of nanopore-membrane detector design. Other
investigators would use the instrument to assist in the development of
bioremediation of toxins and pollutants. For example, one research group will
use the X-ray spectroscopy feature of the microscope to assess the ability of
microorganisms to sequester heavy metal contaminants from water. Finally, some
of the researchers will use the instrument to answer basic biological questions,
such as the organization of organelles within cells under various conditions.
The cryo stage and tomography will be particularly helpful in these types of
studies. The EMC will use the instrument and its accessories to train faculty,
students, and postdoctoral fellows in the principles of transmission electron
microscopy and in the use of the various accessories of the instrument and how
these tools can be applied to further their research endeavors. Access to the
instrument will enhance training in the many areas where it can be employed to
advance investigations that would not otherwise be possible.