* 0958349
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of the Optical Cryostat for Research and Teaching
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Lev Gasparov, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 04/30/2012
* USD 104,047.00

0958349&lt;br/&gt;Gasparov&lt;br/&gt;U. of North
Florida&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of correlated electron compounds is a
particularly important subject in condensed matter physics. The nature of the
structural transition (Verwey transition) in magnetite and mechanism of the
superconducting transition in Fe-pnictides are among the problems that will be
addressed by the proposed acquisition of the versatile helium-bath optical
cryostat. Extended low temperature capability when coupled with the existing
high pressure capability will yield new data critical for understanding the
physics of the compounds under investigation. Two groups from the University of
North Florida (UNF), a group from the Geophysical Laboratory in Washington, DC,
and a group from the University of Florida (UF) will benefit from the
acquisition. The proposed experimental work builds on the PI?s extensive
expertise in optical spectroscopy of correlated electron systems. The PI?s Raman
laboratory is equipped with state-of-the-art spectroscopic equipment. Critical
low temperature capability of the proposed cryostat will substantially expand
the scope of problems accessible to the PI. The project will strengthen the
physics program at UNF and contribute to the development of the Master?s program
in materials science. It will also reinforce the ongoing collaboration between
leading research institutions (UF, Geophysical Laboratory) and a growing
predominately undergraduate university (UNF). The students employed in this
research program will benefit significantly by working in a modern research
environment. This project will introduce high school students into the
atmosphere of a university, it will introduce UNF undergraduates to the
atmosphere of a major research institution, and it will generate future graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Correlated electron systems form a very important
family of compounds. In these materials electrons are equally affected by
interaction between each other and interaction between surrounding ions. The
balance between these interactions is fragile and can be easily broken leading
to an abrupt change in the material?s properties when these materials are cooled
down below certain critical temperature or put under high pressure. For
instance, newly discovered Fe-pnictides display zero resistance at low
temperature and high pressure. Other materials such as magnetite become more
resistive when cooled down. Understanding of the mechanism leading to these
abrupt changes is important for materials science and will lead to new
applications. Optical spectroscopy laboratory at the University of North Florida
(UNF) hosts superb spectroscopic equipment. Acquisition of the proposed state-
of-the-art cryostat will provide critical low temperature capability to conduct
spectroscopic research of correlated electron materials. This capability is
leveraged by the available high-pressure capability. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
cryostat will enhance research and teaching infrastructure at UNF. It will
strengthen the physics program and contribute to the development of the Master?s
program in materials science. It will reinforce the ongoing collaboration
between a growing predominately undergraduate university (UNF) and leading
research institutions (University of Florida and Geophysical Laboratory).
&lt;br/&gt;The students employed in this research program will work in a modern
research environment and develop vital problem-solving skills. This project will
introduce high school students into the atmosphere of a university, it will
introduce UNF undergraduates to the atmosphere of a major research institution,
it will generate future graduate students in a critical science and engineering
field.