* 0958100
* Infection Site-specific Analyses Elucidate Arabidopsis Host Processes and Components Mediating the Sustained Growth and Reproduction of a Compatible Obligate Biotroph
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2017
* Mary Wildermuth, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2017
* USD 944,913.00

Powdery mildews are fungal plant pathogens that infect a variety of agronomic
and ornamental species, as well as the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Powdery
mildews (PMs) establish specialized active feeding sites in the upper cell layer
(epidermis) of the plant leaf through which they acquire all their nutrients.
They require living plant tissue for their growth and reproduction and
dramatically modulate leaf function and metabolism at the site of infection.
Using lasers to specifically isolate only those cells at the site of PM
infection, the investigators identified novel plant regulators and processes
specifically altered by the sustained growth and reproduction of the PM
Golovinomyces orontii on A. thaliana. Sixty-seven regulators were identified
with subsets of these playing known or inferred roles in photosynthesis,
cold/dehydration responses, plant defense, hormone signaling, and the cell
cycle. The investigators will employ genetic, molecular, biochemical, and
cytological approaches to characterize and classify these regulators based on
their impact on PM growth and reproduction and the above processes. Furthermore,
two of these processes will be explored in more detail using the above
approaches. For example, using microscopic analysis, the investigators
determined that the cell cycle is altered at the site of PM infection.
Specifically, the number of copies of chromosomal DNA is dramatically enhanced
in the cells underlying the infected epidermal cell. Furthermore, this increased
copy number is required to maintain the full growth and reproduction of the
fungus. The investigators will further define the factors responsible for this
fungal-induced increase in chromosomal DNA and its role in the sustained growth
and reproduction of the PM on Arabidopsis. Not only will this research identify
targets for translational research in economically important plants impacted by
PMs, but identified genes and processes may also impact other microbes that
require living plant tissue and/or establish highly localized feeding sites. In
addition, this highly localized, PM-inducible system should allow the
investigators to uncover regulatory mechanisms governing fundamental processes,
such as the cell cycle, that are challenging to explore using traditional
approaches. Two postdoctoral scholars and four undergraduates, including
students underrepresented in the sciences, will be trained in this
interdisciplinary project. Outreach to students of local public elementary
schools will enhance scientific literacy and inquiry using plants and school
gardening programs as accessible entry points.