* 0958786
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Mapping micro-XRF Spectrometer for Art and Cultural Heritage Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Karen Trentelman, The Getty Conservation Institution
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 02/29/2012
* USD 137,300.00

0958786 Trentelman The Getty Conservation Institution

Acquisition of a Mapping micro-XRF Spectrometer for Art and Cultural Heritage
Materials Research and Education

Technical Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The scientific study of works of art and other cultural heritage materials
offers insight into past cultures, provides a means to rediscover historic
technologies, and improves our ability to preserve precious objects for future
generations. Funds from this instrumentation grant will support the acquisition
of a micro-X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer with high spatial resolution,
line and area element mapping capabilities, and helium purging to enhance the
detection of low-Z elements. Designed for the in situ examination of works of
art, this instrument will complement and enhance existing analytical
capabilities of the Getty Conservation Institute (GCI) Collections Research
Laboratory for conducting research into the composition, structure, and behavior
of the materials comprising works of art. Specifically, the addition of the
proposed instrument will 1) expand the scope of works of art which can be
studied to include inhomogeneous or finely detailed objects through the use of
micro-focus X-ray optics; 2) assist in the discovery of fundamental phenomena
relating to the historic production of materials through the enhanced detection
of low-Z elements; and 3) open new areas of research through the generation of
spatially resolved elemental information. The portability of the instrument will
facilitate collaborative research between the GCI and other museums and cultural
heritage institutions; in addition, collaboration with UCLA will provide
education and training opportunities for post-doctoral fellows, interns, and
graduate/undergraduate students. The fundamental research that this instrument
will allow has the potential to impact the work of chemists and material
scientists, as well as professionals in the related disciplines of art history,
archaeology, and art conservation. Furthermore, the inclusion of results in
museum gallery displays, exhibition publications and public lectures will serve
to increase public awareness of - and interest in - science.

Layman Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The preservation of works of art and other cultural heritage artifacts is
important not only because of their intrinsic beauty and/or historical
significance, but also because these objects contain material evidence about the
people, societies, and technologies that created them. Scientific analysis can
uncover this evidence, which may change how we understand, interpret and care
for art. Because of the precious nature of these objects, removing samples from
them for analysis is usually not permitted, and so non-invasive techniques are
employed whenever possible. X-ray fluorescence (XRF) is one such non-invasive
technique. Using a thin beam of X-rays to analyze a small area on a work of art,
XRF can identify the individual elements present, from which, for example, the
specific pigment used to color a paint may be deduced. XRF has been employed
successfully for many years in the study of works of art, but until now its use
has been limited to the examination of areas at least a quarter inch across. The
proposed instrument - a mapping micro-XRF spectrometer - is the latest
development in XRF technology. Capable of probing on a microscopic scale, this
instrument is also able to raster the X-ray beam over a surface, generating maps
showing the locations of each element. For example, the pigments used to paint
individual features in the tiny faces frequently found in manuscript
illuminations can be characterized using this instrument. These capabilities
will significantly enhance the ability of scientists in the Getty Conservation
Institute Collections Research Laboratory to contribute to an understanding of
artist's materials and methods, and assist art conservators in developing
preservation strategies. Furthermore, because the instrument is portable, it can
be taken to local cultural heritage institutions and universities for research
and the training of students. In addition, results generated using this
instrument will be incorporated into museum gallery displays, exhibition
publications and public lectures will demonstrate how science can increase our
understanding, appreciation, and enjoyment of art.