* 0958531
* EAGER: A Prototype System for Electrical and Meteorological Measurements in Convective Vortices
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Nilton Renno, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2010
* USD 83,110.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) plans to fabricate and test a prototype
instrument in an effort to obtain specialized measurements describing the
behavior of small-scale convective (i.e. thermally-driven) vortices in the
atmosphere. Convective vortices range in size from small short-lived gyres (such
as "dust devils") to far larger and more persistent hurricane-class
circulations, and play an important role in vertical transports of heat,
momentum and tracer species such as dust and other forms of aerosol. The PI
recently advanced a generalized theory for these vortices that includes the
effect of irreversible thermodynamic processes (tracing to air's viscosity and
resulting turbulent losses of momentum) and other sources/sinks of energy. This
theory provides a mathematical expression relating pressure and flow speed that
sheds new light on their observed intensity and basic structural features,
including their tendency to exhibit hollow (or "calm eye") type structure. The
PI will direct a full-time graduate student and laboratory technician in the
design, fabrication and testing a Prandtl-tube data acquisition system capable
of obtaining pressure measurements needed to properly test this theory. This
instrument, which will be mounted on a short tower suitable for remote
deployment, will simultaneously measure both static and dynamic (stagnation-
generated) fluid pressures at required resolution, and will incorporate
detection of charged particles that can in turn be linked to the presence of
banded flow structures known to occur within some dust-filled
circulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this effort derives
from improved basic understanding of the dynamics governing rotational
atmospheric flows on a wide variety of scales. Broader impacts of this
exploratory effort will come primarily through support for education of a
graduate student, but could ultimately extend to improved representations of
processes responsible for lifting of dust from vast expanses of desert (and
associated climate system impacts) to detailed predictions of damaging storms
such as thunderstorm-spawned tornadoes.