* 0958900
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of an Electron-Beam Evaporator for Undergraduate Research
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Larry Hunter, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2013
* USD 350,000.00

0958900 Friedman Amherst College

Technical Abstract This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The deposition of high-quality
metallic films is indispensable for a variety of research purposes, including
superconducting-device physics, the production of research-grade specialized
optics and in many aspects of materials science and nanoscience. This project
will acquire a state-of-the-art electron-beam evaporation system suitable for a
diverse set of research projects, most involving undergraduate researchers at a
liberal-arts college. The system will be reserved for evaporating only non-
magnetic materials in order to produce high-quality superconducting thin films.
In addition, it will have several important features that will allow it to meet
a diverse set of research needs; these include a cassette with multiple sources,
a combination load lock/deposition chamber and an Ar-ion gun for in situ surface
cleaning. Research projects that the evaporator will enable include the
fabrication of superconducting structures and devices to study their macroscopic
quantum properties, the magnetic interactions between superconducting layers
mediated by magnetic vortices, and the influence of electron-number parity on
persistent currents in superconducting nanorings. The system will also be used
for coating optics and resonant cavities, for the creation of "phase dots" used
in studies of Bose-Einstein Condensates as well as for electrode deposition and
associated surface cleaning for studies of Gd/Y-iron-garnet materials used in
experiments to search for the electron electric-dipole moment. The evaporator
will have enough automation and flexibility to be operated easily by
undergraduate students, who will use the state-of-the-art equipment to perform
cutting-edge research. The system will be used by undergraduates from Amherst
and Mt. Holyoke Colleges, graduate students from the University of
Massachusetts, and postdoctoral researchers and faculty from all three
institutions. Non-technical Abstract This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The deposition of high-quality metallic films is indispensable for a variety of
research purposes, including producing superconducting devices and custom
optics, as well as for many applications in materials science and nanoscience.
This project will acquire a state-of-the-art electron-beam evaporation system
suitable for a diverse set of research projects, most involving undergraduate
researchers at a liberal-arts college. The system will be reserved for
evaporating only non-magnetic materials since even small amounts of magnetic
impurities can adversely affect superconducting devices. It will also have many
specialized features to meet a diverse set of research needs. The new evaporator
will be used to fabricate superconducting structures and devices, make
specialized optical devices and electromagnetic resonators, and create
electrodes for studying magnetic materials. These activities will support work
in numerous fundamental and applied research areas, such as quantum computing,
ultra-low-temperature physics, materials science, and
nanoscience/nanotechnology. The evaporator will have enough automation and
flexibility to be operated easily by undergraduate students, who will use the
state-of-the-art equipment to perform cutting-edge research. The system will be
used by undergraduates from Amherst and Mt. Holyoke Colleges, graduate students
from the University of Massachusetts, and postdoctoral researchers and faculty
from all three institutions.