* 0958867
* Stable Isotopic Evidence of the pCO2 Response to the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* James Wright, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2013
* USD 145,498.00

Stable isotopic evidence of the pCO2 and temperature response to the Central
Atlantic Magmatic Province&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;James Wright and Dennis Kent,
Rutgers
University&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0958867&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Our
planet is habitable because the carbon cycle maintains a balance between the
supply and the consumption of atmospheric pCO2. Plate tectonics influence the
long-term (&gt;105 yr.) cycling of carbon, controlling both the rate of volcanic
CO2 outgassing and the removal of CO2 through the exhumation of weatherable
rocks. Earth has undergone several periods of large-scale volcanic eruptions
termed Large Igneous Provinces (LIPs). Three of the largest and most recent LIPs
are the Deccan Traps at 65 Myr, Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP) at
~200 Myr, and Siberian Traps at ~250 Myr. Various researchers have postulated
that volcanic outgassing associated with the emplacement of each LIP led to
large-scale environmental/climatic changes, which are closely linked to mass
extinctions and subsequent evolutionary recovery. However, a major tenet of
these hypotheses, that large-scale outgassing is associated with LIPs, has yet
to be demonstrated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, PIs will reconstruct atmospheric
CO2 levels using stable isotope measurements from sediments deposited before,
during, and after the emplacement of the CAMP. They make use of a ?paleo-
barometry? method that is based on stable carbon isotope values in both the
inorganic and organic phases of paleosols (e.g., Cerling et al. 1999).
Variations in the carbon isotope values respond directly to the levels of CO2 in
the atmosphere. In the Newark and Hartford Basins, numerous paleosol horizons
are found interbedded with igneous rocks of the CAMP; such superposition
combined with cycle stratigraphy allows very little age uncertainty. These
paleosol isotope reconstructions will test the hypothesis that atmospheric pCO2
increases with LIP emplacements. An under appreciated consequence of LIP
emplacement is that well after the initial injection of CO2, long-term
weathering of the CAMP rocks may lower atmospheric CO2 below pre-event levels.
PIs sampling strategy will collect data to test whether chemical weathering of
CAMP volcanic rocks resulted in a long-term decrease in pCO2.