* 0958058
* Considering the Future of K-12 STEM Curricula and Instructional Materials: Stimulating and Supporting New Developments
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Barbara Reys, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2012
* USD 297,731.00

DRL: DR K-12/REESE&lt;br/&gt;PI: Barbara Reys
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, Considering
the Future of STEM Curricula and Instructional Materials, led by the Center for
Study of Mathematics Curriculum is organizing and operating a series of working
groups to examine challenges and opportunities for future innovations in STEM
curricula, instruction, and instructional materials. The project is addressing
three key questions that have been suggested by prospects for fundamental
technology-driven change in the character of STEM
education:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How could STEM education look very different in
the near and long-term future? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;What development and study
of instructional materials, models, and technologies would be required to make
those future visions possible? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;What design, development,
and diffusion processes are most likely to produce new approaches to STEM
education that are actually implemented in schools?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the working group activity are an innovation research and development
agenda for STEM educators, activation of community interest in work on the tasks
of that agenda, and guidance for funding agencies and professional organizations
that provide support for the work.