* 0958508
* Giving Zooniverse a Face: A Citizen Science Facebook Application
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Christopher Impey, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2012
* USD 97,638.00

The Internet is systematically changing how professional scientists and the
public engage with astronomical data and with one another. One of the most
striking examples of new ways astronomers and the public are collaborating is
the "Galaxy Zoo." This online citizen science project has attracted over 230,000
people from around the globe to make over 100 million classifications of the
morphology of galaxies. These classifications, taken in aggregate, have been
shown to be as accurate as the work of professional galaxy classifiers and have
led to the publication or submission of 14 papers on topics as diverse as galaxy
mergers, active galactic nuclei behavior, and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Galaxy Zoo is now transforming into a project
called Zooniverse that will provide a framework for a diverse set of citizen
science tasks. As the Zooniverse grows, we need to find effective ways to expand
the Galaxy Zoo user base, and this project uses Facebook to address this
fundamental need. One of the fastest growing virtual communities in the world,
Facebook potentially offers exceptional leverage to scale up the number of
research questions that can quickly be answered in the realms of both astronomy
and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the first two
Facebook applications to engage citizen scientists. The first will focus on
getting people to do science by inviting them to pick from a "Rogue's Gallery"
the galaxy that best matches a "Most Wanted" galaxy. The second will use social
networking to build the user base of the main Zooniverse website by linking
users' Facebook and Galaxy Zoo profiles, allowing users to share socially the
results of their citizen science work, to play trivia games, and to give friends
"galaxies" to build their own "clusters".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
these galaxy classifications will be used in a Principal Component Analysis
looking for new ways of categorizing galaxies. The sample of roughly 250,000
galaxies provides a valid space in which to define meaningful categories of
galaxy morphology, deriving for the first time natural classification classes
from the appearance of a large sample of galaxies, instead of sorting them into
categories defined a priori.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also pave
the way for future applications to migrate into Facebook by defining what
characteristics do and do not attract users to engage in citizen science online.
This will allow other projects to engage users in astronomical research and will
inform those working on non-astronomy citizen science about how better to create
future applications.