* 0958585
* II-NEW: Hadoop cluster acquisition, deployment and training for speech and language processing
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2010,10/31/2012
* Brian Roark, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 10/31/2012
* USD 418,500.00

This project aims to educate, train and equip graduate students in what is
becoming a critical paradigm in speech and NLP: distributed algorithms, a
paradigm pursued by Google with great success. This distributed processing
paradigm represents more than just a computational convenience, but rather an
approach for designing algorithms to optimize performance within such an
environment, yielding massive improvements over standard algorithms directly
deployed in parallel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the current
institutional infrastructure proposal are to (1) acquire an extensive (384 core)
cluster of processors for use as a Hadoop cluster at the Center for Spoken
Language Understanding (CSLU) at OHSU; (2) integrate the cluster within the
existing computing infrastructure; and (3) develop educational resources
(tutorials, lab sessions, course modules and seminars) focused on both ``how-
to'' information for using the Hadoop cluster and more general topics in
algorithms for distributed computing. At CSLU -- part of the Division of
Biomedical Computer Science at OHSU -- nearly all of the problems are within the
scope of basic or applied NLP or speech processing
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Apart from training graduate students via both
course-work and work on research projects, the infrastructure created in this
project will contribute to advances in speech processing and NLP and
applications that make use of these technologies, including national defense
applications in text and speech mining along with biomedical applications. It
will enable at least eight funded NSF projects and at least five projects from
other agencies to pursue novel directions in their data analysis.