* 0958512
* II-New: System Acquisition for the Development of Scalable Parallel Algorithms for Scientific Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Krzysztof Szalewicz, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 04/30/2013
* USD 749,769.00

Parallel computing now plays a central role in nearly every science and
engineering endeavor. The leading supercomputers today comprise hundreds of
thousands of processors, and in the near future are expected to comprise
millions of processors. Researchers at the University of Delaware are working to
harness this vast computing power to make ground-breaking scientific
discoveries. This work requires fundamental algorithmic research and development
to address issues such as multiscale coupling, scalability, and hybrid message-
passing/threaded programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are
building a new, highly parallel, computing system for scientific computation
research and teaching at the University of Delaware. This computer consists of
approximately 1,600 processors, and is expandable to many more. UD researchers
who share a common interest in scalable parallel computation plan to explore a
variety of scientific applications: 3D Navier-Stokes solvers for environmental
turbulent flows; "ensemble analysis" in oceanic forecasting; computational
electromagnetism; simulation of emulsion microstructure for environmental
pollution control and material synthesis; electronic structure calculations for
atoms and molecules; multiscale cloud dynamics for more reliable weather and
climate prediction; computational carbon nanoelectronics; and vorticity-
dominated flows. The new computer will be used to optimize the current
algorithms in each application, help identify limitations to scalability, and
explore new ideas to enable scaling to hundreds of thousands of processors and
to take advantage of hybrid architectures. The system motivates collaboration
among faculty interested in application problems and faculty with expertise in
computer science. Libraries for efficient parallel data redistribution and
automatic optimization of parallel codes are some of the ways the computer
scientists participating in the project are enhancing the scientific
applications.