* 0958749
* MRI R2: Acquisition of a Femtosecond Optical Frequency Comb and THz Spectrometer for Atomic, Molecular and Condensed Matter Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2011
* Derek Kimball, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Wendell Talbot Hill
* 02/28/2011
* USD 393,388.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for state-of-the-art
spectroscopic instrumentation for the Departments of Physics and Chemistry and
Biochemistry at California State University - East Bay for research in the
fields of atomic physics, condensed matter physics, material science, and
physical chemistry. The interdisciplinary team of scientists, all experienced
spectroscopists and active researcher-educators will carry out a wide array of
spectroscopic research projects. In atomic physics, direct frequency comb
spectroscopy will be employed in a long-term research program to understand the
complex spectra of rare-earth atoms, enabling discovery of a large number of
theoretically predicted energy levels yet to be experimentally found and
determination of atomic state parameters (such as lifetimes, polarizabilities,
hyperfine splittings, gyromagnetic ratios, etc.) that have never been measured.
These experiments will vastly improve our knowledge of rare-earth atoms and
allow evaluation of potential candidates among metastable states in rare-earth
atoms for new tests of fundamental physics, in particular searches for the
permanent electric dipole moment of the electron. In condensed matter physics,
characteristic low energy excitations will be probed in correlated electronic
systems and temperature-frequency scaling behavior will be tested in systems
that undergo quantum phase transitions. In materials science, THz spectroscopy
will facilitate the characterization of novel thin film photovoltaic systems as
well as engineered metamaterials split ring resonator structures (so-called
negative index of refraction materials). Finally in physical chemistry the
system will be used to create composite spectra for atmospherically relevant
greenhouse gases and molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research on
spectroscopy of atoms, molecules and condensed matter systems blends the power
of the new systems with well-developed experimental methods and analysis
techniques - well-suited for undergraduate research - used both in academic and
industrial research. The acquisitions will provide students in multiple
disciplines (physics, chemistry, and biochemistry) access to experiences and
research opportunities they otherwise would not have. In particular, California
State University - East Bay is one of the most diverse undergraduate
institutions in the U.S. (in 2008, the student diversity ranked 67th out of
2,474 four-year universities according to the U.S. Department of Education), and
our departments are at the forefront of recruitment and retention of
underrepresented minorities and women in the physical sciences. At an
affordable, accessible, public university, this Major Research Instrumentation
acquisition will provide opportunities to the broadest possible range of
students and attract new physical science majors from the extremely diverse pool
of students attending California State University East Bay.