* 0958576
* II-NEW: Acquiring infrastructure for Artificial Intelligence, Natural Language Processing and Information Retrieval
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Lisa Hines, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Vijayalakshmi Atluri
* 04/30/2012
* USD 195,051.00

This proposal seeks to obtain funding to acquire
computing&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure to perform cross-disciplinary research in
artificial&lt;br/&gt;intelligence, natural language processing, bioinformatics,
social&lt;br/&gt;networks and related fields. In particular, the projects that
will&lt;br/&gt;be supported by the infrastructure acquired include developing
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;and architectures for large-scale ontology alignment,
particularly in&lt;br/&gt;the biomedical domain; mining Wikipedia and similar
Web-based sources&lt;br/&gt;for geographical, temporal and ontological
information; performing&lt;br/&gt;named entity recognition in biomedical and
other domains; performing&lt;br/&gt;computational motivational and content
analysis of socially generated&lt;br/&gt;content such a blogs and micro-blogs;
undertaking corpus-based computational&lt;br/&gt;linguistics research in under-
studied and possibly endangered languages from&lt;br/&gt;India and other
locations; developing better-performing algorithms for gene&lt;br/&gt;expression
analysis; and developing, implementing and comparing algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for
protein structure prediction, particularly proteins that
contain&lt;br/&gt;coiled-coil structures. These projects deal with large amounts
of data&lt;br/&gt;and information and processing such data and information
requires large&lt;br/&gt;amounts of computing power. Our proposal seeks to
acquire adequate and&lt;br/&gt;flexible computing hardware to facilitate
problem-solving in these and other&lt;br/&gt;areas, so that current and future
problems can be solved felicitously. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure
acquired will enable cutting-edge research by Ph.D.,&lt;br/&gt;Masters and
undergraduate students, including REU site students, in a&lt;br/&gt;variety of
cross-disciplinary topics that employ ideas and innovations&lt;br/&gt;in
artificial intelligence, machine learning and information
retrieval.&lt;br/&gt;For example, the results of our research may enable
creations of systems&lt;br/&gt;that discover overlaps and matches among large
medical ontologies so that&lt;br/&gt;painstakingly created domain-specific
information can be fused, compared&lt;br/&gt;and utilized better; and may assist
in creating programs that assist in&lt;br/&gt;automatically understanding and/or
visualizing content of socially-generated&lt;br/&gt;Websites such as Wikipedia
and Twitter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web
site at the URL:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.uccs.edu/~kalita.