* 0958363
* II-NEW: Implementation of an Architecture Simulation Platform with a Virtualized Real-time Operating System Interface for Kilocore-scale Heterogeneous Embedded Chip MultiProcessors
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Bharat Joshi, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2013
* USD 204,271.00

Portable embedded systems place ever-increasing demands on high-performance,
low-power microprocessor design. This has triggered a paradigm shift in the
embedded processor industry, and embedded processor architects are permanently
altering their roadmap to incorporate multiple cores on the same chip to
preserve exponential computational speed-up (to continue Moore's law). While the
industry focus is on putting higher number of cores on a single chip, the key
challenge is to optimally architect these processors to meet stringent real-time
constraints in virtualized environments with different real-time operating
systems (RTOS). Moreover, these processors will work on diverse application
types having sporadic event-driven data. In such complex systems, the optimal
performance can only be realized by co-designing the RTOS kernels, the
virtualization environment, and the processor micro-architecture.

The goal of this research is to develop a cycle-accurate simulation platform for
the micro-architectural exploration of future kilocore-scale heterogeneous
embedded chip-multiprocessors (ECMPs), together with an interface to boot RTOS-
es on the simulator, and enable virtualization on the ECMPs. The integrated
framework is flexible and modular for designing a wide variety of ECMPs and
RTOS-es, flexibly threaded for fast simulation of thousands of cores on a wide
range of computing platforms, assertion-based and check-pointed for quickly
regenerating and changing complex trigger conditions required for debugging,
instantly-bootable to reduce the RTOS booting time from power-up to simulation,
enabled with deep-chip-vision for better observability of silicon behavior at
the architectural level, and open-sourced for non-commercial use. The RTOS
integration environment provides software interfaces and libraries to the
architect and the OS designer to simulate the execution of embedded applications
on different exploratory ECMPs, in the presence of different virtualization
scenarios and RTOS scheduling algorithms. This project promotes inter-
disciplinary research between computer architects, RTOS designers, Computer-
Aided Designers, and embedded application programmers at different universities
and research institutions. The various education components woven into the
project will foster team-based research, learning, and teaching among the
university student participants.