* 0958877
* MRI-R2 Consortium: Acquisition of multiple Environmental Sample Processors (ESPs) and supporting mooring and communications hardware
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Christopher Scholin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,934,178.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s request funds to acquire five
Environmental Sample Processors (ESPs) and supporting mooring and communications
hardware to further their research activities and foster collaborations. The
ESP?s will be deployed together in an array configuration to obtain real-time
data on a wide range of microorganisms and their metabolites. For many years,
this has been a distant dream, but that dream is now close to reality with the
development and commercialization of the Environmental Sample Processor (ESP)
that is the centerpiece of this proposal. The ESP can be deployed subsurface for
months at a time. It collects and processes water samples, identifies and
enumerates harmful algal bloom (HAB) species, pathogens, and other
microorganisms as well as the concentration of specific metabolites such as
algal toxins, and relays the data to shore. To foster greater flexibility, the
ESP has been designed with a microfluidic block which allows analytical modules
of different types (e.g., quantitative PCR) to be placed downstream of the water
processing core. A wide variety of organisms and chemicals of interest to
science and society can be analyzed over time scales that are not otherwise
possible, all in automated fashion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential broader impacts include: educational
and outreach benefits from numerous undergraduates, graduate students, post
docs, technical staff, and senior faculty working with the ESPs through various
projects; various summer internship programs provided by WHOI and Biosecurity,
Inc. for undergraduates including minority students; Monterey Bay Aquarium has
included the ESP in a program that runs twice a day reaching almost 300,000
people a year; Volunteer phytoplankton researchers from 11 different states will
be exposed to the ESP at various training workshops; scientifically, the
placement of more ESP's into the ocean and eventually onto mobile platforms will
give us the potential to inform and drive adaptive sampling in the way that CTD
measurements do now; testing and establishing ESP technology will not only
further the proposed research but also contribute to commercial interests that
manufacture and sell advanced scientific instrumentation. As the technology is
proven, other research groups will seek to incorporate it, and demand for the
same or similar instruments will grow; many of the enabled/enhanced projects
(research and educational) supported by this proposal are multi-investigator,
and even multi-institutional, in nature and would further increase networking
and partnering among relevant research groups.&lt;br/&gt;