* 0958974
* From Biological Rhythm Studies to Chronobiology: A History of a New Scientific Discipline
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Jole Shackelford, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2012
* USD 182,859.00

Proposal 0958974 PI: Jole Shackelford&lt;br/&gt;From Biological Rhythm Studies
to Chronobiology: A History of a New Scientific
Discipline&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea that humans have an inner clock and
that animal life is governed by circadian rhythms is commonplace today. The
historical development of biological rhythm studies, or chronobiology as it is
known today, has received scant attention within the historical disciplines, and
yet biological rhythms research has radically transformed how we view living
creatures, from relatively static organisms that stabilize themselves in a
changing environment(homoeostasis) to temporally active, organic systems whose
chemistries vibrate or oscillate in complex patterns that anticipate predictable
changes in environmental factors such as light, heat,tides, and other periodic
phenomena. Moreover, chronobiologist's own accounts of the developmental of
their science often emphasize the history of their individual lines of inquiry;
they do not grasp the broader historical picture of the emergence of biological
rhythms as a scientific research area.&lt;br/&gt;This project is a two-year
investigation of the history of chronobiology, developing expertise and
protocols for training students in the history of recent science. A core group
of historians, philosophers, and scientists will meet in a regularly-scheduled
workshop at the University of Minnesota to define the historical limits and
content of chronobiology, a relatively young field in&lt;br/&gt;the history of
biology, but one that is contemporary with the better-studied environmental
biology and developmental biology. The principal investigators will develop
interactional expertise in the science through the collaborative workshop
format, identify the key historical elements of the establishment of
chronobiology as a new discipline, elaborate a research bibliography, locate and
evaluate primary source documents pertaining to the leading researchers and
their laboratories. The end result will be a working narrative of the history of
rhythm studies and emergence of chronobiology as an autonomous scientific
research area.&lt;br/&gt;At the culmination of the grant, the principal
investigators will bring together historians, philosophers, and scientists to
present the results of individual studies, which are intended for publication.
These steps will contribute to the long term goal of training students in the
methods required to do historical research on this and comparable recent
sciences.