* 0958874
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Dense Array EEG for Research and Training across the Disciplines
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Qihou Zhou, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2013
* USD 222,750.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5

How neural activity in the brain translates into the "mind" is a critical
question facing psychology and cognitive science. With support from the National
Science Foundation, the Center for Psychophysiology at Miami University will
acquire two high density electroencephalography (EEG) systems to help answer
this question.

Housed in the recently constructed Psychology Building on the Oxford campus, the
Center for Psychophysiology will serve to further Miami University's dedication
to high-quality teaching and research. The Center will enable access to modern
cognitive and behavioral neuroscience technologies and will build expertise in
their use. The acquisition of these systems will allow researchers from a broad
range of disciplines to augment their current behavioral methodologies with a
variety of noninvasive means of measuring and modeling human brain function.

The continuous, scalp-recorded EEG and its derivative, event-related potentials
(ERP), provide windows into the brain activities that underlie psychological
processing. This technology measures brain activity by recording rapid changes
in the electromagnetic fields generated by neurons as they engage in processing.
The acquisition of high-density (64 channel and 256 channel) EEG systems will
enable researchers at the Center to identify the sources of this
electrophysiological activity. By taking advantage of recent advances in
mathematical modeling techniques, this spatial information can be used to
localize activity observed in the EEG signal to specific parts of the brain, and
thus clarify the relationship between neural activity and psychological
function.

Planned projects span multiple disciplines, some of which will involve cross-
disciplinary collaborations. These include relating neural activation to working
memory and category learning, identifying the neural correlates of value in
decision-making, measuring brain activities during play in young children, and
contrasting the neural components of same-race and other-race face recognition.
Researchers planning to use the new equipment come from eight departments
spanning all five divisions of the Miami University campuses including a
regional campus in Hamilton.

In addition to supporting faculty and student research efforts, this acquisition
will also enable the Center to offer a unique undergraduate curriculum in
psychophysiology and cognitive neuroscience that embodies the "Student as
Scholar" learning model. Students will obtain hands-on experiences in the
collection and analysis of EEG data, broaden that knowledge to include
applications outside of their own specific disciplines, and design and conduct
independent research projects in their final year of study. This tiered
curriculum initiative is one-of-a kind in its focus on undergraduate training as
it relates to science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines, and is exemplary of Miami's goal of creating the engaged learner.