* 0958193
* CI-P: Deep Understanding Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* James Allen, Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2012
* USD 94,136.00

Deep language understanding involves mapping language to a formalism that
captures its intended meaning in context, using concepts and relations in an
ontology that supports reasoning. It is generally thought that deep
understanding is too difficult to accomplish except in very limited domains. As
a result, most of the field has shifted to studying so-called shallow methods.
Work in shallow language processing has been greatly enhanced in recent years
due to the availability of considerable annotated corpora and off-the-shelf
software. If one had to build this infrastructure from scratch, then most
current work in the field would not be feasible. Despite the successes of
shallow language understanding, however, one cannot, for instance, build
sophisticated dialogue systems or NL interfaces to intelligent systems, (e.g.,
humanrobot interaction) using off-the-shelf shallow components. For these and
many other applications, we need deeper understanding. However, there are
currently no resources or toolkits to support deep understanding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant focuses on identifying the resources
that the research community would find most useful and exploring what would be
useful APIs to this resource (e.g., deep semantic parsers, semantic lexicons and
ontologies, discourse processing capabilities such as ontology-based reference
resolution, surface speech act interpretation). The interested communities fall
into two broad camps. The first are what we might call technology users, people
who want to use deep understanding capabilities but whose research interests are
in some other area of intelligent systems (e.g., reasoning, learning, image
interpretation, robotics). The second camp, technology developers, consist of
researchers in NLP who are pushing research in NLP further. A critical subpart
of this second group are students studying to become natural language
researchers and technology developers. Through a series of case studies and a
workshop, we explore the viability of different delivery mechanisms and needs
for the different types of users and for different applications.