* 0958425
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer For Undergraduate Research and Training at Elizabethtown College
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Jeffrey Rood, Elizabethtown College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 02/28/2013
* USD 332,553.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor
James MacKay and colleague Jeffrey A. Rood from the Department of Chemistry at
Elizabethtown College will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer to support a
number of research projects at this primarily undergraduate institution. Faculty
and students from nearby colleges (Lebanon Valley College and Franklin and
Marshall College) will also use this instrument to support their research. The
instrument will be used to support a large number of research activities,
including: 1) the development of new synthetic routes to beta-lactams and
allenolates; 2) the investigation of Group1/Group2 organometallic compounds and
catalysts ; 3) the synthesis of metal phosphinate/phosphonate framework
materials; 4) the synthesis and characterization of Group 14 organometallic
compounds; 5) the development of luminescence-based sensors; and 6) the
investigation of reactions of chiral, non-racemic trifluoromethyl-containing
compounds.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry and
materials chemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as
well as research for a diverse group of young scientists.