* 0958110
* PECASE:  Taking Attitudes Seriously: A Multi-Contextual Approach to Behavioral-Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Joan Walker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 09/30/2013
* USD 374,504.00

Behavioral models of transport and land use are used to inform planning and
policy making and forecast future scenarios. Discrete choice models are a key
component and explain the choice of interest (spatial location of people and
firms, mode, activities, etc.) as a function of observable attributes of the
alternatives such as time and cost and observable characteristics of the
decision maker such as household size and income. Behavioral scientists have
long emphasized the importance of attitudes as the "emotional core" driving many
decision-making processes. Despite their importance, such behavioral constructs
have not been well represented in the discrete choice paradigm. The objective of
this research is to effectively integrate attitudinal constructs into discrete
choice analysis by building on the findings of behavioral science and
incorporating the methods of structural equation modeling and psychometric data.
The model system uses multiple equations and maximum likelihood estimation to
simultaneously estimate discrete choice and latent variable models. This
framework provides several advantages over existing approaches. First, it can
incorporate the latest developments in discrete choice analysis (for example,
flexible error structures and complex choice sets) as well as linear and non-
linear structural equation models. Second, it produces consistent and efficient
estimators of the influences of attitudes on choice. Third, it provides a means
of simultaneously inferring both a set of intrinsic attitudes for each
individual and how these attitudes affect a number of interrelated decisions.
This methodology has been employed in limited cases and will be further
developed and extended in this research program. Extensions include (i) modeling
the set of intrinsic attitudes of a person and their influence on a number of
interrelated travel, activity, and land use decisions, and (ii) modeling the
trending nature of these attitudes over time. The research goals are to prove
the feasibility of the approach, demonstrate its added value, and make it
accessible to researchers. The educational program uses the domain of attitudes
and behavior as the focus for hands-on, group research activities aimed at
teaching the scientific method and re-enforcing basic principles taught in
class. Educational modules will be developed for graduate, undergraduate, and
secondary school classes that focus on exploration of the students own behavior
and that of their family and colleagues. The research and educational programs
are integrated through the domain of attitude and behavior research and a common
dataset, thereby allowing for interaction through presentations and mentoring
across all levels of the research and education. The education program
contributes to the development of students excited about scientific exploration
and with skills in the scientific method, thereby increasing their probability
of careers in science and engineering. The research program contributes to
better understanding of the development of transportation infrastructure and
urban planning, providing insight into issues of urban sprawl, traffic
congestion, environmental quality, and emergency evacuation. The proposed
methods promise enriched quantitative models of behavior, thereby improving
forecasts and better informing planning, management, and policy making.
Estimation software that makes use of this approach will be developed and made
freely accessible, opening the door for researchers in a wide variety of fields
to enrich behavioral models with attitudinal constructs.