* 0958806
* WORKSHOP Partnership Proposal: Expanding Climate Change Research through a Multidisciplinary Multi-agency Approach
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Leah Mackey, Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2010
* USD 41,808.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed series of
workshops will bring together scientists from the Rocky Mountain Research
Station, Colorado State University, USGS, the science team from the Yukon River
Intertribal Watershed Council (YRITWC), and Yukon watershed communities -
comprised of Cup'ik, Yup'ik, Koyukon and Gwich'in Tribal members to discuss
issues, scientific and local, concerning the effect of climate change on the
Yukon River watershed. The strategy for the workshop is to bring both scientists
and scientific knowledge together with Yukon community members, including
YRITWC's local river monitoring capacity and Traditional Ecological Knowledge in
order to expand each groups' understanding of the changing ecology of the Yukon
River watershed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;YRITWC's member member
communities are increasingly interested in the changes they are observing in and
along the river, many of which are likely attributable to climate change. This
project supports a series of worshops, face to face and electronic, to
illuminate research areas of mutual interest and concern for future
community/scientist collaborative research projects. In addition to the
workshops, the YRITWC has an extensive plan for public outreach and
dissemination of knowledge to Yukon communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;