* 0958345
* II-EN: High-throughput and multimodality optical imaging in computational biology
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Eric Miller, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2014
* USD 304,530.00

This infrastructure enhancement award expands the Optical Imaging Laboratory
(OIL) at Brigham and Women's Hospital through the development of an image
database and image analysis toolbox. The developed database integrates data
obtained from multiple imaging instruments as well as an image processing
toolbox implemented using Matlab. The database manages the dataflow by
interacting with the imaging instruments, metadata, and the toolbox. The data
model consists of four parts: (1)the raw image data, (2) image descriptor data,
(3) metadata definitions from image computations, and (4) associated metadata
definitions concerning cell line, reagents, subjects used in the experiment as
well as information from genetics, biology, and experimental design. The toolbox
features a modular design and includes a versatile graphic user interface and
file input/output. Its careful design facilitates the implementation of existing
and new computational techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
project serve as the backbone of a computational infrastructure for a wide
variety of biology research that is increasingly relying on optical imaging and
computational analysis. Broad impact of the work arises from the fact that the
database and the toolbox are available to researchers and students in biology,
engineering, and mathematics for research and teaching activities. Undergraduate
and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows involved in the work benefit from
the training provided by the multi-disciplinary environment.