* 0958436
* CRI/II-New: Dallas-ARea Testbed for Context-Aware, Cognitive Research  (DART-CARs)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Dinesh Rajan, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 02/28/2014
* USD 551,000.00

Wireless system performance is known to be highly dependent upon the
characteristics of the environment. Despite the increasing ability of wireless
devices to sense their surroundings, wireless systems have yet to fully leverage
contextual data to improve performance. To this end, the Dallas-ARea Testbed for
Context-Aware, Cognitive Research (DART-CARs) allows the study of wireless
performance in a broad class of mobile and static environments from indoor labs
to outdoor high-way speeds within a single testbed. Our hardware platform
functions across many different wireless bands to enable real-time, multi-band
operation. Such a first-of-its-kind infrastructure is critical for designing
context-aware and cognitive algorithms that utilize multiple frequency bands to
adapt to dynamic environmental settings. Our project has three major
initiatives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Deploy a wireless research testbed to enable
study across a vast array of urban environments &lt;br/&gt;-Design multi-band
wireless hardware and reconfigurable embedded software tools that enable
context-driven, cognitive switching across frequency bands to improve
performance in the aforementioned environments&lt;br/&gt;-Develop an open-access
data repository of wireless performance in multiple urban scenarios and across
frequency bands&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project incorporates topics across
disciplines such as wireless theory, embedded programming, hardware design, and
ubiquitous computing. Student involvement in courses and research will allow
cross-disciplinary intellectual growth. Further, field measurements will be made
available to the research community. Finally, handheld mobile devices are
increasingly being used as the primary method for under-represented groups to
access the Internet. This infrastructure and resulting research will improve the
performance these devices.