* 0958033
* Understanding Attention Switching with Visual and Audio Cues in Time-Safety Critical Situations
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Mohan Trivedi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2011
* USD 80,000.00

This project utilizes a holistic, human-centered approach in the design of
intelligent driver support systems, where situational criticality estimates are
continuously monitored. This requires computational models for accurate
estimation of how a driver perceives situations, plans actions, and reacts and
interacts with the vehicle and its surround. The specific goal of the project is
to develop computational frameworks to analyze attention shifts, using
multimodal cues, in an environment where time and safety constraints are
critical. Specific research objectives are: (1) Identification of body related
indicators of attention switching. This involves utilizing statistical machine-
learning algorithms to analyze previously collected ethnographic datasets and
determine most useful indicators of attention shifts, including head and eye
gaze, hands, feet, and other body motions. (2) Understanding the effect of
external visual and audio saliency cues in the driving environment on attention
shifts. This involves the analysis of how those multimodal cues affect attention
shifts in time- and safety-critical situations, incorporating ?top-down? goal-
oriented and ?bottom-up? distraction-based mechanisms. (3) Developing a
hierarchical Bayesian model and computational framework for describing the
relationship between body cues, external saliency, and driving task, in order to
accurately estimate attention and attention shifts. In summary, the project
provides a feasibility assessment of detecting how and why attention shifts
occur in the vehicular environment with a multimodal sensor suite. Project
findings will influence design of active safety systems to reduce crash risk on
the roads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;