* 0958018
* MRI-R2:   Acquisition of a Shared Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Ecological, Geological &amp; Hydrological Research, Education &amp; Training in the Central Appalachians
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2011
* David Nelson, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 11/30/2011
* USD 434,273.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;Funds supplied by the NSF MRI-R2 program have
helped to support the establishment of a facility for state of- the-art stable
isotope measurements at the University of Maryland Center for Environmental
Science Appalachian Laboratory. Acquisition of equipment for this Central
Appalachians Stable Isotope Facility (CASIF) provides critical support to unique
ongoing and planned research projects in multiple disciplines, including
paleoecology and paleoclimatology, landscape ecology and remote sensing,
biogeochemistry, hydrology &amp; plant ecology. The funds were used to purchase
a ThermoFisher Delta V+ isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS), a spooling wire
microcombustion device, an elemental analyzer, a high temperature
conversion/elemental analyzer pyrolysis unit and a GasBench II. A critical mass
of 13 new and existing faculty, including 7 early-career assistant professors
who specialize in the application of isotopic and/or biogeochemical tracers are
using the equipment to address pressing questions concerning the impacts of
environmental change, including: long-term hydrologic variability in the flow of
the Potomac River; the response of the nitrogen cycle to natural and
anthropogenic perturbations; the impacts of invasive species and human
activities on biogeochemical processes in soils and streams; and many other
timely research topics. Together this group actively trains roughly 25 graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers, and approximately 30 undergraduate
researchers. Students and postdoctoral researchers, including women, minorities
&amp; first-generation students, are provided with opportunities to utilize
state-of-the-art techniques and instruments at the CASIF. As a regional shared-
use facility, the CASIF will promote synergistic research and education
activities around common environmental-change research themes, thus enhancing
intra- and inter-institution collaborations, and also helping the general public
appreciate the utility of isotopes for understanding the impacts of
environmental change. Results from the studies enabled by the new
instrumentation will be disseminated through peer-reviewed scientific journals,
and by student and faculty presentations at regional and national meetings.