* 0958556
* RAPID: Evaluation of the Impact of Near-surface Turbulence on the Active Temperature, Ozone and Moisture Microwave Spectrometer (ATOMMS) Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Emil Kursinski, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 09/30/2010
* USD 74,163.00

For more than ten years, the principal Investigator (PI) and his group have been
developing an atmospheric remote sensing system called the Active Temperature,
Ozone and Moisture Microwave Spectrometer (ATOMMS). ATOMMS combines the best
features of the Global Positioning System (GPS) radio occultation (RO) and the
Microwave Limb Sounder (MLS) techniques by actively probing via radio
occultation (a subset of) the absorption lines that MLS observes via passive
emission. Analyses of available data shows that ATOMMS will profile tropospheric
and middle atmosphere water vapor and middle atmosphere ozone to 1-5%,
temperature to 0.5K, and geopotential heights to 10-20 m, all with ~200 m
vertical resolution, in both clear and cloudy air. This unprecedented
performance will improve significantly with averaging. Because the occultation
signal source is observed immediately before or after each occultation, ATOMMS
is self-calibrating, which eliminates long-term drift. These capabilities will
fulfill crucial needs for climate change monitoring, research and policymaking.
This research focuses on several critical, near-term research objectives
associated with the ATOMMS development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
this project are to (1) complete the nearly finished first version of the ATOMMS
instrument, (2) complete the instrument testing and performance evaluation in
the laboratory, (3) use the instrument to measure for the first time the impact
of near-surface turbulence on the ATOMMS signals and (4) assess that impact
against recent theoretical predictions. The nearly completed, first version of
the ATOMMS instrument provides two tones near 183 GHz which is the minimum
number needed to make useful differential absorption measurements.
Simplistically, one tone measures absorption plus unwanted amplitude variations
due to other effects such as antenna pointing and the 2nd tone measures just the
unwanted amplitude variations. As a result, the ratio of the amplitudes of the
two tones largely removes unwanted relatively broadband effects like those
caused by turbulent fluctuations of the real part of the index of refraction
while retaining most of the desired gaseous absorption signature. A recent Ph.D.
in the group identified a new error source: turbulent fluctuations in the
imaginary part of the atmospheric index of refraction that will produce
significant amplitude scintillations separate from and in addition to those due
to fluctuations in the real part of the refractivity. The ground measurements
will for the first time measure the magnitude of the scintillations ("twinkling
of a star") of the ATOMMS signals caused by near-surface turbulent fluctuations
in the real and imaginary parts of the index of refraction and provide critical
information needed to isolate and better understand this new source of error.
The four steps summarized above are critical in the overall evaluation and
demonstration of the ATOMMS remote sensing capability and must be completed
prior to ATOMMS progressing to its flight testing and demonstration phase that
will proceed if the ATOMMS follow-on proposal is funded. These research
objectives are important and well-justified scientifically even if the ATOMMS
follow-on proposal is not funded because they will determine and document in the
peer-reviewed literature the performance of a new RO climate instrument and an
uncertain error source critical to the ultimate performance of the ATOMMS
climate monitoring system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is to isolate and quantify a recently recognized key source of error.
The turbulence testing will provide the information to isolate, quantify and
reduce amplitude scintillations due to turbulent fluctuations in the imaginary
and real refractivity. Without these measurements and subsequent analysis, it
will not be possible to quantify this critical error leaving the assessment of
ATOMMS incomplete and its ultimate performance uncertain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal is a constellation of a dozen or more
small spacecraft making ATOMMS occultation measurements which will provide
dense, global coverage with complete cloud-penetration and diurnal sampling
every orbit. Given its unique and powerful combination of qualities critical to
characterizing climate, ATOMMS should be a key element in the global climate
observing system Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) which is a crucial
component in solving the climate change problem.