* 0958526
* Managing the Impact of Engineering Changes in a Cyberinfrastructure-Enabled Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Debasish Dutta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 05/31/2012
* USD 290,573.00

The research objective of this award is to develop methods to enable fast and
reliable evaluation of the impact of a proposed Engineering Change (EC).
Engineering Change refers to a change to the shape, dimensions, structure,
material, manufacturing process, etc. of a part or assembly after the initial
design has been released. Evaluating ECs is a time-consuming process due to the
complexity of typical products and the lifecycle-wide impact of a change. The
research focus is on the development of (i) meaningful representations of ECs
and (ii) techniques for searching previous similar ECs. Complexities stem from
the disparity of resources that can cause or are affected by the engineering
change. This research assumes the existence of a Cyberinfrastructure (CI) and
focuses on the design of CI-aware models and solution approaches. Techniques
from ontology-based computing, information theory and machine learning are used.

If successful, this research will provide a scientific foundation to the current
ad-hoc change evaluation process. It will advance our understanding of how the
disparate components of engineering change data relate to each other. The
research results will benefit designers in the context of globalization, which
is increasing the pressure to manage component and process changes while
maintaining or improving quality and reducing costs with shorter turn-around
times. Fast, accurate and reliable evaluation of the impact of engineering
changes will result in cost benefits to industry and the US government that
extend beyond benefits realized by just overcoming errors or incremental
improvements in the design or manufacturing processes. Results will be
disseminated through the University of Michigan?s PLM (Product Lifecycle
Management) Alliance and included in a graduate course in Global Product
Development that brings together students from the U.S., Germany, and South
Korea to work in global design teams. Results will also be disseminated through
various publications and the development of open-source software tools which
will be available for industry and academia evaluation. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be exposed to multidisciplinary, global research and
development as a result of this award.