* 0958182
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: State Sovereignty and the Regulation of Cross-Border Capital in the Global Age
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Kevin Sobel-Read, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 01/31/2011
* USD 14,845.00

Sovereignty defines the boundaries of nationhood, yet it also shapes the dynamic
economic, political, and cultural relationships between peoples and governments.
In the conventional view, sovereignty hinges on physical control over territory,
backed by military force. But global capital flows are challenging the essence
of traditional notions of sovereignty. Moreover, because law - in the form of
national legislation and judicial decisions - is one of the primary means of
regulating the flow of cross-border capital, law is an ideal and practical focal
point for such a study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present dissertation project,
to be conducted by Kevin Sobel-Read under the supervision of Dr. William O'
Barr, seeks to shed light on key aspects of modern state-sovereignty by
examining the central role of law in the management of global capital flows and,
in turn, the critical relationship between legal regulation and state
sovereignty. The research will be conducted in the South Pacific region,
focusing on the Cook Islands and New Zealand. Given that a majority of Cook
Islanders reside in New Zealand, and given the differences in wealth between
these two nations, a cross-border analysis of Cook Islanders' capital movement
offers special insight into the interplay between the state sovereignty and
financial regulation of developing and also developed
nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be carried out through
overlapping legal, archival, and ethnographic methods. The data collected will
provide a means: (1) to map the movement of capital among Cook Islanders inside
and outside the Cook Islands; and (2) to analyze that movement of capital
against relevant legal regulation in the Cook Islands and New Zealand,
pinpointing where and how the regulation affects the capital flow. As such, the
goal is to offer a fuller understanding of the relationship between the forces
of globalization on the one hand and the continuing role of state power on the
other, helping to explain the nature and general processes of sovereignty in the
21st century.