* 0958509
* Microhabitat Selection and Morphological Constraint in the Insect Visual System
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2015
* Justin Walguarnery, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2015
* USD 508,006.00

In many animals, nearly every important task, whether it be locomotion,
communication, feeding, or mating, is governed by the availability of visual
information. The theory of sensory drive predicts that sensory signals, sensory
receptors and behaviors will adapt jointly to enable animals to see well,
despite variable or challenging light environments. Yet, two important aspects
of this theory are under-explored: the effect of actual light variation in
natural environments (most studies only consider gross averages), and the
ability of animals to improve what they view by choosing the best locations and
angles within the habitat. Furthermore, more research is needed on synthesizing
the complex interactions of morphology, behavior, and ecology to maintain visual
performance.

In this study anecologically diverse, yet uniquely easy to study, group of
Hawaiian Megalagrion damselflies will be used to investigate constraints and
trade-offs in the insect compound eye visual system, to identify alternative
designs by which visual performance can be maximized, and to expand the
predictive power of current models of sensory system evolution. The study of
sensory systems will be advanced by:

-exploring habitat light at scales relevant to the individual; -studying the
effects of large differences in habitat light; -exploring the interaction of
behavior and morphology in both signalers and receivers; -measuring actual
performance in the field as well as under controlled laboratory conditions;
-exploring the effects of scaling (variation in eye size with increasing body
size); -understanding morphological integration in the eye as well as regional
variations across the eye; and -synthesizing the complex interactions between
morphology, ecology, behavior, and performance.

Furthermore, this work will involve undergraduate and graduate students and will
contribute to conservation efforts for this threatened endemic Hawaiian insect
group, and contribute to the development of artificial visual sensory systems.