* 0958831
* Sensors for Characterization of Phytoplankton Size and Taxonomic Composition Using Spectral Fluorescence Signatures and Imaging Multivariate Optical Computing
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Michael Myrick, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2014
* USD 1,089,543.00

The PI's request funding take what they learned in the NSF funded demonstration
project and develop a new field instrument for in situ measurement of
phytoplankton abundance, size and taxonomic composition. The proposed instrument
will be compact, inexpensive and will require low power. It will be suitable for
broad deployment on fixed platforms or on mobile observing vehicles such as
gliders or tethered or autonomous underwater vehicles. The technological basis,
"imaging multivariate optical computing (IMOC)", uses multivariate
discrimination of unique components of a cell's fluorescence excitation spectra
to create interference filters (Multivariate Optical Elements, or "MOEs") that
code for different phytoplankton species. Target phytoplankton cells are excited
with a light source filtered through a rotating series of MOEs. The fluorescence
response produces a classifying bar code in the image. Information on
phytoplankton size is acquired by the instrument's use of imaging in a "streak
camera" mode. Together, these will provide sufficient morphological and spectral
analysis for classification and quantification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
next phase of the research they will: 1) field test of the shipboard instrument
using natural phytoplankton populations, 2) continue production of interference
filters for a wider range of phytoplankton taxa (for which we have already
identified discriminant functions), and 3) acquire fluorescence excitation
spectra that capture a wider range of variability in ambient light,
macronutrient, and micronutrient environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Risk: an
instrument that is successful in the simple lab environment may not be capable
of discriminating amongst phytoplankton taxa in the more complex natural
environment, or operations may be too difficult to allow
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reward: If successful, this instrument
would revolutionize our ability to study the base of the ocean food web, with
affordable sensors available for all ocean moorings, gliders and AUVs. Such in-
situ observations would be transformative for ecosystem studies in coastal and
open ocean settings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument has potential applications in both
biological and chemical oceanography. Outside the societal benefits, the broader
educational impacts of this work include the training of two undergraduate
students, three graduate students, one postdoctoral fellow, and community
outreach lectures. The undergraduates will be chosen on a competitive basis as
part of the University of South Carolina Marine Science Program's Summer
Undergraduate Research Assistant Program. Students will have a major role in the
project work-load and would be provided with cross-discipline training
opportunities.