* 0958198
* 7th International Conference on Urban Earthquake Engineering and the 5th International Conference on Earthquake Engineering; held in Tokyo, Japan, March 3-5, 2010.
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Amr Elnashai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2011
* USD 33,759.00

This project will support the travel of 11 US scientists and engineers to
participate in the joint conference combining the well established conferences
-- 7th Conference on Urban Earthquake Engineering and the 5th International
Conference on Earthquake Engineering (5th ICEE) Conference -- in Earthquake
Engineering to be held in Tokyo, Japan on March 3-5, 2010. The combined
conference is organized on the four major themes: (1) vulnerability of mega-
cities to seismic hazards, (2) multi-hazard mitigation solutions, (3) adoption
of new sensors, actuation and control technologies within future mitigation
strategies, and (4) education initiatives aimed toward cultivating
interdisciplinary and cross-cultural earthquake engineering curricula. This is a
major forum that provides excellent opportunity for the exchange of scientific
information and ideas in area of earthquake hazard mitigation. The project will
provide the US researchers an opportunity to present technical papers for
dissemination of their research results, to interact with international
researchers who are working in the area of earthquake engineering and to explore
the opportunities for future collaborations. The participants will be selected
to represent a broad spectrum of researchers including the underrepresented
groups.