* 0958132
* Student Travel for PerMIS 2009
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Holly Yanco, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 16,609.00

This is funding to support the participation of approximately 15 students, both
undergraduate and graduate, in the 2009 Performance Metrics for Intelligent
Systems (PerMIS) Workshop, which will be held in Gaithersburg, Maryland, on
September 21-23, 2009. The PerMIS workshop brings together researchers from
colleges, universities, research laboratories, and government laboratories to
discuss how to design and evaluate intelligent systems. This workshop is the
only one of its kind dedicated to defining measures and methodologies of
evaluating performance of intelligent systems. Started in 2000, the PerMIS
series focuses on applications of performance measures to practical problems in
commercial, industrial, homeland security, and military applications. It has
proved to be an excellent forum for discussions and partnerships, dissemination
of ideas, and future collaborations between researchers, graduate students, and
practitioners from industry, academia, and government agencies. As its main
theme, this year's workshop seeks to address the question: Does performance
measurement accelerate the pace of advancement for intelligent systems? In
addition to the benefits students derive from attending a workshop where they
can learn about current research, present their own work, and get feedback from
professionals in their field, PerMIS organizers will provide structured
opportunities for mentoring and networking. Students will meet at the start of
the workshop to be introduced to one another and some of the workshop
organizers. They will also have a luncheon with select senior researchers, to
encourage interaction. And they will be given guidance about how to listen to
research presentations and think critically about them. The organizers will take
proactive steps to encourage diversity in the applicant pool by announcing the
availability of funding to mailing lists for women in computer science, the
Tapia Workshop mailing list, and through NSF's Broadening Participation in
Computing Alliances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Participation in
workshops and conferences during one's student years can contribute to a
successful research career. Student funding for travel to the PerMIS workshop
will serve to introduce students to other researchers in the field, increase
their knowledge of the research done in the field, and encourage them to
continue their pursuit of research. Each student will be asked to write a report
on his or her experiences at PerMIS 2009, which will be due with the travel
reimbursement paperwork. In their reports, the students will be asked to write
brief summaries of the plenary talks and their reactions to them. They will also
be asked to discuss how each of the plenary talks relates to at least two other
talks at the workshop. These reports will be used to evaluate the success of the
funded student participation in the event, and will be submitted to NSF with the
final project report.