* 0958482
* II-EN: A compute cluster and software tools for Monte-Carlo methods in artificial intelligence
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Thomas Dietterich, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 600,000.00

The project supports acquisition of a hardware cluster and development of
software frameworks to support Monte Carlo methods in articial intelligence, for
tasks such as model compilation through machine learning over the results of
Monte Carlo simulation, application of Monte Carlo methods to solve single-agent
and multi-agent sequential decision making problems, and integration of machine
learning methods into Monte Carlo search to improve real-time decision making.
These software frameworks will include implementations of baseline and state-of-
the-art algorithms for each task, with a goal of release with generic APIs and
open-source availability to make it easy for other researchers to add new
methods and to connect external simulators to the frameworks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms and tools have many important applications,
including (a) optimization of forest management to jointly minimize the risk of
catastrophic fires and maximize biological and economic benefits, (b)design and
validation of multiagent control methods for reducing congestion in air traffic
control, (c) design and validation of multiagent control methods for micro air
vehicles, and (d)modeling spatio-temporal distribution of species to support
management of endangered and threatened species. The hardware cluster and
software frameworks will be integrated into the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum at Oregon State University, as well as various outreach beyond Oregon
State.