* 0958168
* The Role of Centers for Teaching and Learning in Improvement of Undergraduate Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Pratibha Varma-Nelson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 06/30/2011
* USD 97,989.00

The project is supporting a workshop to discuss the role of centers for teaching
and learning (CTLs) in enhancing undergraduate engineering education. The two-
day workshop will bring together the directors of CTLs, engineering faculty, and
administrators of schools of engineering. The organizers are planning to (1)
outline strategies for leveraging resources and expertise at existing CTLs to
enhance undergraduate engineering education by identifying goals, expected
outcomes, strategies, and activities for the CTL and school of engineering
partnerships; (2) identify programs, support and resources from CTLs appropriate
for engineering faculty to enhance lifelong development as educators; (3)
identify ways of utilizing faculty insight into student learning issues and
difficulties with content to inform the planning of professional development
programs; and (4) prepare recommendations for how engineering administrators
could support and recognize educational innovation and professional development
through a partnership with CTLs. The pre-workshop activities will include
preparing a white paper on the state of the field that discusses current
professional development practices for schools of engineering as conducted
either by CTLs or centers for engineering education. The organizers are planning
a website to host the workshop materials and results and a session at the ASEE
Annual Conference and at the AERA Professional and Organizational Development
Network Conference.