* 0958464
* II-NEW: A Heterogeneous Testbed for Exploring Emerging HPC Tools, Programming Languages, and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Jaspal Subhlok, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2015
* USD 447,999.00

Parallel computing is in the midst of exciting changes. Virtually all new
processors have multiple cores exposing all applications to parallelism. GPUs
are processors of choice for many compute intensive applications, making
heterogeneity another reality of the HPC landscape. These characteristics pose
tough challenges to application developers as well as system level software
architects. This project plans to develop the infrastructure to support research
into programming models, tools and runtime systems for emerging HPC
systems.&lt;br/&gt;The project creates a heterogeneous compute cluster with core
aspects of emerging high-end systems. The system will have a high degree of
parallelism distributed on a modest number of nodes by maximizing the cores per
node up to 32. It utilizes multiple heterogeneous CPU architectures and deploy
compute accelerators. The storage system is based on solid-state disks (SSDs),
an emerging technology that allows two orders of magnitude lower latencies than
magnetic hard drives. &lt;br/&gt;The research conducted on this system focuses
on various aspects of the execution tool chain. Specific research projects
supported include: OpenMP compiler and run-time system for multi-core
architectures and accelerators; automatic optimization of compute and
communication operations in heterogeneous environments; highly fault-tolerant
execution in heterogeneous and volunteer environments; and optimization of
parallel I/O operations for low latency storage devices. Furthermore,
collaborative work with applications scientists is expected to lead to the
development of advanced parallelization strategies for various application
domains.