* 0958202
* Symposium on Engineering Biomaterials for Regenerative Medicine
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jason Burdick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 08/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBET - 0958202 Symposium on Engineering
Biomaterials for Regenerative Medicine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Burdick, Jason A.
University of Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program
Director: Semahat S. Demir, Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support
travel of graduate students, post-docs, and young faculty to attend the
symposium on Engineering Biomaterials for Regenerative Medicine at the Fall
Materials Research Society national meeting in Boston, MA, November 30-December
4, 2009. The intellectual merit is based on the critical importance of
understanding the design of materials for inclusion into tissue engineering
approaches. This symposium will cover recent advances in the development of
materials for use as engineered biomaterials in regenerative medicine. The
symposium can be divided into five specific focus areas: (1) bio-inspired
scaffold design; (2) stem cell/material interactions; (3) advanced scaffold
design; (4) nanotechnology (including particles and fibers), and (5) new
technology. Although there have been a few very successful symposia held at MRS
meetings and Gordon Research Conferences in this area, it is important to
routinely update the field on progress to help motivate sophisticated material
&lt;br/&gt;development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed
support lies in recruiting a larger number of graduate students, postdoc
researchers and young faculty to attend the conference. The primary goal of the
symposium is to bring the most recent development in the field of materials for
regenerative medicine to the broader audience. A total of 11 internationally
renowned speakers have been invited and confirmed to present their latest
research findings at the MRS meeting. The funding support from NSF Biomedical
Engineering (BME) Program will be used to provide travel awards to support
graduate students, post-doc researchers and young faculty to attend the proposed
symposium. Priority will be given to graduate students who will attend their
first national meeting, young faculty who will give oral presentations, and
those who belong to the underrepresented groups. Three co-organizers of this
symposium are female and are strongly committed to recruit and promote women and
minority students to attend the meeting.