* 0958515
* Functional Group Interactions in DNA - Protein Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2016
* Larry McLaughlin, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 03/31/2016
* USD 960,000.00

This project applies the tools of organic chemistry to prepare specifically
altered DNA sequences, either by total chemical synthesis, or by synthesis of
modified DNA subunits (nucleotides) that can then be linked together by enzymes
called "DNA polymerases" to obtain DNA molecules modified at desired locations.
A variety of biophysical tools will be applied to study the effects of these
modifications on DNA structure and thermodynamic stability, and the abilities of
proteins (TBP, trp repressor) and minor groove binding ligands (DAPI, Hoechst
33258) to bind these modified DNA duplexes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This project will focus on two areas of modification: (i) First, minor
groove functional groups in A-T rich regions will be probed by synthesizing
analogues such as 3-deazaadenine or 3-deaza-3- methyladenine that are expected
be disrupt binding of water molecules in the minor groove. These derivatives
will be studied to assess the contribution of such water interactions to DNA
structure and stability. A 3-deaza-3-hydroxymethyladenine derivative will
synthesized as a modified adenosine residue with a built-in structural water
analogue (hydroxymethyl group). By mimicking the water structure, studies
employing this analogue are expected to provide insight into DNA helix
stabilization by water groove binding. Related analogues will also provide new
types of labeling sites to introduce reporter groups to the minor groove. (ii)
Second, a series of pre-organized analogues will be synthesized in which the
nucleobase and carbohydrate moieties are fused into a single rigid structure
that maintains the conformation adopted upon duplex formation. These
modifications are expected to reduce DNA single-strand flexibility, thus pre-
organizing it to promote helix formation and increase helix stability.
Determination of the thermodynamic parameters for duplex formation will quantify
the differences between native and analogue sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
process of designing, synthesizing, and testing new analogues to effect specific
changes in DNA structure and properties will deepen our understanding of the
behavior of this all important biopolymer. The students working on the project
will be exposed to all aspects of the process. They will take part in the design
and preparation of the requisite modified nucleoside monomers, perform the DNA
synthesis and purification, and then study the properties of the analogue DNA
sequence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: (1) The modified nucleotides
and DNA analogues prepared during the course of the proposed work will be made
available to researchers in related fields to study the effects of these
modifications on various biological processes involving DNA. (2) The PI will
recruit undergraduates, especially women and members of underrepresented groups
to participate in research on this project. The university is making available
two to three "Lin Fellowships" (named after a former chairman, Jeong-Long Lin)
for summer-support students from underrepresented groups to work in the PI's
laboratory. (3) Other outreach activities planned by PI involve relatively young
children who have little to no exposure to chemistry. An outreach program to 5th
grade students in Needham, MA is planned to bring the excitement of chemistry to
those just beginning to think about science.