* 0958596
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Beowulf Cluster for Computational Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Nicholas Kioussis, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 02/29/2012
* USD 216,000.00

0958596 Lu The University Corporation, Northridge

Technical Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

This proposal requests support for expanding and strengthening the computational
facilities of the W.M. Keck Computational Materials Theory Center (CMTC) at
California State University Northridge, a minority-serving institution. The
proposed research programs include: (1) Multiscale modeling of the interplay of
magnetism and mechanical strength of NiAl alloys; (2) Novel transport,
fractionalization and topological order in electronic materials with unusual
symmetries, and (3) Spin transport in complex magnetic/ferroelectric interfaces
and graphene nanogaps. We will develop state-of-the-art multiscale methodologies
that couple quantum mechanics, statistical mechanics and continuum mechanics to
bear on important materials problems. The project will shed light on the
interplay between quantum magnetism and mechanical response of materials, which
has been traditionally overlooked. The project will also advance the
understanding of physical phenomena underlying the novel 2D electron systems. A
broad range of transport problems, such as charge and spin transport in novel
nanoscale magnetic, magnetoelectric, ferroelectric, and piezoelectric
heterostructures and DNA molecules.

Layman Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The project will impact on the design of advanced high-temperature alloys used
for example in aircraft engines, future development of new magneto-electronic
devices, topological quantum computing and new kinds of resistive switches and
ferroelectric memories used for future generation of computers. The novel
graphene nanopore approach for electron and spin transport in single-stranded
DNA has significant and unique potential for contributing to emerging
technologies for rapid DNA sequencing. The proposed computational techniques
will be applied to address a broad array of problems in physics, materials
science, and mechanical engineering, etc. The computational codes will be made
freely available to the research community. The research results will be
integrated into both an undergraduate course in Computational Materials Science
and a graduate course in Solid State Physics. As an integral part of the Center,
the CMTC will continue providing interdisciplinary training for the next
generation of materials scientists, including students from underrepresented
groups, and offering opportunities for high-school teachers and their students,
via the annual NSF funded Teacher's Camp, to learn about materials science.