* 0958111
* Amphiphilic Proteins & Peptides
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2015
* David Eisenberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,050,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Structural and computational methods will be applied to
understand why some proteins undergo transitions from their soluble, globular
structures to form insoluble, elongated fibrils. In previous work, we have shown
that an essential feature of fibril structure is that the protein contains a
short self-complementary sequence of amino acids. We developed a computer
algorithm that accurately identifies such segments, and we have validated the
algorithm by experiments, which show that the identified segments do in fact
form fibrils. Our goal now is to determine the universe of fibril-forming
proteins, which we term the amylome.

Broader Impacts: The wider implications of the work include the following: (1)
Protein fibrils can form the basis of new materials. (2) A UCLA course in
Structural Molecular Biology is linked to this research. In the laboratory
section, students learn hands-on protein structure determination. Graduates of
this course now teach and carry out research at some 30 universities, colleges,
and research institutes. UCLA has perhaps the most diverse student body of any
university, and our course reflects the demography of the campus. We plan to
recruit students to this course, and through it, to the field of structural
molecular biology, from a wide range of backgrounds, particularly those from
underrepresented minority groups.