* 0958658
* MRI-R2: Development of an Ice Imaging System for Monitoring Changing Ice Sheets Mounted on the NYANG LC-130
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Nicholas Frearson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 04/30/2015
* USD 4,140,323.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The icePod system will consist of a suite of imaging sensors
mounted in an external pod installed and operated on New York Air National Guard
LC-130 aircraft during routine and targeted missions across Antarctica and
Greenland. This system will be operated as a shared community research facility
providing data to scientists and educators. Instrumentation will include a
scanning laser for precise measurements of the ice surface, visible and infrared
imaging cameras to document the ice surface structure and temperature, and ice-
penetrating radar to recover ice thickness and constrain the distribution of
water at the ice sheet bed. Geo-referencing of the measurements will be provided
by precision GPS satellite data integrated with inertial technology. Using the
icePod system, a majority of the remaining unexplored regions of East Antarctica
will become open for study including several key regions in Antarctica. Data
from the integrated icePod sensor system will enable novel studies of the
dynamics of outlet glaciers, the stability of the West Antarctic ice sheet
grounding lines, the nature of the water movement between subglacial lakes and
on the role surface melt water plays in the seasonal acceleration of the
Greenland ice sheet. This project could provide the integrated ice imaging
system capable of measuring in detail both the ice surface and the ice bed. The
icePod imaging system will leverage a newly available instrumented door plug
developed for Department of Defense Special Forces applications that can be
installed in any LC-130 rear troop door. This proposal will design, build,
calibrate, test and commission the instrument over a five-year period. A
scientific advisory committee will provide input to the icePod team to ensure
the system meets the science community?s needs and an operations advisory group
will provide input on aircraft operations, logistics, testing and certification.
The goal of the icePod project is that the sensor system will become a facility
operated for the science community and the data will be served to the science
community through a NSF- supported polar data center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be engaged in the development of icePod
through design, construction and demonstration of sample measurement systems.
The investigators will also build a network of educators who can access,
understand and employ the data collected from the icePod, thereby engaging
students with the science of environmental change and instrumentation
development.