* 0958477
* II-New: A Network Forensics Lab for Integrated Research and Education at University of Massachusetts Lowell
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Jie Wang, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 02/28/2014
* USD 500,278.00

This proposal aims to establish a network forensics lab at University of
Massachusetts Lowell. This proposed research and education infrastructure
consists of network devices, such as network analyzers, Cisco routers, spectrum
analyzer, and software for collecting and analyzing wired and wireless data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested infrastructure will support three projects
focusing on network forensics: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Tracing Anonymous Criminals on the
Internet &lt;br/&gt;(2) Localizing and Locking Anonymous Malicious Wireless
Mobiles &lt;br/&gt;(3) Fingerprinting Wireless Mobiles for Forensics Purpose
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These projects will address issues that are critical to
the nation?s security and will train students who will be sought out by
industrial companies and research laboratories. The proposed research will also
position UMass Lowell among the leaders in network forensics research and
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three projects in this proposal have the
following broader impact: &lt;br/&gt;(i) The proposed infrastructure will
enhance the research and education of network forensics, and will create an
opportunity for developing new courses on network forensics and data recovery
and analysis in UMass Lowell. &lt;br/&gt;(ii) The proposed infrastructure will
also enhance the collaborations that already exist between UMass Lowell,
regional security industry, and the other UMass campuses.