* 0958547
* CI-ADDO-EN:  ILENS:  Internet Laboratory for Empirical Network Science
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 02/28/2014
* USD 1,516,000.00

Understanding the structure and dynamics of Internet topology, routing,
workload, performance, and vulnerabilities remains disturbingly elusive, in part
for lack of large-scale distributed network measurement infrastructure available
to scientific researchers. This project upgrades and extends -- in geographic
scope as well as function -- an active measurement instrumentation (Ark),
creating an unprecedented laboratory in which to easily design, implement, and
coordinate execution of Internet measurement experiments across a widely
distributed set of dedicated monitors. In 2007 Ark launched a new global
Internet topology measurement and mapping expedition, and now gathers the
largest set of IP topology data available to academic researchers. We use the
best available techniques for IP topology mapping, share raw and processed data
sets, and support software for analysis, annotation, topology generation, and
interactive visualization of resulting graphs. The effort has three tasks: (1)
adding new monitors in geographic and topological areas lacking coverage; (2)
improving tools for processing topology data; (3) enhancing and developing
software modules to support new experiments and validation. Workshops will also
be conducted to collect, synthesize, and integrate feedback on Ark operations.
It is expected that a broad set of research communities will continue make use
of this measurement infrastructure. By lowering the cost to implement scientific
Internet measurement experiments, Ark will allow researchers to test and
evaluate more ambitious, sophisticated and risky ideas. The resulting data will
enable a wide range of network modeling, simulation, analysis, and theoretical
research activities, including historical Internet studies and evaluation of
proposed future Internet architectures.