* 0958241
* "Deprivation" and "Enrichment" in Infant Spatial Cognitive Development
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Joseph Campos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 04/30/2013
* USD 321,086.00

The typical infant undergoes a psychological revolution between 7 and 9 months
of age. There are so many changes involving numerous psychological functions,
affecting domains so different from one another, and taking place within such a
narrow time span that maturation has been postulated to account for the
revolution. However, recent studies in the researcher's laboratory suggest a
different interpretation. The onset of locomotor experience (such as crawling)
is a potential determinant of many, if not most, of these changes. The proposed
research will confirm or disconfirm the role of locomotor experience on a set of
these changes. The proposed work has three goals. The first goal is to conduct a
true experiment to examine the influence of locomotion. This study will randomly
assign prelocomotor infants to conditions in which (a) such babies can control a
powered-mobility device (PMD) to provide active locomotor experience, (b) babies
receive passive locomotor experience in the PMD (no active control but otherwise
have the same experience as those in the first group), and (c) a control group
in which there is no locomotor experience, but rather fine motor training. The
second goal is to test whether delays in locomotor experience linked to motor
handicaps (in this case, infants with spina bifida) go along with delays in
psychological development for the period of the delay in self-produced
locomotion, followed by a spurt in functioning upon the delayed acquisition of
locomotion. The third goal is to determine whether early crawlers, late
crawlers, and normative-age crawlers differ or are the same in showing the
psychological revolution mentioned before. Outcome assessments include tests for
self-development (visual proprioception), memory for locations, joint visual
attention, and concept formation.

This research draws its significance from theoretical and practical
implications. In behavioral science, the importance of self-movement as a cause
of psychological change dates back to the work of Berkeley in 1709 and has
continued in studies by other prominent researchers through the centuries.
Despite its lengthy historical tradition, the effect of motor activity on
psychological function has been controversial, being refuted, ignored, or given
second place to exposure to sensory stimulation. The proposed research should
provide findings crucial to clarifying the controversy over the relative
contributions of self-produced movement (versus sensory exposure). The project
also has clinical implications. First, it investigates a major understudied
developmental disability (spina bifida). In addition, the project can confirm
whether motoric delays negatively impact spatial cognitive skills in infants and
children with motor impairments. An especially important long-term implication
of the proposed work will depend on the outcome of the studies using the
powered-mobility device. If the device proves successful in bringing about
psychological changes in otherwise prelocomotor infants, it can be used to
intervene and to provide "artificial" locomotor experience with positive
psychological outcomes for infants with locomotor handicaps.