* 0958901
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of an Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry System for Interdisciplinary Research and Training at the University of Houston-Clear Lake
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Lory Santiago-Vazquez, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 245,527.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research and Instrumentation (MRI) program,
Professors Zerong D. Wang, Lory Z. Santiago-Vazquez and Chunlong Zhang from the
University of Houston at Clear Lake will acquire a liquid chromatography time-
of-flight mass spectrometer (LC-TOF-MS) equipped with an electrospray ionization
source (ESI). The instrumentation will support their research in the development
of nucleoside analogs that may lead to potential anticancer and anti-HIV drugs,
the design of remediation systems to support a green and sustainable
environment, and the production of marine natural products with biological
activity. Seven other faculty members at the University of Houston-Clear Lake
will benefit in their studies of proteins and nucleic acids as well as organic
and organometallic compounds.

Mass spectrometry (MS) is used to identify the chemical composition of a sample
by measuring the mass of the molecular constituents in the sample after they are
ionized and detected by the mass spectrometer. The chromatography inlet will
provide separation of complex mixtures before each component is analyzed. The
time of flight mass analyzer has high sensitivity and mass accuracy to assist
the analyses and interpretation of the resultant data. By using the LC/MS in
research and laboratory courses, students will gain valuable experience with
this modern instrument in a variety of applications across the disciplines of
biology, chemistry, and environmental sciences.