* 0958854
* MRI-R2: Acquisition: A Hybrid High-Performance GPU/CPU System
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Yuan Shi, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2013
* USD 839,221.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-58854&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Wu, Jie,
Biswas, Saroj K., Klein, Michael L., Rivin, Igor, Shi,
Yuan&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Temple University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI-R2:
Acquisition: A Hybrid High-Performance GPU/CPU System&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a hybrid high-performance GPU
(graphics processing unit)/CPU system, enables broader heterogeneous computing
by deploying multiple types of computing nodes and allowing each to perform the
tasks to which it is best suited in traditional CPU-based, GPU based, and hybrid
GPU/CPU applications. Satisfying two major research environments in computer and
information sciences and scientific computing, the instrument &lt;br/&gt;-
Serves faculty and students conducting research using existing parallel
application software and developing tools for parallel programming and parallel
applications of the system, &lt;br/&gt;- Serves the center for High Performance
Computing and Networking at the institution and the greater Philadelphia region
offering services not only to other departments on campus, but also to other
institutions in the local community, such as area high schools and local
colleges/universities , &lt;br/&gt;- Educates and trains providing a computing
environment to various science courses for students to gain hands-on experience
and offers research training sessions to the local research community;
and&lt;br/&gt;- Fosters collaboration by supporting joint research with local
colleges/universities, in collaboration with other schools in the state, to
develop, test, and apply advanced tools for designing and executing parallel
programs.&lt;br/&gt;Among others, the Center services Chemistry, Computer and
Information Sciences, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mathematics, Physics,
and Pulmonary, Critical Care Medicine and Physical Therapy. The instrument
specifically supports research projects with broad impact in molecular self
assembly, microvessel networks, spatio-temporal data analysis, large-scale
system simulation, effective uniformization, fault tolerant computing, etc. and
augments existing applications using the GPU as an accelerator enabling some
problems to run entirely on the GPU.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
instrument greatly enhances the current computing facilities at the institution.
With its GPU/CPU component, this instrument is the first of its kind of high-
performance computing facility in the greater Philadelphia region, an area with
a high degree of diversity. This university draws a substantial portion of its
students from one of the largest African American populations in the country.
Enabling education, training, and collaboration, the instrument contributes to
foster economic growth in an area with a high concentration of high-tech and IT-
related industries that currently has no high-performance computing and
networking center of this magnitude. The region is now able to go beyond minimal
services and promote and support collaboration and cooperation across sectors
(e.g., higher education and local industry).