* 0958998
* MRI-R2 Consortium: Development of Dynamic Network System (DYNES)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Harvey Newman, INTERNET2
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,744,464.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and deploy
the Dynamic Network System (DYNES), a nationwide cyber-instrument spanning 39 US
universities and 16 regional networks. DYNES will support large, long-distance
scientific data flows in the LHC, other leading programs in data intensive
science (such as LIGO, Virtual Observatory, and other large scale sky surveys),
and the broader scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating
existing and emerging protocols and software for dynamic circuit provisioning
and scheduling, in-depth end-to-end network path and end-system monitoring, and
higher level services for management on a national scale, DYNES will allocate
and schedule channels with bandwidth guarantees to several classes of
prioritized data flows with known bandwidth requirements, and to the largest
high priority data flows, enabling scientists to utilize and share network
resources effectively. DYNES is dimensioned to support many data transfers which
require aggregate network throughputs between sites of 1-20 Gbps, rising to the
40-100 Gbps range. This capacity will enhance researchers? ability to
distribute, process, access, and collaboratively analyze 1 to 100 TB datasets at
university-based Tier2 and Tier3 centers now, and PB-scale datasets once the LHC
begins operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DYNES is based on a ?hybrid? packet and
circuit architecture composed of Internet2's ION service and extensions over
regional and state networks to US campuses. It will connect with transoceanic
(IRNC, USLHCNet), European (GÉANT), Asian (SINET3) and Latin American (RNP and
ANSP) Research and Education networks. It will build on existing key open source
software components that have already been individually field-tested and
hardened: DCN Software Suite (OSCARS / DRAGON), perfSONAR, UltraLight Linux
kernel, FDT, FDT/dCache, FDT/Hadoop, and PLaNeTs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
DYNES team will partner with the LHC and astrophysics communities, OSG, and
Worldwide LHC Computing Grid (WLCG) to deliver these capabilities to the LHC
experiment as well as others such as LIGO, VO and eVLBI programs, broadening
existing Grid computing systems by promoting the network to a reliable, high
performance, actively managed component. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future science
programs in HEP, astrophysics and gravity wave physics, and other data intensive
disciplines, will be facilitated by DYNES? technologies and worldwide network
partnerships. Working with CHEPREO and similar education and outreach efforts
targeting under-served communities both in the US and overseas, DYNES will reach
a wide variety of students at collaborating institutes including
underrepresented groups and minorities. This will lower the barriers, and enable
individual graduate students, undergrads, postdocs and faculty to use DYNES to
achieve high throughput in support of their research in many data intensive
fields.