* 0958785
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Conformal-Oxide Processing Module for Microfabrication Central User Facility
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Arto Nurmikko, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 02/29/2012
* USD 450,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective: The objective of this
research is to enable development of nanopatterned conformal oxides for device
applications. The approach is to acquire a processing module comprised of
complementary inductively-coupled plasma (ICP) etch and atomic-layer deposition
(ALD) tools for the Brown Microelectronics Central User Facility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This equipment cluster will enable the
fabrication of nanopatterned conformal oxides for cutting-edge applications in
electronic, fluidic, photonic, and implantable devices. Specifically, the
proposed equipment will help researchers: (1) deposit high-?Û dielectrics for
nanoelectronic devices; (2) control the dimensions and surface chemistry of
nanofluidic channels; (3) pattern and protect optically active materials,
including luminescent rare-earth oxides, for light emitters and detectors; and
(4) encapsulate implants with bio-compatible coatings that prevent infection and
promote tissue
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
Located in a central user facility with ongoing technical and administrative
support, this equipment will constitute a linchpin of the Brown University
infrastructure for research training in nanoscale science and engineering for
years to come. Housed in a publicly accessible cleanroom, this equipment will be
made available to researchers from many university departments, including
Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, Biology and Medicine, as well as outside users
from local industry and academic institutions via the Materials Research
Facilities Network. Furthermore, this program will be enriched by established
connections with outreach through the NSF sponsored GK-12 ¡§Physical Processes
in the Environment¡¨ program in the Providence Public School system and the
collaborative REU program offered by the Brown Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC) and the Leadership Alliance.