* 0958066
* Plant Innate Immunity against Necrotrophic Pathogens
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Zhixiang Chen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2014
* USD 462,253.00

Necrotrophic pathogens cause diseases by killing plant cells during early stages
of infection to extract nutrients from dead plant cells for pathogen growth and
proliferation. To induce plant cell death, necrotrophic pathogens release
toxins, reactive oxygen species and hydrolytic enzymes into plant tissues. Plant
immune responses against necrotrophic pathogens involve defense mechanisms such
as production of antimicrobial compounds and suppression of pathogen-induced
cell death. How distinct defense responses are coordinately regulated in plant
cells is poorly understood. Arabidopsis WRKY33 transcription factor is important
for plant resistance to necrotrophic pathogens. Plants lacking a functional
WRKY33 gene display greatly increased susceptibility to necrotrophic fungal
pathogens Botrytis cinerea and Alternaria brassicicola. As a transcription
factor, WRKY33 regulates plant nuclear genes involved in defense responses. In
addition, WRKY33 physically interacts with proteins involved in chloroplast
transcription and autophagy, a protein degradation pathway critical for nutrient
recycling and cell survival. This research will analyze the regulation,
functions and coordination of the WRKY33, chloroplast transcription and
autophagy pathways in plant defense against necrotrophic pathogens. The
investigators will continue functional analysis of WRKY33-interacting
chloroplast transcription factors in plant resistance to necrotrophic pathogens.
The investigators will examine activation, roles and action mechanisms of
autophagy in promoting plant cell survival during responses to necrotrophic
pathogens. In addition, the investigators will analyze functional interactions
of the three pathways required for an integrated immune response to necrotrophic
pathogens. Progress in these studies will help establish a comprehensive plant
immune system against necrotrophic pathogens. This knowledge is necessary for
development of new and novel strategies for controlling necrotrophic pathogens,
which cause many devastating diseases in crop and forest plants. The project
will provide training for both graduate and undergraduate students, including
students underrepresented in sciences.