* 0958426
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Atomic Absorption Instrumentation for Multi-Disciplinary Undergraduate Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Peter Siver, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2013
* USD 54,070.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
and Instrumentation (MRI) program, supported by the Chemistry Division and the
Office of Polar Programs, Professor Stanton S.H.Y. Ching, Stephen H. Loomis, T.
Page Owen, Jr., Joseph Schroeder and Peter A. Siver will acquire a flame atomic
absorption (AA) spectrometer to advance research and research training
activities in chemistry and the life sciences at Connecticut College. The
following research will be carried out: (1) determining elemental compositions
of microporous and nanostructured manganese oxides to correlate the influence on
particle growth, catalytic activity, and electrochemical performance; (2)
establishing relationships between concentrations of base cations (Na+, K+,
Mg2+, and Ca2+) and the presence of specific species of chrysophyte and diatom
algae in freshwater lakes along the North American east coast; (3) determining
intracellular volumes in freshwater sponge gemmules by Li+ analysis; (4)
analyzing Pb levels in blood and brain tissue of rats to study neuroprotective
effects of chemical treatments for Pb poisoning; and (5) measuring soluble metal
concentrations in digestive fluids and epidermal peels of carnivorous pitcher
plants to study ion transport and salt tolerance in
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flame Atomic Absorption spectroscopy enables
researchers to perform elemental analysis of a sample particularly its metal
content. A flame atomizes the sample that is probed by a light source. Since
atoms and ions absorb light at characteristic wavelengths, identification and
quantification of them from their spectral characteristics are realized. The
instrument will be used in research and undergraduate laboratory classes by
students at Connecticut College and the nearby U.S. Coast Guard Academy.