* 0958088
* Collaborative Research:CI-P: Creation of an annotated repository of multilingual and multigenre code switched data for several language pairs
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Thamar Solorio, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/29/2012
* USD 21,992.00

Code switching (CS) is the term used to describe a common practice among
bilingual speakers of a given language pair in which the speakers switch back
and forth between their common languages. CS occurs in all genres of
communication, and at different levels of linguistic representation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational algorithms trained for a single language
fail when the input has other languages in the signal i.e. data with CS
phenomena. One major barrier to research on processing CS is the lack of large,
accurately annotated corpora of CS data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning
proposal aims at creating the framework for a large consistently annotated data
repository that will target 7 different languages annotated with features at
different levels of granularity. In the course of the planning grant, we plan to
hold a community workshop to ensure that we are addressing their needs in the
repository. We will work with the community in order to prepare the full CRI
proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This data will be transformative for
computational linguistics research as it will provide a testbed for adaptive
learning algorithms, lead to significant robustness in handling very diverse
data sources, and create a framework for genuine multilingual processing.
Moreover, it will have a direct impact on the way sociolinguists account for CS
leading to more robust and replicable generalizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on CS will help acknowledge the creativity of
bilinguals in exploiting their verbal repertoire. The CS repository will enable
new research in many interconnected fields. This research will contribute to
raising general awareness of bi/multilingualism.