* 0959921
* Race, Poverty, and Science in Mexico and the United States, 1930-1970
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Karin Rosemblatt, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/2013
* USD 182,023.00

This research analyzes a set of interconnected social science projects that
examined the nature of racial difference, its salience, and its relation to
poverty in Mexico and the United States, 1930-1970. The research tracks the
scientists, mainly anthropologists, who carried out the research projects and
explores the methods they used to categorize individuals and groups. It also ask
how research agendas were shaped by the government and private agencies that
funded the projects. My research sheds light on the internationalization of
science and on the differing ways scholars conceptualized the relation of race-
based policies to class.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project charts the relations
between scientists across national borders, their access to resources, and their
ability to shape research agendas. It shows that knowledge travelled from South
to North as well as from North to South, and reveals the unacknowledged
creativity with which Latin American intellectuals appropriated and adapted
ideas. Yet differences in power between North and South often led U.S. scholars
to view Latin American social science as derivative. The research contributes to
scholarship on race by examining whether scientists conceived of race as
biological or cultural; what they identified as its bodily and mental
manifestations; whether they saw racial differences as superficial or deeply
engrained in individual essences; and whether they saw it as shaped primarily by
socialization or economic structures. When was race was invoked by scholars? To
what ends were racial categorizations put? And how did definitions of race or
class change in distinct national contexts and over time? The research is
grounded in reading of key texts and in archival research to track the
institutional and personal networks of scholars. It will use secondary sources
to identify the social science literatures on which prominent authors drew.
Secondary works, published papers, and archival collections will help establish
previously unknown connections among scholars and the role of institutional
connections and funding on research.