* 0959373
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of SPM for Nanoscience in Undergraduate Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Michael Pettersen, Washington and Jefferson College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 02/29/2012
* USD 143,000.00

0959373&lt;br/&gt;Logan&lt;br/&gt;Washington &amp; Jefferson
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a multi-disciplinary proposal to purchase a
scanning probe microscopy system (SPM) capable of atomic force microscopy (AFM)
and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) for Washington &amp; Jefferson (W&amp;J)
College, a private four year undergraduate institution. SPM represents a family
of techniques that can image surfaces at the nanoscopic level and would play an
integral role in both our research and our curriculum. AFM would be used in
several research projects, including 1) the controlled patterning of block
copolymer nanostructures, 2) the development of synthetic cells consisting of an
inorganic core, lipid membranes, and biological proteins, and 3) the measurement
of nanoscale liquid droplet wetting on rough surfaces. Understanding and
controlling the patterning of nanostructures is crucial in the continued push
for smaller and smaller technologies while synthetic cells would combine
biological properties with the ease of handling stable inorganic molecules.
Wetting research uses the AFM in ways that are just beginning to be explored,
investigating the pinning of the contact line on nanoscale defects, an important
topic in all applications of spreading. The SPM will be housed in the new $32
million John A. Swanson Science Center, scheduled to open in 2010. Training on
the instrument will be significantly enhanced by a proposed SPM virtual
instrument. AFM and STM will also be integrated into the teaching of
introductory physics, upper level physics and chemistry classes, as well as
general education courses for non-science majors on nanotechnology. Local high
school students will be impacted through our science education outreach
programs. The SPM would thus introduce an entirely new direction in both the
research and teaching curriculum at W&amp;J by introducing concepts inherent to
surface science and materials research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
multi-disciplinary proposal to purchase a scanning probe microscopy system (SPM)
for Washington &amp; Jefferson (W&amp;J) College, a private four year
undergraduate institution. SPM allows us to image surfaces at the nanoscopic
level and would play an integral role in both our research and our curriculum.
The SPM would be used in several research projects. For example, polymer
nanostructures could be seen through SPM, allowing us to investigate different
ways of controlling the size, shape, and structure of these tiny domains. Being
able to pattern these nanostructures is crucial in the continued push for
smaller and smaller technologies. The SPM would also allow us to develop
synthetic cells; these would mimic real cell surfaces but be more robust and
easier to handle, providing a model for biochemical research. Another project
would use the SPM to image nano-sized liquid droplets wetting rough surfaces.
This research is important in better understanding how a liquid spreads on a
surface, with industrial applications ranging from semiconductor manufacture and
oil extraction to paper towels and dish soap. The SPM will be housed in the new
$32 million John A. Swanson Science Center, scheduled to open in 2010. To train
students, we intend to develop a simulated instrument, allowing them to practice
on a computer before touching the actual one. SPM will also be integrated into
the teaching of introductory physics, upper level physics and chemistry classes,
as well as general education courses for non-science majors on nanotechnology.
Local high school students will be impacted through our science education
outreach programs. The SPM would thus introduce an entirely new direction in
both the research and teaching curriculum at W&amp;J by introducing concepts
inherent to surface science and materials research.