* 0959617
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a 500 MHz Multinuclear NMR for Investigation of Metal-Containing Systems at Hunter College
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Matthew Devany, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 390,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor Lynn C. Francesconi and colleagues
Matthew Devany, Charles M. Drain and Nancy L. Greenbaum from the Department of
Chemistry at CUNY Hunter College will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. The
instrument will be used to support research activities such as: 1) speciation of
99Tc metal oxides and phosphates; 2) porphyrin-based materials; 3) RNA
structure-function; 4) polyoxometalates, nanoparticles, materials, sensors and
imaging agents; 5) experiments using 13C labeled RNA samples and 31P-99Tc
correlation; and 6) studies of speciation of 99Tc and lanthanide metal
oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is
one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-
art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier
research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research.&lt;br/&gt;