* 0959384
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a High Resolution CT-Scanner at the American Museum of  Natural History
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Neil Landman, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 888,860.00

Landman&lt;br/&gt;0959384&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI-R2 award will provide funding
for a high resolution CT scanner (HRCT) for the American Museum of Natural
History. The new acquisition will assist research for over 20 AMNH researchers
spanning a wide range of disciplines. The new facility will support educational
outreach in the greater NYC area as well supporting Columbia, Cornell and other
neighboring institutions. The extensive AMNH collection will be a major focus
for imaging. The scanner will be instrumental in determining organismal
systematics, morphology, and life histories. It will also be used for
terrestrial Earth and planetary system science. Out-sourcing CT analyses has
become burdensome to the institution and does not allow training the next
generation of CT analysts. The CT system will allow investigators to better
decipher organismal morphological characteristics giving the ability to
reconstruct lineages over geologic time. The system will allow non-invasive
imaging of the unique collection available at AMNH. The Divisions of
Paleontology, Invertebrate Zoology, Anthropology, Earth and Planetary Sciences
and the Natural Sciences Collections will all be supported by the new system.
The CT system will have tremendous educational and societal benefits. AMNH has
partnerships with adjacent undergraduate colleges (many of which serve
minorities and women), a viable REU program in biology and physical sciences,
and a relatively new PhD program. AMNH has over 4 million visitors annually
serving K-12 outreach. The research group actively publishes research results in
the peer-reviewed literature and provides web outreach. The system will be
housed in the AMNH Microscopy and Imaging Facility (MIF). The facility is
managed by a full-time employee and supervised by the co-I. A committee of six
curators chaired by the PI provides operational oversight and guidance. A
service contract is requested for the initial grant period - after which the
institution will continue the contract. Training will be provided to full-time
technicians who will, in turn, train users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***