* 0959550
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Synergistic Driving Simulator
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Brooke Hallowell, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 01/31/2011
* USD 170,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI-R2) award is to
acquire a driving simulator for collaborative research focusing on the
relationship between the automobile driver and the road environment. As field
data collection related to driver performance has become increasingly difficult
due to safety issues as, a driving simulator is an alternative research approach
which allows for experimental control and data collection efficiency. The driver
and road environment relationships that will be investigated include roadway
design, traffic operations, driver skill development, and driver distraction;
all of which incorporate driver safety. The driving simulator can rapidly
demonstrate road geometry or flow modifications, correlate cognitive skills with
driver performance particularly involving fatigue or distraction, identify
physical capabilities which limit or do not impact driver performance, and the
impact of driver training. Due to the crash risk associated with older,
adolescent and disabled (emotionally or physically) drivers, simulator research
studies allow for the expansion of research with these populations into a
critically important domain.

If successful, the driving simulator will be incorporated into courses to
enhance curricula, student research, and outreach activities to engage a broad
spectrum of individuals, professionals and researchers. The driving simulator
provides a tool to integrate traditional classroom topics into an interactive
learning experience. Outreach and public education activities previously
established at Ohio University will immediately be enhanced with the addition of
a driving simulator interactive module. Researchers and students will also
utilize the driving simulator to assist disabled individuals with sensory, such
as hearing or vision, physical and mobility limitations to improve their quality
of life. Research and educational efforts undertaken with the use of the driving
simulator will reduce traffic fatalities and crashes thereby reducing the
economic burden on society resulting from the loss of life.