* 0959209
* Acquisition of an Analytical Flow Cytometer for Natural Sciences and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Steven Runge, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 11/30/2012
* USD 82,452.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from the NSF MRI-R2 program
has allowed for the purchase of a Beckman Coulter Cell Lab QuantaSC in order to
establish an analytical flow cytometry facility at the University of Central
Arkansas (UCA). Five faculty members are conducting research in Biology and
Biochemistry that requires the use of a flow cytometer. Dr. Rowley investigates
lymphocyte signal transduction in response to mercury compounds. Drs. Bridges
and Kelley study novel lymphocyte ADAM-integrin protein:protein interactions.
Dr. Runge examines effects of hypoxia and/or acidity on induction of unfolded
protein responses and apoptosis. Dr. Swanson investigates effects of plant-
derived phenolic compounds on mammalian cell cycle control, as well as their
role as plant defense mechanisms. The new cytometer uses one low-powered 488 nm
laser coupled with a 100 watt mercury arc lamp providing additional excitation
at 366, 405, and 435 nm. These lines of excitation will allow for a wide-
spectrum of possible standard dyes and fluorescent proteins to be utilized,
including FITC, GFP, CFP, PE, and PC5. Included software utilizes an automatic
compensation matrix that will allow for better standardization of results and
ease of new user training. The flow cytometer will be incorporated into not only
the identified research programs, but also into a robust undergraduate/graduate
research program and into the laboratories of faculty members yet to be hired.
The flow cytometer will be used by other faculty members within the College of
Natural Sciences and Mathematics for both research and teaching due to its
versatility. It has capacity for cell cycle analysis, apoptosis analysis,
GFP/CFP detection, and Coulter particle/cell counting capability. Addition of
these functions to the repertoire of UCA's research and teaching equipment will
enhance the capabilities of a significant number of faculty members in terms of
research productivity, development of teaching laboratory exercises, and
ultimately the mentoring of research students in a highly applied field that
crosses several disciplines. As nearly 65% of UCA students are female, and 26.5%
of the student body represents underrepresented minority groups, this equipment
would provide access and training in highly technical skill sets to a desired
underrepresented science student population. The instrumentation would also
provide a closer alternative for other primarily undergraduate institutions in
the central Arkansas area to perform sample analysis. Results of the research
conducted with the cytometer will be disseminated through faculty and student
presentations at regional or national meetings, and through published peer-
reviewed articles.