* 0959984
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a liquid chromatograph-mass spectrometer for biogeochemistry and paleoclimate studies at the Large Lakes Observatory
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2012
* Elizabeth Minor, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2012
* USD 327,334.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The PI?s request funding to acquire an up-to-date liquid chromatograph ? mass
spectrometer (LC/MS). Specifically, we request a triple quadrupole LC/MS system
with electrospray ionization (ESI), atmospheric pressure chemical ionization
(APCI) sources, thus allowing characterization of a wide range of soluble
molecules, including extracted lipids that are not volatile enough to be GC-
amenable. The acquisition of this instrument will allow characterization of
molecules of widely varying structures, while keeping maintenance requirements
at a level supportable with our current infrastructure and technical support
staff. Ongoing and future projects include analysis of lipids for development
and application of paleoenvironmental proxies, studies of water column
particulate and dissolved organic matter, studies of intact polar lipids, and
further development of black carbon measurements.

Broader Impacts:

The acquisition of the LC/MS triple quad system will open up new avenues of
research into compounds that are not amenable for GC/MS analyses. The
significance of the research could be far-reaching with respect to environmental
concerns over black carbon. Teaching undergraduate and graduate research is a
real strength of both PI's. The PI's demonstrated priority emphasis on hands-on
experience, including research experiences for graduates and undergraduates in
three different courses. The attitude that instrumentation should not be used as
a 'black box' but rather as a hands-on learning opportunity pervades the text,
and this is an important plus for this proposal. This aspect meets one of the
principal NSF strategies for fostering the integration of research and
education.