* 0959381
* Denmark Strait Overflow Water: A New Paradigm for the Origin of the Deep Western Boundary Current
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2010,11/30/2016
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 11/30/2016
* USD 2,434,278.00

The North Atlantic Deep Western Boundary Current constitutes the lower limb of
the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (MOC), and, as such, is a
crucial component of the Earth's climate system. Dense water formed north of the
Greenland-Scotland Ridge returns southward by flowing through the gaps in the
ridge and descending the continental slope as overflow plumes. The largest of
these is the Denmark Strait Overflow Water (DSOW) plume which passes between
Greenland and Iceland and forms the densest component of the MOC. Presently, it
is believed that the primary source of the DSOW is the East Greenland Current, a
southward-flowing current along the continental slope of Greenland. Recently,
however, direct shipboard velocity measurements and detailed hydrographic
information in the vicinity of Denmark Strait suggest that a substantial
fraction of the overflow water originates from the Iceland side of the strait,
in addition to the Greenland side. In particular, a newly discovered narrow
current, called the Northwest Icelandic Jet, appears to transport overflow water
directly into Denmark Strait from the Iceland Sea. If this is the case, it means
that the ventilation process forming a large part of the Deep Western Boundary
Current is not what the oceanographic community presently envisions. In order to
understand how global warming and the consequent enhanced surface freshwater
fluxes will impact the MOC, it is imperative to have an accurate understanding
of where the DSOW emanates from and the processes that form
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use moored velocity and moored
hydrographic time series to determine and quantify the sources of the DSOW,
while simultaneously measuring the main northward pathway of heat and salt to
the southern Iceland Sea. This is made possible through collaborations with
scientists at the Marine Research Institute (MRI) in Reykjavik, Iceland, who
will contribute both moorings and ship time to the project. The principal
investigator will deploy an array of profiling moorings across the Northwest
Icelandic Jet to establish its existence, and quantify its structure, transport,
and dynamics. At the same time MRI will maintain moorings in the East Greenland
Current, the overflow plume at Denmark Strait, and in the Icelandic Irminger
Current. In concert with the observations a modeling study will be conducted to
understand the origin of the Northwest Icelandic Jet and the water mass
transformation and overturning that drives it. The expected outcome is that a
new paradigm will emerge regarding the origin of the Deep Western Boundary
Current, which will modify how the community views the links between climatic
forcing and the sources of the DSOW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The proposed project will enhance the current understanding of the water mass
transformation, currents, and pathways that lead to the formation of the North
Atlantic Deep Western Boundary Current. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
By clarifying the origin of the DSOW, the results of the project will shed light
on the links between the atmospheric forcing and the North Atlantic MOC, which
in turn impacts the global ocean circulation and Earth?s climate. This will
allow to better anticipate how the MOC will respond to global warming. The U.S.
fieldwork is closely coordinated with the activities of MRI as well as with the
European climate program THOR (Thermohaline Overturning Circulation at Risk).
MRI has committed significant resources to the project in the way of
instrumentation and ship time. The proposed outreach involves participation in
the project by school children from four different countries (including
Greenland), and a graduate student will be educated by the project.