* 0959695
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of High Performance Deep Reactive Ion Etching System for Multidisciplinary Engineering Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Nan Jokerst, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samir El-Ghazaly
* 02/28/2011
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI-R2: Acquisition of High
Performance Deep Reactive Ion Etching System for Multidisciplinary Engineering
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to acquire a
silicon deep reactive ion etching system to be installed and operated within the
Shared Materials Instrumentation Facility at Duke University. The proposed
system will be installed, operated and maintained with full-time engineering
staff support for user training, operation and equipment maintenance. This
arrangement ensures a sustainable long-term operation of the tool, while
providing access to broad base of interested users from universities, non-profit
research institutions and industry to serve as a regional
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal stems
from the wide range of research this tool enables. The proposed system is
capable of performing a wide range of silicon etching processes including high
etch rate etch, high aspect ratio etch, deep sub-micron feature etch in the
nanometer scale, smooth sidewall etch, minimal undercutting of silicon-on-
insulator substrates, flexible sidewall profile control, and highly selective
etch. This tool is expected to enable multidisciplinary research activities that
encompass optical micro-electromechanical systems, metamaterials at the micro-
and nano-scale, photonic crystals and nanophotonic devices, micro-power
generators, precision packaging solutions for optical/electronic devices and
systems, terahertz sources, microfluidic devices, and low-cost patterning
technologies using molds and stamps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this program have educational and economical aspect. Addition of this capability
to SMIF will provide graduate students and postdoctoral researchers to expand
their research experience that will help train a higher quality work force, and
enable local startup companies to develop their core technology that will lead
to job creation and economic growth.