* 0959924
* MRI-R2: Development of a Software Traceability Instrument to Facilitate and Empower Traceability Research and Technology Transfer
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Jonathan Maletic, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2013
* USD 2,000,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project, developing a software traceability instrument, enables research in
diverse, much needed, software-related research areas such as formal methods,
human computer factors, software visualization, and project management. The work
supports a critical research agenda of the software engineering community and
facilitates technology transfer of traceability solutions to business and
industry. Traceability refers to the ability to capture the relationships
between different artifacts of a software-intensive system development project,
including code, requirements, design, specifications, external regulations, and
software architectures. Many software engineering activities involve tracing
between interdependent artifacts, for example, finding software components that
implement a given system requirement in order to assure that an as-built system
meets its intended goals, or conversely, finding all the requirements that
pertain to a code module to ensure that the system does not contain extraneous
and potentially malicious features. The traceability instrument contains a
library of reusable trace algorithms and utilities, a benchmarked repository of
trace-related datasets, tasks, metrics, and experimental results, a plug-and-
play environment for conducting trace-related experiments, and predefined
experimental templates representing common types of empirical traceability
experiments. The instrument facilitates the application of traceability
solutions across a broad range of software engineering activities including
requirements analysis, architectural design, maintenance, reverse engineering,
and IV&V (independent verification and validation) or V&V activities.

Broader Impacts: Despite the criticality of software traceability, organizations
have struggled to implement successful and cost-effective traceability due to
the complexity and error-proneness of the task. Despite a compelling research
agenda, traceability research has been impeded by the lack of shared
instruments. The instrument will make state-of-the-art traceability results
available to enable the next generation of customized traceability environments
and will provide support for conducting empirical research. Results will be
disseminated broadly through outreach endeavors by the Center of Excellence for
Software Traceability. The project will provide multiple opportunities for
participation by underrepresented minorities and undergraduate students, and
will create three fulltime job positions. The long-term broader impacts of the
project will be to improve software project productivity and to improve the
reliability of software, as well as developing software engineering educational
curriculum for training students and practitioners.