* 0959486
* MRI-R2:  Development of a System for Real-Time X-Ray Scattering Analysis of Complex Oxide Thin Film Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Soumendra Basu, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2013
* USD 287,204.00

0959486&lt;br/&gt;Headrick&lt;br/&gt;U. of Vermont &amp; State Agricultural
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray scattering is an enormously powerful tool for the
study of materials because of the ability to monitor length scales down to
atomic dimensions and penetrating power to reach buried interfaces and
structures. Synchrotron-based x-ray techniques also provide time resolution to
study thin film crystal growth on time scales relevant to the fundamental
surface processes and access to chemical information. This project aims to
construct a unique thin-film growth system optimized for epitaxial growth of
complex functional oxide materials. The system will be compatible with the
existing infrastructure at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) beamline
X21, where it will be used to perform in-situ x-ray scattering studies of
surface roughening and smoothening, strain, phase separation, surface/interface
structure, and other phenomena related to epitaxial film growth kinetics during
film growth by Pulsed Laser Deposition or by Sputter Deposition. Research teams
from a consortium of institutions, including Boston University, Stony Brook
University, the University of Vermont, and Brookhaven National Laboratory will
construct and support the facility. These groups bring to bear expertise in a
wide variety of oxide materials, including materials that exhibit ferroelectric,
ferromagnetic, or antiferromagnetic ordering, and materials with applications in
Solid Oxide Fuel Cells. The proposed instrumentation represents an exciting
possibility for students to learn from a diverse group of scientists having
tremendous expertise in characterization of materials by advanced methods.
General users of the NSLS will also have access to the facility, which will
ensure that focused high quality research will be performed with the system,
while at the same time providing access and support to an international pool of
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-rays are an enormously powerful tool for the
study of materials: they can be used to measure structures down to atomic
dimensions using diffraction because of their short wavelength, and they can
reach inside of materials because they are not strongly absorbed. Synchrotrons
are the brightest sources of x-rays routinely available to scientists, which
allows time resolved studies of thin film crystal growth on the time scales at
or near the time scales of atomic processes taking place on the growth surface.
This project aims to construct a unique thin-film growth system optimized for
crystal growth of complex oxide thin films that have potential applications in
electronics and energy devices. The system will be compatible with the existing
infrastructure at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS), where it will be
used to perform x-ray scattering studies of surface roughening and smoothening,
strain, phase separation, surface/interface structure, and other phenomena
related to thin film crystal growth during film growth from plumes of atoms
created by laser pulses or by energetic ion erosion of a target material.
Research teams from a consortium of institutions, including Boston University,
Stony Brook University, the University of Vermont, and Brookhaven National
Laboratory will construct and support the facility. These groups bring to bear
expertise in a wide variety of oxide materials, including materials for future
electronic devices that exhibit ferroelectric, ferromagnetic, or
antiferromagnetic ordering, and materials with applications in Solid Oxide Fuel
Cells. The proposed instrumentation represents an exciting possibility for
students to learn from a diverse group of scientists having tremendous expertise
in characterization of materials by advanced methods. General users of the NSLS
will also have access to the facility, which will ensure that focused high
quality research will be performed with the system, while at the same time
providing access and support to an international pool of scientists.