* 0959565
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP/MS)
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Alan Rabideau, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 390,524.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research and Instrumentation (MRI) program,
Professor Diana Aga, Tracy Bank, Eliza S. Calder, Alan J. Rabideau and David F.
Watson will acquire an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP/MS) to
be used for environmental science and engineering research. Projects that will
be undertaken include: 1.) environmental impacts of engineered nanomaterials,
2.) biogeochemistry and remediation of heavy metal pollutants, 3.) geochemical
analysis of volcanic rocks for petrological research, 4.) transport and modeling
of strontium and phytoremediation of cadmium, and, 5.) characterization of
semiconductor nanomaterials.

Mass spectrometry (MS) is used to identify the chemical composition of a sample
by measuring the mass of the molecular constituents in the sample after they are
ionized and detected by the mass spectrometer. The ICP/MS will allow analysis of
metal speciation at sub-parts per billion (ppb) levels, which is crucial in
accurately assessing the effectiveness of bioremediation and the risks of metal
contamination. It will not only be useful for environmental samples, but will
also be a highly valuable characterization tool for nanomaterials research. The
laser ablation system in front of the ICP/MS can be used for direct analysis of
solid rocks and semiconductor materials. This will advance and transform the
current research activities of students and in Geology and Chemistry.