* 0959461
* MRI-R2: CSAM Acquisition of Scientific Computing Capacity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2011
* Philip Yecko, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2011
* USD 129,372.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty across the College of Science
and Mathematics (CSAM) of Montclair State University are pursuing
computationally intensive research programs that, together, comprise a diverse
array of applications: stochastic metapopulation disease models, leading to
improved outbreak prediction and vaccination policies; functional genomics of
the maize genome, essential for researchers to fully exploit the maize genome
sequence; liquid atomization modeling, leading to new control strategies for
specifying droplet size (a need in many industrial processes); magnetic fluid
dynamics modeling, leading to improved models of magnetically-driven and
directed flows relevant to applications in biomedicine and providing a valuable
simulation tool for systems in which experimental observations are difficult and
expensive; imaging by inverse scattering, leading to better models for acoustic
and elastic wave propagation and tools for imaging structures in the Earth;
simulations of Fermi-Pasta-Ulam systems, leading to new examination of the
physically fundamental and mathematically rich dynamics nonlinear multicomponent
systems; feature extraction in financial data series, leading to fast, accurate
algorithms for sophisticated, real-time analysis of large data sets, including
rapidly evolving financial data series. The HPC cluster acquired by CSAM is
well-suited to the computational tasks for each of these investigations and will
enable a transformative increase in the scale and complexity of computations
undertaken in support of each research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expansion of research enabled by access to high-performance computing will, in
turn, enable the investigators to expand opportunities for student research in
leading-edge computational science, in a broad range of disciplines.
Undergraduate and Masters? student research opportunities that make use of the
HPC facility will provide the highly diverse CSAM student population (including
many who are members of groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines) critical
computational and mathematical skills, valuable in preparing these students for
advanced study and careers in STEM fields that are well represented among New
Jersey academic and industrial institutions.