* 0959333
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Trace Gas and Aerosol Instrumentation for Ecosystem Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Maureen Conte, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 11/30/2012
* USD 418,048.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;Funding from the NSF MRI-R2 program has been
awarded to the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) to support the purchase of two
Campbell Scientific TGA200 in situ trace gas analyzer systems for deployment at
field sites and an Agilent Technologies G3242A/G3440A Gas Chromatograph-Mass
Spectrometer system for analysis of trace organic compounds such as plant waxes
and microbe cellular debris in atmospheric aerosols. These instruments provide
new information about ecosystem metabolism and new understanding of the
biogeochemical and ecological processes that result in net fluxes between
ecosystems and the atmosphere. The instruments enable Ecosystems Center
scientists to open new ground in the area of whole-ecosystem processes.
Typically, fluxes are inferred from small-scale measurements often requiring
enclosure and incubation of ecosystem components (e.g., soil, water) that may
perturb organisms and the processes they catalyze, resulting in inaccurate
estimates. The atmosphere, by virtue of relatively rapid mixing, acts as an
integrator, so measuring concentrations of substances over time and above or
downwind of ecosystems, enables estimation of fluxes. The new instruments are
used to support the Center's research programs at three NSF Long Term Ecological
Research (LTER) sites at Plum Island MA, Harvard Forest, MA and Toolik Lake, AK;
at NSF and NASA-supported project sites in Brazil and new research sites in
Africa. The TGA and GCMS systems directly impact educational activities in the
Ecosystems Center. First, our Semester in Environmental Science (SES) Program
draws undergraduates from small colleges around the country and world for an
intensive "semester abroad" program in Woods Hole. SES students learn about
terrestrial and marine environmental sciences, take field trips, do lab
exercises and finally carry out an independent research project. Faculty at the
MBL also participate in several NSF-REU programs, some associated with LTER and
other field sites. These students employ the new instrumentation in their
research projects. Ecosystems Center scientists also mentor PhD students in the
Brown-MBL Joint PhD Program. Center scientists also sponsor and direct research
by several postdoctoral fellows. Finally, the new, ecosystem-level flux
estimates are directly relevant to new climate change policy formation. Data
from these studies will be disseminated through regional and national
presentations by students and faculty, and through peer-reviewed scientific
journals.