* 0959583
* Acquisition of High Performance Computational Infrastructure for Image Analysis, Visualization, and Game Development
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Marjan Trutschl, Louisiana State University Shreveport
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2012
* USD 154,901.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-59583&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Celebi, M
Emre, Cvek, Urska, Trutschl, Marjan, Williams-Hart, Itara
T.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Louisiana State University&lt;br/&gt; Shreveport, LA
71115-2301&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI-R2/Acq: High Performance Computational
Infrastructure for Image Analysis, Visualization, and Game
Development&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring high-
performance and storage infrastructure, services research projects requiring the
use of high performance resources for image analysis, visualization, game
development, and other advanced applications. The specific instrumentation is a
blade server system with a storage area network (SAN) subsystem for use by
faculty and students mainly in Computer Sciences, Biological Sciences, and
Physics/Astronomy. Key characteristics follow.&lt;br/&gt;- Provides high
performance computing and storage infrastructure to support large image
databases, visualization research, and access to vast amount of experimental
data from outside the institution;&lt;br/&gt;- Promotes multidisciplinary use of
common equipment and infrastructure;&lt;br/&gt;- Enhances current research
efforts and creates new synergy among the various groups involved.
&lt;br/&gt;These key characteristics should lead to scholarly publications and
additional research ideas. Hence, new research ideas and initiatives are
expected to emerge that will lead to additional high quality interdisciplinary
research activities with potential to enhance socioeconomic progress in the
state and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The instrument greatly
enhances this primarily undergraduate, non-doctoral institution that serves
under represented students in an EPSCoR state. The institution has a long
history of involving undergraduates in research. Thus, the acquisition and
utilization of the system supports an improved learning environment that
integrates research and education fostering collaborations within the
university, and across institutions. It directly benefits approximately 150
undergraduate students, and at least 15 graduate students per year. Moreover,
the supported research and education should contribute to the development of a
skilled workforce. The acquisition and utilization of the new blade server
system expands opportunities for a diverse community of faculty and students in
an underserved area of U.S.