* 0959026
* Communicating Research to Public Audiences: Environmental Drivers of the Ecological Role and Movements of Top Predators in the Coastal Everglades
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Michael Heithaus, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,699.00

This two-year project is communicating the results of scientific discoveries
produced by an on-going LTER (Long-term Ecological Research) project devoted to
understanding the Everglades ecosystem. Specifically, Dr. Heithaus is
capitalizing on the discoveries funded through 0620409 (Coastal Oligotrophic
Ecosystems Research) about the role of large-bodied, top predators in the
Everglades, including bull sharks (Carcharhinus leucas) and American alligators
(Alligator mississippiensis). The STEM content of this project is biology, in
particular ecology, the environment, and conservation.

These results are being communicated via: (1) multimedia exhibit presentations
at multiple museums and nature centers in southern Florida, primarily the Museum
of Discovery and Science (MODS), located in Ft. Lauderdale near the Everglades
and (2) online dissemination of mini-documentaries and other educational
components at social media websites and the LTER web site. The target audience
for the museum exhibit components includes learners from diverse cultural
backgrounds, such as urban family groups reflecting the demographics of southern
Florida. This project will also develop a documentary about Everglades ecology
that is planned for dissemination on a cable TV channel devoted to natural
history. In order to link with formal education, related educational
deliverables are being produced for use in science classroom settings (grades 4
through 12) that are aligned with the state science standards and benchmarks.
Formative assessment conducted by museum staff and university students will
evaluate learning outcomes as they relate to STEM content learning goals. After
the two-year funding period, the science learning opportunities produced from
the current Communicating Research to Public Audiences (CRPA) project will be
sustained as the exhibit travels to other venues and as web deliverables are
accessed on-line.