* 0959584
* MRI-R2: Development of a Second-Generation Applications-Driven Wireless Sensor Networking Instrument
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Peter Desnoyers, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2013
* USD 499,355.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-59584&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Noubir,
Guevara&lt;br/&gt; Basagni, Stefano; Desnoyers, Peter; Vona, Marsette
A.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Northeastern University &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI-R2/Dev.:
Second-Generation Applications-Driven Wireless Sensor Networking
Instrument&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing a
multi-purpose wireless sensor networking instrument, supports the specific
experimental research needs of cross-layer protocols for heterogeneous sensor
networks and key applications such as search and rescue by swarms of robots,
buildings structure health monitoring, and hand and patient motion tracking. The
instrument enables&lt;br/&gt;- Research and education for developing and
experimenting with protocols and algorithms for a future generation of wireless
sensor networks,&lt;br/&gt;- Cross-cutting research and education in application
areas of key interest to the society and the institution.&lt;br/&gt;This work
enhances the support of existing mechanisms of today's wireless sensor networks
such as security, energy efficiency, and reliability by using a more capable
second systems on chips at an order of magnitude lower cost and within a
significantly smaller package than today's solution. Additionally, inexistent
capabilities that enable research are designed and integrated in the target
multi-disciplinary application areas; these include:&lt;br/&gt;- Directional
antennas for localization, and interference-cancellation, using a combination of
low-cost mechanical and electronic beam-forming techniques (outperforming purely
electronic smart antennas). This improves communication capacity and robustness
against unintentional and malicious interference. It will be fitted on mobile
robots and combined with ultra-sound transceivers for faster localization of
transmission sources in search and rescue missions.&lt;br/&gt;- Ultralow-power
with multi-radio support including wakeup-radios, enabling asymmetric
communication architectures, and allowing deployed sensor nodes to last for over
a decade without battery changes.&lt;br/&gt;- Nodes hardware, software, and
network design architected for ease of composability to quickly integrate
specific hardware components of new applications such as wideband reduces
personnel in the development microelectronic mechanical systems (MEMS)
ultrasound transceivers, MEMS accelerometers, flash storage, and also interfaces
with a variety of robots and off-the-shelf components (e.g., miniSD
GPS).&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project fosters a wider use of
wireless sensor networks in application areas of national importance, namely,
emergency preparedness and health science. All the instrument components are
open-sourced including the schematics, printed circuit board (PCB) layouts, and
software with adequate documentation, thus enabling other institutions to easily
extend and build copies of the instrument at low cost. The work fosters the
development of the next generation application-driven wireless sensor networks
widening the use of such networks both in research and education. Several
education kits and evaluation systems will be made available to other academic
groups. Dissemination workshops will also be organized for application and
module developers. The instrument will be used in several multi-disciplinary
courses bridging CS, EE, ME, and CE.