* 0959514
* Collaborative Research: Automating the Large-Scale Measurement of Insect Behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Stephen Pratt, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 209,014.00

The Georgia Institute of Technology and Arizona State University are awarded
grants to develop an integrated approach to automating measurements of insect
behavior from video records. The study of insect behavior plays a fundamental
role in biology, but progress is limited by the rate at which data can be
gathered. Researchers have relied largely on direct observation or time-
consuming manual annotation of video records. This project will create an
automated solution that combines theory, algorithms, software modules, and
databases of behavior measurements. These tools will be widely applicable to
studies of animal behavior, but development will focus on the particularly rich
and challenging problems offered by ants, where multiple interacting animals
must be simultaneously tracked. Current multi-tracking technologies are limited
in their ability to deal with the huge degree of target interaction in this
context, including significant periods of occlusion of one target by another.
This project will generate a novel approach that applies the graph-cut
optimization method to video object segmentation. This method will be able to
identify which portions of the video correspond to distinct targets even when
they overlap. Accurate target segmentation will also facilitate more accurate
adaptation to changes in appearance due to lighting or other environmental
effects. The project will also develop novel behavior recognition methods that
infer behavior from target configuration and appearance. Unlike traditional
methods this approach will not rely on the state of the tracker and thus will
avoid the compounding of recognition errors by tracking
errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two cross-cutting themes inform this project. The
first is a focus on algorithms and methods compatible with modular software
tools, thus allowing biologists to develop a customized solution to a wide range
of sensing tasks. The second theme is the utilization of state-of-the-art ultra-
high resolution imaging sensors to obtain more information about ant behavior
and identity than is currently possible. These capabilities will enable insect
biologists to frame and answer research questions that exceed the limited data
collection capabilities of current methods. Algorithms and software modules will
be widely disseminated, to maximize their power to transform biology in a more
general setting. For more information visit the project website at
http://www.kinetrack.org/