* 0959124
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of an Integrated Instrument for Computational Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Magda El-Shenawee, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2013
* USD 900,000.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009. As
the cognizant Program Officer, I also affirm that the proposal does not support
projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-59124&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Apon, Amy W.;
Cothren, Jackson, D.; El-Shenawee, Magda O.; Pulay, Peter; Spearot, Douglas
E.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Arkansas&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI-R2/Acq.:
Acq. of an Integrated Instrument for Computational Research and
Education&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring an
integrated supercomputing platform for distributed and shared memory parallel
applications that are computationally, data, and storage intensive, aims to
service a broad range of projects in computational science and engineering. The
work potentially expands the capability to do computational research in Arkansas
by an order of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;The supercomputer requested would be used
principally in the areas of computer science, computational chemistry,
computational biomagnetics, mechanical engineering, geosciences, and spatial
science. It also benefits researchers in integrated nanoscience, astrophysics,
bioinformatics, large scale optimization, video analysis, and network
topology.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed cluster will be the
primary high-end computing platform for research and educational activities for
the University and for the state. The geosciences projects have substantial
commercial potential and particular significance for the economic development in
Arkansas. The proposal includes a significant outreach and an educational
component targeted to undergraduate students. In addition, the project contains
training activities targeted to faculty who teach undergraduate students at many
institutions of the eleven four-year institutions of higher education in
Arkansas.