* 0959989
* MRI-R^2:  Development of STIM and DATS for Protein and Nanosystem Characterization
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2010,09/30/2013
* John Cerne, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,001,046.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;Support from the MRI-R2 program has been awarded
to SUNY at Buffalo to develop two complimentary instruments: Spectral Terahertz
Imaging Microscopy (STIM) and Dynamic Alignment Terahertz Spectroscopy (DATS).
This pair of instruments is essential to address a fundamental question: what is
the role of collective motions in protein function? Answering this question has
an immediate impact on biological physics, and bioengineering. STIM enables
terahertz imaging of protein crystals and solid state samples with &lt; 1 micron
resolution, 0.2-7.0 THz bandwidth, 4.2 K - 300 K and in fields up to 10 T. DATS
enables terahertz spectroscopy of electrostatically aligned molecular systems
and structural measurements of non-crystallizing molecular systems. Proteins and
RNA-systems lay at the intersection between highly structured and amorphous
systems. Traditional approaches to studying these systems are limited by
background from the relaxational contribution of surface side chains and
solvent, and by the broad spectrum of overlapping modes. STIM and DATS address
these limitations through molecular alignment and polarization modulation and
thereby establish the functional importance of structural vibrational motion.
This instrumentation significantly improves our understanding of protein
dynamics. Also, magnetic excitations, phonon frequencies and carrier transport
times for technologically emerging materials lie in the terahertz frequency
range. As device size shrinks, one cannot assume bulk material properties and
local characterization is essential. Further, emerging materials often do not
have sufficient sample size or uniformity for bulk characterization. To probe
nonuniformity, localized states and phase transitions require terahertz
microscopy. STIM is a high resolution, high quality spectroscopy system for
measurement of nanosystems. The development of STIM and DATS enables critical
measurements in fields as diverse as structural biology and condensed matter
research. The instrumentation directly addresses needs that other current
terahertz instrumentation does not: 1) need to discriminate structural motion
from diffusive surface motion in proteins; 2) need for spatially resolved
conductivity tensor and spin spectroscopy of electronic materials 3) need for
structural determination for non-crystallizing molecules. This MRI-R2 project
fosters interdisciplinary work among multiple departments, schools and agencies.
The system development offers unique training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate researchers. This MRI-R2 activity also includes a new microscopy
exhibit for our GGEMS on the GO program for 7-12 graders and an undergraduate
Discovery Seminar Series: Bringing Science and Engineering to Life. Results of
the development effort, and of the research enabled by the new instruments, will
be published in peer-reviewed journals and disseminated through student and
faculty presentations at regional and national meetings.