* 0959568
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an Analytical High Resolution Scanning Electron Microscope
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* John Bozzola, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 464,075.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor
John J. Bozzola and colleagues Samir M. Aouadi, Peter Filip, Punit Kohli and
Shing-Chung Max Yen from the Integrated Microscopy and Graphics Expertise
(IMAGE) facility at Southern Illinois University at Carbondale will acquire a
high resolution, field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM). This
facility is used by a large number of researchers in fields as diverse as
biomolecular sensing to atmospheric to geological sciences and engineering. The
facility is administratively housed at the Graduate School. The instrument will
be used to support research activities such as: 1) studies of nanoscience
applications to bioanalytical and materials chemistry; 2) adaptive nanocomposite
and textured tribological coatings; 3) dendron-functionalized superconducting
iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) as pH-sensing MRI contrast agents; 4)
application development using carbon nanotubes, nanowires and carbon nanotube-
based hybrid materials; 5) surface phenomena and imaging of nanostructures to
study the interplay between surfaces and bulk electronic properties of
individual nanostructures; 6) study of modified matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI) targets as advanced platforms for biomarker
screening/comparative proteomics; 7) studies of the generation, processing and
fate of atmospheric particulate matter; 8) applications of sol-gel derived
materials; 9) study of bacterial degradation of cellulose; and 10) study of
oxidative dissolution of sulfide minerals.

A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a widely used technique for providing an
image of a sample surface. The image is obtained from scanning the surface with
a beam of electrons. This mainstay technique enables scientists to see the
ultrastructural details of fabricated systems, molecular arrangements of man-
made nanostructures and the subtle changes associated with friction and wear in
surfaces. The studies described here will impact a number of areas, including
chemistry, materials chemistry, geology, biochemistry and the environment. This
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research.