* 0959681
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Biophysical Instruments for Interdisciplinary Faculty and Student Research
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Brad Wallar, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 208,645.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Professor Kumar Sinniah and his colleagues
David E Benson and Amy Wilstermann from Calvin College, and Brad Wallar from
Grand Valley State University will acquire an atomic force microscope (AFM),
isothermal titration calorimeter (ITC), and differential scanning calorimeter
(DSC). The instruments will be used in an array of chemical and biological
investigations including: the binding interaction between G-quadruplex DNA with
insulin and with topoisomerase I, the thermodynamic parameters that control
protein attachment and stability on nanoparticle surfaces, and the protein
interactions involved in the regulation of diaphanous related formins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomic force microscopy, isothermal titration calorimetry,
and differential scanning calorimetry are used to study the binding of protein-
protein and protein-ligand complexes from single molecule to bulk ensemble
methods. The single molecule interactions will be studied using the atomic force
microscope (AFM), while the bulk ensemble characterizations will be carried out
using the complementary techniques of isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The ITC and DSC provide critical
information regarding the stability and binding of protein-protein and protein-
ligand interactions and will aid in the interpretation of single molecule
kinetic and thermodynamic properties estimated from the AFM studies. Together
these instruments will expand the scope of research and training possible,
providing essential bioanalytical capabilities to faculty and students at Calvin
College and Grand Valley State University (GVSU).