* 0959821
* Doctoral Dissertation Reason and Faith: A Study of Interwar Chilean Eugenic Discourse
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Sarah Walsh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/29/2012
* USD 14,979.00

This dissertation project focuses on interwar Chile to understand the dynamic
relationship between Catholicism, gender and eugenics in Latin America.
Historians of science often argue that eugenics (efforts to improve the
proportion of positve traits in human populations by selective breeding) was
distasteful to most Latin Americans, scientists and laymen, because of their
Catholic identities. However, using a variety of scientific pamphlets, ephemera,
treatises and instruction materials, this project will illuminate how Latin
American Catholics engaged eugenic science. Latin Americans, Chileans included,
generally latched on to the Lamarckian contention that creating a eugenic
environment would gradually improve populations over time, rather than
encouraging the separation of unfit individuals from the rest of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in its
focus on the complicated relationship between science and religion in Chile.
This relationship has been studied in the United States and Europe, but this is
not true of the Latin American case. Many historians overlook Latin America as a
place of scientific innovation precisely because of its religious identity. The
result of this has been the relative dearth of scholarly work on the history of
science in Latin America, particularly science practiced by Latin Americans
without the intervention of Europeans or Americans. Scholars who do discuss
Latin American science often portray it as flawed or derivative. This project,
however, will treat Chilean eugenics as legitimate. This approach will better
historiographically link Chilean eugenics to literature on the relationship
between religion and science in North Atlantic
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project will be an
examination of the power scientific discourse had in the creation of Latin
American interwar gender norms. Both religious and secular Chileans shored up
notions of modernized, patriarchal gender systems that emphasized the role of
women as wives and mothers through the use of eugenic discourse. This allows for
the exploration of how both Catholicism and modernized patriarchy affected the
development of eugenic science in Latin America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was funded by way of NSF's Science, Technology and Society Program.