* 0959722
* MRI R2: Acquisition of the next generation IRMS and CRDS for the SERC Stable Isotope Laboratory
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,12/31/2011
* James Fourqurean, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2011
* USD 328,334.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The funds for the next generation of mass spectrometers for the SERC Stable
Isotope Laboratory (SIL), with a request for one new isotope ratio mass
spectrometer (IRMS) and two Cavity Ring-down Spectroscopy (CRDS) systems. The
new next generation Delta V IRMS system will have hydrogen collectors to allow
for the measurement of D/H ratios in water, bulk OM, and biomarkers. The new
Delta V Plus IRMS will come with an amplifier gain switch with a variable
resistor for enriched 15N analyses. One CRDS system, a Picarro iTOC-CRDS
Isotopic Carbon Analyzer will allow the lab to measure total organic carbon
(TOC), dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) in
marine waters including carbon isotopic compositions. The proposed
instrumentation will add new capabilities to the facility.

Broader Impacts

The proposed instruments will be heavily involved with the training and research
of graduate students. There is also a specific graduate class in stable isotope
biogeochemistry which uses the instruments. The SIL has a good record of
providing research opportunities for underrepresented individuals in the
sciences (both undergraduate and graduate level). The SIL group has also
participated in various outreach projects including LTER's and GEOSCOPE. These
programs are designed to expose and include student (elementary /high school) in
research projects in the South Florida marine system. The SIL group has also
provided different government agencies with data used for management purposes.