* 0959282
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Instrumentation to Determine Provenance of Environmental Samples
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Kelvin Murray, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 215,180.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Graham F. Peaslee, Kelvin J. Murray and
Stephen K. Remillard will acquire a table-top scanning electron microscope and
an auto analyzer for pollutants such as phosphates and nitrates in environmental
samples. The equipment will be used to study the eutrophication of lakes and
rivers due to non-point-source nutrient loading, a geological study of Lake
Michigan beach sands, an investigation of the interactions of fruit-eating birds
and their food plants in Costa Rica, and in the characterization of
superconducting microstrip lines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A scanning electron
microscope (SEM) which includes x-ray analyses (EDS) enables researchers to
measure important light element concentrations such as Na, Mg, Al, and Si and to
study the morphological characterization of samples. A continuous flow
autoanalyzer can analyze large numbers of samples per hour for specific elements
using a spectrophotometer detector. Such chemical characterization provides
critical information on problems ranging across chemistry, biology, geology and
physics. In addition to the use of this instrumentation by undergraduates
engaged in research and training, an innovative approach will be undertaken to
incorporate high-school students and teachers into sediment sampling and
characterization study of the local watershed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;