* 0959167
* EAGER: Quantifying Information Security Risks in Complex Systems at the Interface of Users, Policies, and Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Susanne Wetzel, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 144,038.00

This proposal represents an opportunity to seed a highly innovative
interdisciplinary research project that has the potential for significant
practical and theoretical impact for the management of information security ? an
area which is receiving more and more public attention. During the past decade,
research in information security has expanded from a purely technical focus to a
more general technology-economic focus. Despite its expansion, a
multidisciplinary approach to understand and theoretically explain the
interaction of security and economy within complex systems of partners is still
missing. The principle objective of this proposed research is to develop an
innovative interdisciplinary information security framework in collaboration
with a healthcare system to optimize and substantially advance both its system
information security and system productivity. For example, consider a hospital
that exchanges data records of patients with governmental data bases that ? on
the other hand ? are accessed by insurance companies. Furthermore, hospitals
directly exchange information with these insurance companies. This may allow an
insurance company to combine and deduce information from different data sources
that could pose a security threat which is not addressed by traditional security
considerations. From a security economics perspective, the impact of information
exchange between partners on their productivity has to be considered to
understand the conditions under which partners will obey or violate information
security policies. The proposed project provides the potential for high impact
in substantially advancing research in information security as well as in
management science. Although the project will address systems information
security within the health care industry, its outcomes are expected to be
applicable in other industries, e.g., defense. The cross-disciplinary nature of
the proposed project is also expected to identify opportunities for
interdisciplinary education.