* 0959055
* Participant Support for 2010 Snowbird Workshop on Particle Astrophysics, Astronomy, and Cosmology; Salt Lake City, UT; March 23 to April 2, 2010
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* David Kieda, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2010
* USD 5,000.00

This award will provide participant support for the 2010 Snowbird Particle
astrophysics, Astronomy, and Cosmology workshop (SnowPAC 2010, March 23 to April
2, 2010 in Salt Lake City, Utah). The SnowPAC conference is an international
conference that seeks to review the current status of recent developments in
particle astrophysics, dark matter, dark energy and cosmology, to establish new
cross-connections between these disciplines, and to establish new collaborative
ties between individuals working in these research areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds will be used for increasing participation in the
conference by young scientists, including graduate students, postdocs, and young
faculty members. These funds will be used to waive registration fees, travel,
and local expenses of these individuals in order to enable their participation
in the conference. Improving the participation by under-represented minorities
is a high priority for use of these funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader
Impact of this proposal derives through three elements:&lt;br/&gt;1) Development
of new, cross-disciplinary research ties between young scientists;&lt;br/&gt;2)
Establishment of a yearly conference series in particle astrophysics, astronomy
and cosmology that can result in a long term effort to provide a forum to
integrate research ideas between particle astrophysics, astronomy and cosmology;
and&lt;br/&gt;3) Providing increased national visibility and research
connections for the growing astronomy and astrophysics community in the
Intermountain West.