* 0959306
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an XRD, FTIR, and WDS for Integrated Mineralogical and Geochemical Studies at Middlebury College
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Patricia Manley, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2013
* USD 299,584.00

0959306 Ryan

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Major Research Instrumentation Recovery and Reinvestment (MRI-R2) Program
grant supports acquisition of x-ray diffractometer (XRD) and a wavelength
dispersive spectrometer (WDS) that will be mated to an existing scanning
electron microscope at Middlebury College. The XRD will support research
requiring mineral phase identification and crystallographic structure
refinements and will be outfitted with a temperature controlled sample stage to
allow for kinetic studies. The SEM equipped WDS will allow for microchemical
analysis of solid materials. PI research will include studies of arsenic
speciation in aquifer rocks and groundwaters from northern Vermont to evaluate
toxicity and sources. An existing FTIR will support this research. Other
research application of requested instruments will include studies of Quaternary
climate as recorded in lake and marine sediments and soil minerals. The
requested instruments will support PI research and undergraduate student
research training at this liberal arts college located in Vermont, an EPSCoR
state, as well as collaborators from regional institutions. The grant is well
aligned with ARRA goals as the equipment to be purchased will be through
instrument manufacturer U.S. sales offices that support U.S. employees.

***