* 0959072
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Electron Beam Writer for Southern California Recovery Investment in Nanotechnology (SCRIN)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Bing Ren, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,960,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to study fundamental electronic, photonic,
chemical, and bio-logical behaviors of nanoscale structures relevant to future
applications in next generation storage, energy harvesting, communications and
computing, quantum communication and information proc-essing, superconductivity,
and biomedical and biochemical sensing. The approach is to utilize nano-scale
e-beam lithography in conjunction with other nanomanufacturing technologies to
fabricate and characterize nanometer scale metamaterials, devices, and
subsystems in which these new behaviors are expected to manifest themselves most
clearly and can be exploited.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The proposed
acquisition will enable investigation of smaller structures, finer features, and
larger patterns than can be experimentally accessed today. Electronic and spin
dif-fusion, a variety of magnetic behaviors, structural and chemical changes,
superconducting decoher-ence, and many other phenomena that occur at nanometric
length scales in common materials will be explored. Research projects are also
planned in the areas of nanophotonics, metamaterials, quantum optics, quantum
information, and nanomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The creation of wealth
through advances in nanoscale science and technol-ogy is at the heart of the
21st century economy. The impacts span multiple technical fields, including
information systems, health care, energy, pollution monitoring, and chemical
threat and explosive detection for homeland security applications. The UCSD
Nano3 facility is serving a wide area of Southern California, and the proposed
tool will benefit users throughout this geographic area. The project will also
play a significant role in promoting education and development of human
resources in science and engineering at the graduate and undergraduate levels,
diversity and outreach.