* 0959441
* MRI-R2: Development of a User-Centered Network Measurement Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Matthew Ward, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2013
* USD 391,582.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-59441&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Wills,
Craig &lt;br/&gt; Claypool, Mark L.; Doyle, James K.; Ward, Mathew
O.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Worcester Polytechnic Institute &lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Acq.: Dev. of a User-Centered Network Measurement Platform&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing a network measurement approach
centered on where users live and on their specific interactions with the
Internet, supports a wide range of research projects. The instrumentation
provides a means to test applicable techniques from research projects on a large
scale through vetted experiments and will be accessible to all users via two
integrated measurement approaches that&lt;br/&gt;- Execute within the protected
sandbox of a user Web browser to provide low impediments encouraging broad user
participation while still yielding useful Internet data.&lt;br/&gt;- Perform
more extensive application-oriented performance tests from a user's machine and
is not constrained by the sandbox.&lt;br/&gt;The former makes use of
entertainment applications in the form of games and videos to help engage users
and increase participation. The application-oriented nature of the latter tests
yields performance data that can be uploaded for sharing among network
researchers while providing feedback to users on network applications of
interest. This feedback serves as an incentive for user participation. Thus, the
platform provides information about the network applications that interest home
users and conditions in which these applications operate. Researchers can use
the platform tests from their own measurement points (MPs) and then calibrate
the characteristics of their MPs with others. The entertainment orientation of
the sandboxed platform serves provides an environment to decide how best to
employ the use of videos and games for measurement. The open research area
offers a training opportunity for students.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This project promotes teaching and training through integration with
systems courses and the Interactive Media and Games Development (IMGD) program.
The work also aims to broaden participation in science and engineering by
underrepresented groups through IMGD. Moreover, the available data sets are
likely to provide a foundation for scientific discovery.