* 0959037
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of High Resolution Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) for Characterization of Hydrogels, Nano-/Micro-Structures, &amp; Cell-Material Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Christine Schmidt, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 01/31/2011
* USD 544,314.00

0959037&lt;br/&gt;Schmidt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests the purchase of a Quanta
250 FEG environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) from FEI for
nanometer-scale imaging and analysis of biological samples under near-biological
environmental conditions. The proposed instrument is to be housed within the
Center for Nano- and Molecular Science and Technology (CNM) at the University of
Texas at Austin (UT Austin), and used for original research by student and
faculty users representing 10 academic departments. The instrument will allow
researchers to examine the structure and composition of hydrated materials under
precisely controlled environmental conditions, which will provide a heretofore-
unattainable degree of detail (down to 1.4 nm resolution) in the many areas of
cutting-edge research using hydrated materials in areas such as drug delivery,
tissue engineering, drug-resistant bacterial strains, and development of
nanosensors to name just a few. The ESEM can be configured to operate as a
scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) for even more in-depth analysis
of hydrated samples, and will allow elemental data analysis via energy-depletion
x-ray analysis (EDS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas at Austin
has a number of state-of-the-art conventional SEM imaging systems, but is
critically lacking a contemporary ESEM. Currently, there is only one ESEM user-
facility on campus (in Geosciences), but this is an older system that lacks the
resolution (tungsten filament system versus Schottky field emission for the
proposed system) and capabilities required for imaging biological samples and
micro/nano-materials in their more natural, hydrated state. Due to the ability
of the proposed ESEM to image hydrated samples, researchers who were previously
unable to use electron microscopy will now have a powerful tool that will open
new avenues of research. Additionally, researchers working with biological and
other hydrated samples that previously used electron microscopy will have better
and complementary imaging data. The ESEM will be maintained by the Texas
Materials Institute (TMI) in conjunction with the CNM and it will be centrally
located in the CNM's Nano Science and Technology (NST) building. The instrument
will be managed by the current facility manager, Dr. Hugo Celio, who has
extensive experience in using electron microscopes, in training others in their
use, and in performing instrument maintenance. An extended maintenance contract
with the manufacturer will also be purchased. This instrument will be available
at all times for all eligible users, via a system of controlled access already
successfully implemented by the CNM, which balances access with security.