* 0959979
* MRI-R2: Development of an Immersive Giga-pixel Display
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Arie Kaufman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2014
* USD 1,400,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-59979&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Kaufman,
Arie E., Mueller, Klaus, Qin, Hong, Samaras, Dimitrios, Varshney,
Amitabh&lt;br/&gt;Institution: SUNY at Stony Brook&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI-R2:
Development of an Immersive Giga-pixel Display&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:
&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing a next generation of immersive display
instrument (called 'Reality Deck'), aims to explore and visualize data from many
fields. To satisfy the need driven by the explosive growth of data size and
environments already at the institution, the work builds on the existing
experience with immersive environments (e.g., the 'Immersive Cabin' a current
generation device using projectors). This unique project generates a one-of-a-
kind exploration theater, using 308 high-resolution 30 LCD display monitors, by
contributing an environment whose visual resolution is at the limit of the human
eye's acuity. Within this environment investigators can interact with the
data/information displayed. &lt;br/&gt;The instrument services many groups,
including visual computing, virtual and augmented reality, human computer
interfaces, computer vision and image processing, data mining, physics,
scientific computing, chemistry, marine and atmospheric sciences, climate and
weather modeling, material science, etc.&lt;br/&gt;Collaborating scientist's
applications will be ported to the RealityDeck, including applications in
nanoelectronics, climate and weather modeling, biotoxin simulations,
microtomography, astronomy, atmospheric science, G-pixel camera for intelligence
gathering, architectural design and disaster simulations, smart energy grid, and
many others.&lt;br/&gt;A unique assembly of displays, GPU cluster, sensors,
communication/networking, computer vision and human computer interaction
technologies, RealityDeck is an engineering feat with user studies to deliver a
holistic system with a significant societal and research value. It is a one-of-
a-kind pioneering G-pixel display approaching the limits of visual cognition
that provides functionalities to a diverse user base. Its resolution at the
eye's visual acuity and its field of view will always exceed that of a human
user (wherever a human chooses to look), satisfying visual queries into the data
in a very intuitive way. This visual interaction is tightly coupled with
physical navigation.&lt;br/&gt;This surround virtual environment consists of
inertial sensors and six cameras mounted around the top corners of the
RealityDeck room to allow interaction with the displays. The display system is
driven by a cluster of about 80 high-end computer nodes, each equipped with two
high end GPUs. A small-scale video-wall has already been constructed as an
experimental platform for the RealityDeck consisting of 9 high-resolution 30 LCD
panels in a 3Ã—3 configuration. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
instrument will be used for research, education, and outreach across many
departments at the institution, the University of Maryland, and Brookhaven
National Laboratory (BNL). It fosters collaborations across disciplines
attracting faculty, researchers, and students. RealityDeck significantly
enriches the quality of visual thinking and data exploration. It substantially
enhances the infrastructure of research and education and has the potential to
alter the way computer graphicists, engineers, and scientists work and/or
conduct scientific discoveries.