* 0959294
* MRI: Collaborative Development of a Novel Pediatric Magnetoencephalography System
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Patricia Grant, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 2,995,639.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Support from the National Science Foundation will enable Drs. Ellen Grant and
Yoshio Okada at Children's Hospital Boston (CHB) and Dr Matti Hämäläinen at
Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) to develop a novel magnetoencephalography
(MEG) system, babyMEG, optimized for the non-invasive study of human brain
development from premature babies up to children 3 years old. This new
instrument will be developed under the direction of Dr. Okada in collaboration
with an R&D company (Tristan Technologies) in San Diego, CA. The software for
data analysis will be developed by Dr. Hämäläinen. Once completed, the
instrument will be installed in a novel clinical/research facility that CHB has
committed to build next to the Neonatal and Pediatric Intensive Care Units (NICU
and PICU). The PI of this project (Dr. Grant) will oversee the use of the
babyMEG in this facility as its Center Director.

This babyMEG is transformative because it will have a tremendous impact on the
understanding of early brain development in humans. Users will be able to
measure cortical activity with an unprecedented level of sensitivity and spatial
resolution: high-resolution information about regional cortical activity in real
time in the developing brain will become available. This information will allow
evaluation of developing functional brain connectivity with acquisition of new
skills such as language and determination of how developing connectivity is
altered by disease.

The new research facility where this work will be carried out will be equipped
with other neuroimaging tools such as a state-of-the-art 3 Tesla MR scanner with
custom-built 32-channel head coils and a novel Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS)
system. Thus, the babyMEG will be part of a multimodal neuroimaging facility.
The proximity of the research center to the NICU and PICU is unique in the
world. This infrastructure will provide exciting opportunities for understanding
human brain development in health and disease and for eventually helping to
maximize the potential of babies with various brain disorders.

It is anticipated that the support from the NSF will help to create a unique
research center that will become an important hub for research, training and
education not only in this country, but also in the world. The center will be
used for training of postdoctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate students
as well junior faculty from engineering and neuroscience. The babyMEG in the
clinical environment will expose basic scientists to the real world problems and
questions of early brain development and clinicians to the relevance of basic
science methods. The babyMEG will promote not only interdisciplinary research
but also collaboration between multiple Harvard institutions including CHB, MGH,
MIT and Harvard Medical School as well as their collaborators worldwide.
Specific benefits to graduate education will focus on training students to
research scientific questions drawing on advice and guidance from the three co-
PIs and senior faculty members who will be using the facility in collaboration
with the three key leaders. Use of the babyMEG will be promoted through regular
hands-on teaching sessions, seminar series and public lectures.