* 0959029
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: EVOLUTION OF THE HADROSAURID DENTITION--HISTOLOGICAL AND BIOMECHANICAL INSIGHTS INTO ADVANCED REPTILIAN HERBIVORY
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2015
* Gregory Erickson, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2015
* USD 190,901.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: EVOLUTION OF THE HADROSAURID
DENTITION--HISTOLOGICAL AND BIOMECHANICAL INSIGHTS INTO ADVANCED REPTILIAN
HERBIVORY&lt;br/&gt;Gregory M. Erickson and Mark A. Norell&lt;br/&gt;Throughout
their 300+ million year history, herbivorous reptiles rarely acquired teeth that
allowed for chewing in the manner of ungulate mammals (e.g. horses and cows).
The lone exception was the duck-billed dinosaurs (aka hadrosaurids), the
dominant herbivores of the Late Cretaceous. In our research we are studying: 1)
the steps by which hadrosaur teeth became more complex, 2) how the mechanics of
their dentition changed with each step, 3) how such changes allowed for the
processing of different food types, and finally 4) how their extensive worldwide
radiations were made possible by dental changes. We are specifically documenting
the shape and microstructure of the teeth throughout the group, including some
of the earliest and latest representatives. From growth lines found in the
samples we are determining how long each dinosaur?s teeth took to form, wear
down, and be replaced. We are then using these data to create computerized
engineering models of the dentitions and using them to explain how the chewing
surfaces of each species were created. Ultimately we will correlate these data
with dietary information and geographic radiations to gain a comprehensive
understanding of how hadrosaurids came to dominant herbivorous roles during the
age of dinosaurs. The results will serve as a model for understanding the
genesis of complex dental structures and will be of interest to investigators in
myriad scientific disciplines (e.g. vertebrate paleontology, paleobiology,
evolutionary biology, anthropology, integrative biology, comparative physiology,
ecology, herpetology, and mammalogy). Additional benefits of this study include
educational opportunities for students and teachers. Justifications and
descriptions of the research and findings will be posted on the internet for
public access along with an archive of research images. Through the American
Museum of Natural History (AMNH) Education Department?s summer intern program,
high school students have the opportunity for hands-on participation in the
project. Teacher training (for high school and middle school teachers) will also
be conducted as a result of this grant. Teacher Professional Development
Workshops, focusing on dinosaur evolutionary feeding ecology, will be held at
the Gottesman Center at the AMNH. In addition this research will be shared with
teachers who participate in hands-on histology activities during a special
continuing education program at Florida State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;