* 0959360
* MRI-R2 Acquisition of a 600 MHz NMR Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Christopher Spilling, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 614,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor
Christopher D. Spilling and colleagues from the Chemistry and Biochemistry
Department at the University of Missouri-Saint Louis will acquire a 600 MHz NMR
spectrometer. The instrument will be used to support research activities dealing
with synthetic chemistry as well as structures and dynamics of protein, DNA and
other biological macromolecules. Specific examples are: 1) restriction
endonuclease structure and function; 2) structure, dynamics and function of PA-
binding domains of PP2C-like ABI1 and Raf-like CTR1 in free and lipid-bound
forms; 3) structure and conformations of Puf repeat domain-mRNA complexes and
mRNA degradation; 4) structure and biological activity of the amyloid-beta
peptide; 5) antiviral compounds for HPVs; 6) accelerating iron release from
serum transferring; 7) synthetic channels, capsules, and nanotubes designed for
transport and for drug delivery; 8) synthesis, mechanism of formation,
structure, and conformation of complex glycostructures; 9) application of
chiral, non-racemic allylic hydroxy phosphonates for the synthesis of complex
natural products; and 10) Pt-Si aggregates from Si-H bond activation reactions.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials
chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching
as well as research.