* 0959012
* MRI-R2:   Acquisition of a Confocal/Multiphoton Microscope to Advance Cellular and Physiological Research at Marshall University
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Michael Norton, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 11/30/2012
* USD 930,058.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Support from the NSF MRI-R2 program has allowed Marshall University to purchase
a Leica TCS SP5 II AOBS and MP High End System. This system includes the ability
to perform very high resolution imaging, and very fast imaging for the rapid
detection, with good temporal resolution, of fast physiological changes that can
last 1 msec or less. These features thus allow the combination of fluorescent
imaging in live tissues with other physiological techniques required by Marshall
researchers. The initial user group for the new system consists of 5 major and
10 minor users, representing researchers from 5 departments, with projects that
span a broad range of biological and biochemical research in neurobiology,
genetics, physiology, molecular biology, and bioengineering. Major projects use
multiphoton microscopy to study signal transduction mechanisms in single
neurons, and to analyze the effect of environmental variables on bone elongation
by imaging skeletal growth plates in vivo. Other research projects that benefit
from the high resolution imaging, multiple color channels, rapid scanning, and
precise optical sectioning capability of the proposed instrumentation include a
study using the fruit fly Drosophila as a model to investigate the orientation
and shape of cells within the plane of an epithelium; an analysis of stem cell
integration and differentiation in tissues; and the evaluation of DNA damage
repair mechanisms. Additional projects include the intracellular localization of
an important cell cycle regulatory protein in the protist Acanthamoeba;
molecular signaling triggered by oxidized dietary lipids; neuronal mechanisms
underlying the regulation of body load in stick insects; and the development of
single-molecule sensor systems. The new equipment enhances the cutting edge
research programs and student research opportunities. The projects include 17
undergraduate and 23 graduate student researchers. Confocal microscopy is
regularly used in coursework (laboratory exercises, and capstone and independent
research projects) at Marshall, and as part of outreach programs. These programs
include the Marshall Chapter of the WV Space Grant Consortium's NASA Research
Scholarships Program; the NSF Kentucky-WV Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation; the WV-IDeA Network of Biomedical Research Excellence; The
Biomedical Sciences Summer Research Internship for Minority Students; and the
state-funded Marshall Summer Undergraduate Research Experience. In addition,
summer Bridge programs expose high school students, their teachers, and
Marshall's rising sophomores to cutting-edge research which includes the use of
confocal microscopy. Publication and presentation are major dissemination
criteria, and all participating faculty have support student presenters at
national and/or international conferences as well as at local events such as
Undergraduate Research Day at the WV Capitol.