* 0959134
* Conference and Workshop Support: Philosophical perspectives on causal reasoning in biology. Held at the University of Minnesota  Minneapolis, MN in Spring 2011 and Spring 2012.
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Michael Travisano, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 01/31/2013
* USD 30,000.00

Causal reasoning plays a central role in biology and many of the more
philosophically oriented disputes in biology, such as disputes about the levels
of selection or disagreements about gene determination, are best framed in
explicitly causal terms. Most philosophical accounts of causation have been
developed on the assumption that the analysis of causes in simple systems will
automatically (or "in principle") apply to complex causal systems as well. Many
philosophers of biology tend to assume the opposite: they are skeptical that
philosophical analysis of highly idealized simple systems can provide a basis
for elucidating causality in kinds of complex systems investigated by
biologists. This workshop will open up inquiry by exploring the possibility that
abstract accounts of causation can help inform analysis of causation in complex
systems and that analyzing causation in complex systems can help inform
philosophers' understanding of causation more generally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will bring together biologists
investigating complex causal systems, philosophers of biology analyzing causal
models and experimentation in biology, and philosophers of causation who have
developed abstract theories aimed at elucidating the nature of causation and
causal reasoning. Given the overlap of interests, one might expect that these
researchers would already be in conversation. But the exchange of ideas among
these groups is limited, even between philosophers of biology and philosophers
of causation. Participants will meet for two workshops, the first of which will
is organized to initiate collaborative investigations into the nature of
causation in biological systems, new analyses of the causal reasoning underlying
the scientific investigation and explanation of the behavior of these systems,
and models of how to understand causation in complex systems more generally. The
results of these collaborative investigations will be discussed at the second
workshop and for publication in Minnesota Studies for Philosophy of Science.