* 0959393
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a High Resolution Field Emission Transmission Electron Microscope for Research in Self-Assembled, Synthetic and Biomolecular Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Vijay John, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 01/31/2012
* USD 1,300,000.00

0959393&lt;br/&gt;John&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal addresses Tulane University's request
for a high resolution field-emission transmission electron microscope (FE-TEM)
to complement its existing capabilities in electron microscopy and bring these
capabilities to address the research needs of the university and academic
researchers in the region. Tulane University operates an Electron Microscopy
Facility as part of a centralized Coordinated Instrumentation Facility (CIF)
(http://www.tulane.edu/~cif/) that was established in 1991 with the intent to
maintain, manage and operate high priced instrumentation across the University.
The electron microscopy facility is well-staffed by an excellent electron
microscopist (Dr. Jibao He) who will provide training, participate in data
interpretation, and maintain the instrument. Intellectual Aspects: The proposed
TEM will be used to carry out a wide variety of research projects and to enhance
the research resources available for new faculty across a range of scientific
and engineering disciplines. There are 3 principal investigators and 6 senior
investigators who will directly benefit from access to a high quality
instrument. V. John will use the instrument for a variety of projects involving
the self-assembly of lipid and surfactant systems to tubular liposomes and gel
microstructures. S. Grayson's research related to dendrimers and macromolecules,
T. Mandal's research in polymer nanoparticles related to drug delivery, T.
Ahsan's project in stem cell characterization, and D. Khismatullin's research in
cell cytoskeletal characterization, N. Pesika's research in biomimetic adhesive
materials, and J. Wickramarajah's research in self-assembled porphyrin based
materials, are all examples of projects in soft materials that will tremendously
benefit from the use of high-resolution cryogenic imaging techniques for a
fundamental understanding of underlying phenomena. U. Diebold's research in sub-
surface microstructures in semi-conducting materials, Z. Mao's research in
superconducting and magnetic thin films, N. Pesika's research in anisotropic
quantum dots, and V. John's research in ceramics templated in self-assembled
systems are examples where high-resolution TEM at the sub-nanometer scale will
help understand the growth characteristics and properties of inorganic
materials. The relatively recent advent of Field-Emission TEM providing
tremendous increases in beam energy, brightness and coherence makes imaging at
such resolutions and in such difficult-to-image systems possible. This proposal
represents Tulane's efforts to bring its well-run electron microscope facility
to a state-of-the-art facility conducting forefront research in an inherently
interdisciplinary setting.