* 0959630
* MRI-R2:   Acquisition of a High-Speed Sorting Flow Cytometer  for Multi-User Environmental Microbiology Research
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Dana Hunt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 02/29/2012
* USD 473,370.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of&lt;br/&gt;2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation-Recovery and Reinvestment (MRI-R2) award funds the acquisition
of a high-speed sorting flow cytometer for multi-user environmental microbiology
research at the Duke University Marine Laboratory. Flow cytometry offers
distinct advantages over other techniques, including: the ability to count and
characterize large numbers of cells in short times (~50,000 cells/sec); the
ability to simultaneously measure multiple properties (size, color or specific
genetic (DNA/RNA) or protein constituents using probes) of individual cells and
therefore populations; and the ability to sort and collect individual cells or
populations of cells for additional downstream analyses. Research enabled by
this instrument includes the enumeration and genetic and biochemical
characterization of marine microbes, the evaluation of marine and freshwater
microbes in the context of environmental pollutants, the analysis of cells
harvested from higher organisms of interest to conservation, and the study of
algae for the renewable and carbon-neutral production of biofuels and animal
protein. &lt;br/&gt; The cytometer enables modern environmental microbiology
research at a satellite campus of Duke University, and provides access and
infrastructure for other regional universities with similar research interests.
Beyond developing research infrastructure, the instrument facility is integral
to teaching at Duke University and neighboring institutions, allowing
incorporation of cutting edge techniques in undergraduate, professional masters
and graduate student education. A list of undergraduate and graduate courses at
Duke University that directly benefit from this facility includes Biological
Oceanography, Genetics and Molecular Biology, Environmental Molecular Tools, and
Analysis of Ocean Ecosystems among others. The facility is also to be made
available for undergraduate independent study research as well as thesis
research by graduate students. Results from the studies enabled by the new
equipment will be disseminated by student and faculty presentations at regional
and national meetings, and through publication in peer-reviewed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;