* 0959329
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Gleeble 3500 Thermomechanical Processing Simulator
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* David Matlock, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2013
* USD 589,036.00

0959329 Matlock Colorado School of Mines

Technical Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

Materials processing research is key to enable advancing and new technologies
required to support the nation's needs for infrastructure and energy
development. In response to these needs, the Colorado School of Mines (CSM) has
assembled research teams that are well qualified to pursue the necessary
materials processing research in diverse areas including ferrous and non-ferrous
metallurgy, materials for new energy developments including advanced fossil-fuel
and nuclear power generation systems, development of advanced biological
materials, development of fuel cell materials, and development of advanced
recycling technologies which will be required for all future materials
applications. Common to all of these research areas is the need for experimental
capabilities which simulate, on small-scale laboratory samples, new materials
processing technologies, provide fundamental property information on new
materials, and provide critical data necessary to validate predictions based on
computational simulations. To enable this diverse group of research areas, this
project will acquire a Gleeble 3500 thermomechanical processing simulator, a
fully integrated digital, closed loop control, thermal and mechanical testing
system that can be programmed to simultaneously control the time dependence of
temperature and a selected mechanical parameter such as load, displacement,
strain, or stress. To provide the necessary flexibility, the system employs a
direct resistance heating system to heat specimens at rates up to 10,000 °C/s,
and a cooling system that can achieve controlled cooling rates in excess of
10,000 °C/s. The system will also be equipped with a hot torsion system for
simulation of high strain hot deformation operations (e.g. rolling and forging)
and a special fixture for solidification studies. The presence of the unit in
Golden, Colorado which is centrally located in a growing technology community
along the front range of the Rocky Mountains, will provide a resource to local
industries, national laboratories, and universities and provide significant
opportunities, through organized programs at the University, to enhance outreach
opportunities for high school students, including those from underrepresented
minority groups.

Layman Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

Materials processing research is key to enable advancing and new technologies
required to support the nation's needs for infrastructure and energy
development, both of which are required for the development of new manufacturing
industries and an economy based on energy independence. In response to these
needs, the Colorado School of Mines (CSM) has assembled diverse research teams
that are well qualified to pursue the necessary research. Materials processing
research at CSM includes development of new steels for light weight, fuel
efficient automobiles, new materials for advanced fossil-fuel and nuclear power
generation systems, advanced biological materials for enhanced implants, fuel
cell materials for clean energy systems, and advanced recycling technologies
required for all future materials applications. Common to all of these research
areas is the need for experimental capabilities which simulate, on small-scale
laboratory samples, new materials processing technologies, provide fundamental
property information on new materials, provide critical data necessary to
validate predictions based on computational simulations, and provide guidelines
to economically scale laboratory developments to full scale commercial
production. To enable this diverse group of research areas, this project will
acquire a Gleeble 3500 thermomechanical processing simulator, a unique research
instrument equipped to control processing temperature over a wide range of
heating and cooling rates and with attachments to enable tension, compression,
and torsional loading of samples and to simulate casting and solidification
operations. The presence of the unit in Golden, Colorado which is centrally
located in a growing technology community along the front range of the Rocky
Mountains, will provide a resource to local industries, national laboratories,
and universities and provide significant opportunities, through organized
programs at the University, to enhance outreach opportunities for high school
students, including those from underrepresented minority groups.