* 0959778
* MRI-R2:   Acquisition of High Throughput Crystallization and Collection Devices
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* ChulHee Kang, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 01/31/2013
* USD 1,497,205.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Major Research Instrumentation-Recovery and Reinvestment (MRI-R2) award
funds the acquisition of high throughput crystallization and collection devices
at the Biomolecular X-ray Crystallography (BXC) Center at Washington State
University (WSU). Research benefitting from the acquisition includes projects to
investigate mechanisms of DNA damage and repair, reproductive physiology,
defense against bioterrorism, causes and prevention of major worldwide diseases,
plant defense systems, redox chemistry, protein folding, production of food and
renewable energy, and reduction of environmental pollution. Automation of
crystallization and availability of high flux X-ray generators with dual
wavelengths (Cu and Cr anodes) has significantly enhanced the overall
scientific, and establishes the BXC Center as a regional center for high-
throughput structure determination. The availability of the high throughput
devices allows the BXC Center to not only continuously address the most
compelling scientific questions in each of those on-going collaborations but
also allows expansion of the collaborations and services to include new
neighboring institutes. The instrumentation provides extended and efficient
service for the regional research and teaching community to collectively enhance
their scientific programs via access to and utilization of a core. The BXC
Center performs numerous services and external collaborations with many
institutions across the Nation, and is active in enhancing regional teaching and
training capabilities at the graduate, undergraduate, and high school level
through laboratory experiments and classroom instruction. The high throughput
devices increases the Center's role in this region to produce world-class
scientists of the next generation derived from diverse economic, ethnic and
geographic backgrounds. Results from the studies enabled by the new equipment
are disseminated by student and faculty presentations at regional and national
meetings, and through publication in peer-reviewed journals.