* 0959177
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of UV-Vis-NIR, FT-IR, and Fluorescence Spectrometric Instrumentation
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Alison Williams, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 04/30/2013
* USD 166,668.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Marisa Buzzeo, John S. Magyar, Dina C.
Merrer, Christian M. Rojas and Alison P. Williams of Barnard College will
acquire a high-resolution ultraviolet-visible-near-infrared (UV-Vis-NIR)
spectrometer, a high-resolution Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrometer,
and a fluorescence spectrometer. These instruments will be used by all research-
active members of the Chemistry Department and their research students in
biological physical, environmental bioinorganic, synthetic organic, and physical
organic chemistry. With the aid of these three spectroscopic tools,
undergraduates will be able to conduct research in the following areas:
electrochemical biosensing and drug-membrane interactions; mechanisms of DNA
damage by the tissue preservative, formalin; metal-binding thermodynamics,
coordination chemistry, and conformational dynamics of metalloregulatory
proteins in marine microorganisms; formation of metal-complexed acyl nitrenes
from azidoformates; and, generation and reactivity of halocarbenes with strained
cyclic organic substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectroscopy is an analytical
technique that uses light (electromagnetic radiation) of various wavelengths to
probe the structure and composition of matter. The radiation may be absorbed
differentially producing an absorption spectrum or absorbed and later emitted
producing an emission or fluorescence spectrum. The variation of the absorption
or emission as the wavelength is changed provides a spectrum characteristic of
the material, sometimes called a fingerprint. These spectrometers will be used
by undergraduates in research and laboratory courses providing training in this
basic technique essential to quantitative and qualitative analysis in chemistry
and biological experiments.