* 0959341
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a High-Power Femtosecond Ti:Sapphire Laser for Ultrafast Terahertz Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* James Heyman, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 03/31/2012
* USD 290,000.00

0959341&lt;br/&gt;Heyman&lt;br/&gt;Macalester
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI-R2: Acquisition of a High-Power Femtosecond
Ti:Sapphire Laser Oscillator for Time-Resolved Terahertz
Spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;It is increasingly important to understand carrier transport
phenomena in electronic materials on picosecond and femtosecond time-scales. We
propose to acquire a high-power femtosecond Ti:Sapphire laser oscillator to
support characterization of electronic materials at Macalester College. Time-
resolved terahertz spectroscopy offers a sub-picosecond probe of conductivity
and charge carrier mobility in materials. This application requires a laser
producing highly stable, powerful femtosecond laser pulses, and the system
requested will provide an ideal balance of laser-power, repetition rate and
stability for this purpose. The system will initially be used to study carrier
transport in graphene and ultrathin graphite. Graphene, a novel carbon material
consisting of a single sheet of carbon atoms, shows exceptional promise as an
electronic material. The properties of few-layer graphite are tunable with
thickness. The new laser system will also be used to study other electronic
materials including semiconductors and semiconductor heterostructures. Our
research program will provide education and research training opportunities for
advanced undergraduate students in Photonics and experimental Condensed Matter
Physics. The PI's research lab has trained 35 advanced undergraduates during the
last 15 years. More than two thirds of these students have pursued graduate
degrees in Science, Math or Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;As the clock speeds of computers and
transistors are pushed ever higher, it becomes increasingly important to
understand how electric charge moves in the materials they are made from on
ultra short time scales. Time resolved terahertz spectroscopy can track the
motion of electric charge over times as short as 1/100th of a trillionth of a
second, a ten-thousandth of the interval between computer clock tics. We can map
out in time the processes which occur in transistors and photo-switches when
they are switched from "off" to "on" with a pulse of light. We propose to
acquire a high-power femtosecond Ti:Sapphire laser oscillator to support
characterization of novel electronic materials and research training at
Macalester College. The system we are requesting will provide an ideal balance
of laser-power, repetition rate and stability for time-resolved terahertz
spectroscopy. This system will initially be used to study graphene, a novel
material consisting of single sheets of carbon atoms which shows exceptional
promise as a material for ultra high-speed, nanometer-scale transistors. Our
research program will provide education and research training opportunities for
advanced undergraduate students in Photonics and experimental Condensed Matter
Physics. The PI's research lab has trained 35 advanced undergraduates during the
last 15 years. More than two thirds of these students have pursued graduate
degrees in Science, Math or Engineering.