* 0959787
* MRI-R2 : Acquisition for In Vacuo Characterization and Pb-VI MBE System Upgrades
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2012
* James Barnes, Oklahoma State University Multispectral Laboratories
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 03/31/2012
* USD 234,100.00

0959787&lt;br/&gt;Barnes&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma State U. Multispectral
Laboratories&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lead based IV-VI semiconductor alloys are unique
as a multifunctional material due to its unique and tunable optical, electronic,
magnetic and thermoelectric properties. Pb-VI material development has been
overshadowed by II-VI (HgCdTe) and III-V (InSb) for infrared (IR)
sensors/detectors/imagers since the late 1970s. With the current use of two
dimensional imaging focal plane arrays the IV-VI semiconductors are again the
optimal choice for IR devices. They are tolerant of structural and point defects
that typically limit yields of II-VI and III-V semiconductor materials. Also,
there is currently considerable drive to develop the Pb-VI materials for high
efficiency thermoelectric energy harvesting applications. Despite these major
technical drivers in sensors and energy harvesting, research in advancing the
understanding and quality of the Pb-VI material system is minimal at best. In
this program we are pursuing the fundamental development of the materials by a
cooperative effort between the University Multispectral Laboratory, Oklahoma
State University and Amethyst Research Inc. Integration of in vacuo
characterization equipment, including RHEED, RGA, XPS and AES, allows for
immediate feedback to growth processes and semiconductor properties unhindered
by the formation of oxides and contaminants that occurs when these surfaces are
removed from vacuum. Basic research enabled by this acquisition includes
understanding the band alignment between ternary Pb-VI alloys (to be immediately
fed into device modeling efforts), understanding growth modes for Pb-VIs on II-
VI/Si composite substrates and feedback during growth of semiconductor
heterostructures for defect engineering/nanostructuring. These projects will
lead to improved device design and subsequently enhanced energy harvesting and
sensor performance. This effort places an emphasis on incorporation of graduate
and undergraduate student research experiences, which in collaboration with
small business also opens the door to cross-disciplinary cooperation in the
academic environment as physicists, material scientists and electrical engineers
understand, grow and design advanced device structures in the selected material
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enhance the understanding of basic material
properties it is important to investigate the system in a pristine environment.
By acquiring a number of specialized analysis tools designed to work in such an
environment, basic research of Pb-salt based materials will be performed as part
of a collaborative effort between the University Multispectral Laboratory,
Oklahoma State University and Amethyst Research Inc. Investigation of Pb-salt
based semiconductors addresses areas of societal concern in the security,
health, energy and environmental sectors. These materials are far more tolerant
of material issues that limit yields in other semiconductor systems. The
research that will be performed provides the enabling technology to manufacture
low-cost, high performance infrared imaging arrays, allowing advanced sensing to
penetrate previously untapped markets such as non-military surveillance,
infrared radiography for tumor and other medical imaging, and environmental
monitoring. This material system is also a prime candidate for solid-state
thermoelectric power devices that have the potential for significant economic
and improved environmental impact to society by allowing harvesting of waste
heat through direct conversion to electricity. The project will involve the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in physics, electrical
engineering and materials science in a vital technology, and also simultaneously
involve and expose these students to high technology industry.