* 0959879
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Research Training at UNC
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Kimberly Pacheco, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 09/30/2013
* USD 371,800.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the Departments of Chemistry, Earth
Sciences, Biology, Physics and Anthropology at the University of Northern
Colorado will acquire a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) equipped with energy
dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) to support research activities in these
Departments. This instrumentation will enable significant advances in projects
focused on materials science, geology, biology, anthropology and the
environment. Examples of projects include: 1) the investigation of how the
mineral zircon can provide critical information regarding the formation of
mountain belts, 2) the determination of elemental composition in intermetallic
materials, 3) the investigation of monolayer formation and stability on
surfaces, with respect to studying specific receptor-analyte interactions, 4)
the elucidation of the uptake and distribution of selenium in several
filamentous fungi, 5) the study of the tool cut and wear marks on ancient stone
and bone tools to help in determining their use and function, and 6) the study
of plant cell structure as a function of temperature stress. In addition, the
SEM will feature in a number of outreach and education activities of the
University, including the education of pre-service K-12 teachers, and ongoing
collaborations with Laramie County Community College and the Greeley/Weld County
Forensic Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scanning electron microscopy is a
widely used technique for providing an image of a sample surface. The image is
obtained from scanning the surface with a beam of electrons. Energy dispersive
spectroscopy is combined with a SEM to provide elemental analysis i.e. chemical
characterization of the sample. The SEM/EDS acquisition will be fully integrated
into faculty members' research programs, and will be used by research students
from a wide variety of science disciplines. The wide-ranging education and
outreach activities carried out by the University of Northern Colorado will
expose a large number of members of the public to the utility of SEM imaging in
helping to answer important questions in science.&lt;br/&gt;