* 0959254
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of High-throughput Crystallization Instrumentation to Enhance the Macromolecular X-ray Crystallography Facility of the University of Puerto Rico
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Zarixia Zavala-Ruiz, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2012
* USD 516,658.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Major Research Instrumentation-Recovery and Reinvestment (MRI-R2) award
funds the acquisition of high-throughput crystallization instrumentation to
enhance the Macromolecular X-ray Crystallography Facility (MXCF) of the
University of Puerto Rico (UPR). The long-term goal of this facility is to bring
a productive structural biology research component to the University of Puerto
Rico, which will impact a wide range of research efforts. Structural biology
researchers at the facility are investigating a wide scope of projects,
including non-genetic mechanisms of protein sequence variability, enzyme
function, and related topics. The facility plays a central role in graduate
education, training workshops in x-ray crystallography and structural biology,
and training of faculty, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and
undergraduates. This instrumentation promotes collaboration of investigators
from four research centers in San Juan, Puerto Rico, and prestigious research
institutes in the US with the common theme of solving important problems through
structure determination using x-ray crystallography. The faculty involved in
this project are actively engaged in training efforts with a large population of
underrepresented minority students at the University of Puerto Rico. The MXCF
will continue to promote the expansion of high-quality, collaborative structural
biology research among the University of Puerto Rico scientific community,
strengthening multidisciplinary collaborations among investigators within UPR-
RÃ­o Piedras and other institutions inside and outside Puerto Rico.
Undergraduates, graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty will be
trained in modern methods of macromolecular crystallization and structure
determination via a new course and a workshop series that will include hands-on
experience with the newly acquired instrumentation. Results from these studies
will be disseminated by student and faculty presentations at regional and
national meetings, and through publication in peer-reviewed journals.