* 0959349
* MRI-R2: Development  of a Low-Frequency Microwave Polarimeter for Large Scale Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Charles Bennett, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 02/28/2015
* USD 5,044,023.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout history and all cultures
mankind has wondered about the beginnings of our universe. Today's scientific
understanding of those beginnings still leaves many unanswered questions: Why is
the geometry of the universe so flat? Why is the universe so homogeneous?
Theoretical cosmologists have posed answers to these questions, but the theories
are extremely difficult to verify. Inflation in the very early universe is now
the widely accepted theoretical explanation, but empirical measurements of the
subtle predictions of inflation theory are elusive. Dr. Charles Bennett of The
Johns Hopkins University is building a sophisticated instrument to make a
measurement of the very faint imprint on the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB)
that inflation theory predicts would have been made by gravitational waves. The
key is to measure the anisotropy of the so-called "B mode polarization" in the
CMB. This is a search for a veritable needle in a haystack and great care is
required to detect and isolate the very weak distant signature from the very
strong unrelated foreground signals on the sky. Dr. Bennett has designed an
instrument that he suggests stands the best chance for making this measurement
by targeting the scales where the signature is strongest relative to the
foreground signals. Development of this instrument is funded by the National
Science Foundation's Major Research Instrumentation program through the Division
of Astronomical Sciences.