* 0959354
* MRI-R2:   ACQUISITION OF A LASER SCANNING CONFOCAL MICROSCOPE FOR RESEARCH AND TRAINING IN BIOLOGY AT PROVIDENCE COLLEGE
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Charles Toth, Providence College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 11/30/2012
* USD 266,261.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from the MRI-R2 program has
allowed the purchase of a confocal microscope at Providence College. A critical
number of experimental questions actively under investigation by Providence
College faculty currently require high resolution imaging of fluorescently
labeled cells and proteins. Programmed cell death (PCD) in both its forms,
apoptosis (PCD I) and autophagy (PCD II), serves fundamental functions during
plant and animal development. Dr. Austriaco's lab will use the confocal to
localize PCD proteins in the yeast cell and to visualize their dynamics during
the induction and progression of yeast cell death. Dr. Maia Bailey will
investigate cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS), a process that converts
ancestrally hermaphroditic plants to females, to explore the links between
mitochondrial gene function and evolution. Dr. Bailey's lab will use the
confocal to assess the membrane potential of mitochondria in the tapetal tissues
of male sterile and male fertile Silene vulgaris and male fertile S. latifolia
plants. Dr. Costello's lab will use the confocal to characterize the
epitheliomuscular fiber packing and location across a phylogenetically diverse
array of medusae. Recently, Dr. DeGiorgis has raised species-specific antibodies
against five kinesins, three dynein light chains, and four myosins of the Woods
Hole squid, Loligo pealei. His lab plans to use the confocal to optically
section through antibody stained retina tissue to determine the distribution of
these motors within the squid photoreceptor. Dr. Toth's lab will use the
confocal and DNA FISH to determine whether NF-KB family members occupy RRBE
sites in c-myb in murine erythroleukemia cells during differentiation. Dr. Wan's
lab will use the confocal to monitor the intracellular translocation of the
signaling molecules in both Gi1/3 wild type and knockout MEF cells in response
to UV and IFR radiation. In addition to intellectual impacts in biology and
neuroscience, a confocal microscope at Providence College will also have broader
impacts by significantly enhancing the training of future scientists. Providence
College is a selective liberal arts college where our science faculty
collaborate with undergraduate students in their research programs. With faculty
mentorship, undergraduate research students will use the confocal to conduct
original research projects. Other students majoring in the sciences will also
acquire contemporary microscopy and imaging skills in advanced undergraduate
courses that already incorporate microscopy in their teaching laboratories. In
sum, the confocal microscope will the continued training of students for careers
in the life sciences. Results from the research enabled by this acquisition will
be published in peer-reviewed journals, and presented by students and faculty at
regional and national conferences.