* 0959985
* MRI-R2: Development of an Instrument for Information Science and  Computing  in Neuroscience
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Naphtali Rishe, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2015
* USD 2,939,515.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009(Public Law 111-5)." Proposal #: 09-59985 PI(s): Adjouadi, Malek; Barreto,
Armando B.; Gaillard,William; Jayakar,Prasanna; Rishe, Naphtali D. Institution:
Florida International University Title: MRI-R2/Dev: Instrument for Information
Science and Computing in Neuroscience This project, developing an instrument for
information processing and computing that enables cohesive study of the brain,
involves the new concept of a 5-D brain processing platform while addressing the
challenge of finding the best way to put together five dimensions to provide a
complete picture of brain dynamics. This unified approach brings together fields
of Computer Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, and
Bioengineering to create an instrument for precisely measuring and visualizing
significant information and results across the five dimensions, three from
spatial data, time, and an imaging modality that serves as the fifth dimension.
Accomplishing this mission involves advanced designs, hardware-software
integration mechanisms, and novel interfaces that bring competing, and sometimes
diverging, technologies into a unified brain research platform. Combining a
Multi-site Data Repository, Modality Integration and Computational,
Visualization, and Operation Support Units, this new instrument is expected to
bring: - New insights into brain structure, functional correlations and
dynamics, both in its normal state and under specific pathological conditions, -
Far improved mapping of patterns of brain activity, - Integration of multimodal
technologies in order to augment their capabilities with new insights while
consolidating high spatial resolution with high temporal resolution, - Database
design and management augmented with mechanisms for fast user interaction and
visualization to meet the challenge of managing complex spatio-temporal
datasets, posing complex queries, and establishing effective methods for data
representation and visualization, and - Resolution of those paradigms that
confront heavy computational requirements and compatibility problems that arise
from the use of different recording modalities and diverse software platforms.
The project aims to collectively overcome the primary barriers in identifying
the different factors that influence the functional organization of the brain
and its underlying pathology. As an example, it delves in the epileptic seizure
that can be mapped over time as it moves along specific fiber tracts that may
enable better identification of specific areas of treatment and consequently
protect functionally important parts of the brain during surgery that may lead
to better and safer outcomes. Broader Impacts: Fostering an environment that
supports cross disciplinary initiatives, joint collaboration and programs, the
instrument establishes a research platform that enables academic institutions
and hospitals to investigate multi-site collaborative studies in accordance to
systematically administered standardize protocols to a database of common
assessments and measures. The project extends the breadth and depth of
multidisciplinary efforts including new paradigms and findings. Moreover, the
project advances the education, research, and training of many students in a
minority serving university.