* 0959168
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) for a Multidisciplinary Core Imaging Facility
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* David Howard, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2013
* USD 524,145.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, the Departments of Chemistry, Biology,
Microbiology, and Physics at the University of Wisconsin - La Crosse will
acquire a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and Atomic Force Microscope (AFM)
to support research activities in these Departments. This instrumentation will
significantly expand the capabilities of the University's Core Imaging Facility.
Examples of specific projects that will use the requested instrumentation
include: 1) the investigation of the structure and stability of DNA films on
gold surfaces, 2) the investigation of organic/inorganic semiconductor
interfaces, 3) the investigation of the structural and functional properties of
full-length hemolysin A, 4) the use of semiconductor quantum dots to detect
single photons, 5) the quantifying of particulate food resources in the upper
Mississippi River as a means of evaluating the impacts of invasive species , 6)
the analysis of the phenotype of defective cell cycle genes in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae meiosis, as well as the research projects of seven additional faculty
in these Departments. The instrumentation will be available to a large number of
undergraduate students -- both students enrolled in laboratory courses as well
as undergraduate researchers. This group includes a significant number of
students from underrepresented groups. In addition, the SEM and AFM will feature
prominently in a number of extramural collaborations between research groups on
campus and external partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scanning electron microscopy
and atomic force microscopy are widely used techniques for providing an image of
a sample surface. The image is obtained by scanning an electron beam (SEM) or an
atomically-sharp tip (AFM) over the surface under study. The resolution
obtainable with both SEM and AFM microscopies (ca. nanometer or less) is
significantly better than that achievable with optical microscopes. The
instruments acquired will be housed in the University's Core Imaging Facility,
and will be used by researchers from a wide variety of science disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;