* 0959823
* MRI-R2: Development of High-Resolution Single Fluorescent Particle Tracker and Nanomanipulator
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Nils Walter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,163,026.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation-
Recovery and Reinvestment (MRI-R2) award funds the development of two versatile,
modular fluorescence microscopy platforms for tracking and mechanically probing
single molecules/particles at the University of Michigan (UM), and the
installation of a third, user-friendly microscope system for user training and
project development. The development and application of two open-access single
molecule tracking and probing microscopes transforms the limited capability for
high-content screening of biological samples. Benchmarks are set that make both
instruments operational within two years and lay out plans for testing, further
optimization and expansion over an additional two years, after which recharges
will maintain them. The instruments are being utilized for research and
education by the University of Michigan community and beyond, engaging physical
and biological scientists as well as an engineer. This development activity
helps establish a unique, nation-wide, educational Center of Single Molecule
Analysis (CoSiMA) in a highly cross-disciplinary, emerging field of
transformative power in the biosciences. CoSiMA is engaging in vigorous outreach
efforts to experimentalists, theorists, undergraduates, and high school students
with large, local, underrepresented groups, as well as the public at large, in
close collaboration with UM's existing IDEA Institute. These efforts are
facilitated by the creation of a central laboratory facility with access to
multiple single molecule microscopes under guidance of a Steering Committee and
a senior staff scientist, as well as by the broad inspirational appeal of the
emerging single molecule biosciences. Results from the studies enabled by the
new equipment are disseminated by student and faculty presentations at regional
and national meetings, and through publication in peer-reviewed journals.