* 0959856
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Shared Cluster and Database Computing Facilities at Wesleyan University
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Michael Weir, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2013
* USD 298,736.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-59856&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Starr,
Francis W.; Beveridge, David, L.; Weir, Michael, P.&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Wesleyan University &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI-R2/Acq: Shared Cluster and Database
Computing Facilities at Wesleyan University&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a shared, state-of-the-art, mid-
sized super-computing cluster and database server, supports intensive research
computing and corresponding initiatives at the institution. The current central
facilities are no longer able to meet the intensive research computing and
corresponding initiatives in education, as evidenced by a five-fold increase in
the number of pending jobs over a period of two years. The requested cluster
roughly doubles the size of the central super-computing facility, as well as
adds new support for informatics-based research that relies heavily on
relational database mining.&lt;br/&gt;Research programs in astrophysics,
biomaterials, liquid state chemical physics, nanotechnology, quantum chemistry,
molecular biophysics, neuroinformatics, and structural bioinformatics, all
require high-end computing resources and have become increasingly dependent on
high-performance computing facilities. All these areas offer courses that
involve hands-on computation. Currently, a large number of faculty, staff and
students are active research users, and roughly 2/3 of those are students;
additionally, 40-50 students per year make use of facilities for course related
computational activities.&lt;br/&gt;Based on consultations with the current
primary users of the system and the systems administrator, the new proposed
cluster consists of 40-50 CPU nodes, each with two Intel Xeon quad core
processors, and containing 8-16 GB of storage. An infiniband interconnect will
connect the processors to facilitate parallel applications. Data storage is
provided for the user calculations via a RAID array of 30-40 TB. The dedicated
database server has dual 4 or 6-core processors, a large memory footprint, and
high performance local disks to store the database.&lt;br/&gt;The system is
housed in the renovated facility on the Information Technology Services (ITS)
floor of the Wesleyan Science Tower, maintained by a designated ITS systems
manager and made available for research and instructional needs over the current
WESNET network. A faculty Computer Advisory Committee provides academic
oversight, manages allocation requests, and coordinates with ITS. The
institution continues to support the administration of the new
system.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The instrument services both the
faculty research and student education. It enables new science to be produced in
the course of diverse research projects and impacts the ongoing instruction in
the University, serving as a learning tool to develop student scientific
computing proficiency both through existing courses and participating in
faculty-led research. To further extend the educational and training goals, a
new Scientific Computing and Informatics Center (SCIC) was developed with
funding support from the University, aimed at facilitating the effective use of
the new high-performance computing facility by all faculty and students, and
supporting the educational initiatives of courses utilizing computational
resources. The SCIC also operates a summer program supporting undergraduate
research and developing teaching modules (in collaboration with relevant
faculty) that directly impacts many courses across the curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;The cluster and database facility also serve as a focal point and
resource for undergraduate students in computationally intensive courses of
study, including a recently approved interdisciplinary 'Certificate Program in
Informatics and Modeling'. This interdisciplinary program functions effectively
as a minor field of study alongside major fields. The program has two elements,
a computational and an informatics foci.