* 0959625
* MRI-R2: Portable X-Ray Fluorescence, Digital IR Photography, and Stereomicroscopy Applied to University Collections of Art and History at Washington and Lee University
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Erich Uffelman, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 119,678.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major
Research and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Erich S. Uffelman and colleagues
Alison Bell, Ronald Fuchs, Peter Grover and Patricia Hobbs of Washington &amp;
Lee (W&amp;L) University will acquire a portable X-ray fluorescence
spectrometer, a digital infrared camera, and a boom-mounted research-quality
stereomicroscope. These instruments will be employed in the nondestructive
technical analysis of W&amp;L's extensive holdings of art and historical objects
by students and faculty in the Departments of Chemistry, Anthropology, and
Museum Studies. Research projects to be undertaken include analysis of several
historically important paintings of George Washington, an assessment of the
technique of the minor turn-of-the-century master Louise Herreshoff, studies of
W&amp;L's ceramics and porcelain, and analysis of objects discovered at Thomas
Jefferson's home of Monticello. These projects, which will apply techniques of
analytical, physical and inorganic chemistry to problems in art history,
archaeology and anthropology will engage students and faculty in research at the
interface of science and the humanities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray fluorescence
spectroscopy is used for nondestructive elemental analysis of elements heavier
than Mg in a variety of objects including paintings and ceramics. An infrared
camera forms an image using infrared radiation. Since many pigments are semi-
transparent to infrared light, the camera can reveal objects under layers of
paint. A stereomicroscope produces a three-dimensional image and will be used to
facilitate taking microsamples (when ethically appropriate) for other methods of
analysis. The instrumentation made available by this award will provide a broad
range of students critical hands-on experience in several courses and expose the
public to applications of chemistry in art history investigations.