* 0959226
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma-Time of Flight-Mass Spectrometer (ICP-TOF-MS) for Multidisciplinary Research and Training at Towson University
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Joel Snodgrass, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 257,546.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major
Research and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Steven Lev and colleagues Ellen
Hondrogiannis, Ryan Casey and Joel Snodgrass of Towson University will acquire
an inductively coupled plasma-time of flight-mass spectrometer (ICP-TOF-MS),
which will expand the research capabilities of the Urban Environmental
Biogeochemistry Laboratory (UEBL). The new instrument will be coupled with an
existing Laser Ablation (LA) system in the UEBL. Projects to be undertaken with
this instrumentation include evaluation of the life history of brown bullhead
catfish, investigation of the uptake of roadway zinc by earthworms,
determination of the metal signatures of precursors to certain neurotoxins, and
identification of the geographic origins of black pepper
spices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer is
a type of mass spectrometer that uses a high-energy plasma to generate ions. The
masses of the ions produced are measured by the mass spectrometer providing an
elemental analysis of the sample. The use of a laser pulse to ablate the sample
combined with the high detection speed of TOF enables a complete trace metal
analysis with a single laser pulse. The instrumentation provided by this award
will allow undergraduate students significant research experiences and provide
them with high-quality instruction on the use of modern instrumentation.