* 0959822
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Shared Digital Video Data Analysis Infrastructure
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Sharon Dotger, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 06/30/2013
* USD 473,434.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
award funds the acquisition of high quality video production and post-production
equipment to support research at Syracuse University. Several research projects
at Syracuse University currently collect and analyze large quantities of digital
video (DV) data to investigate diverse questions that consider both the obvious
and the subtle interactions people have with each other and with technology.
Digital video data analysis, which requires high quality video production and
post-production equipment and specialized analytical software, allows for
repeated and detailed examination of acquired footage and increased analytic
accuracy. Findings from DV data analysis can play an important role in fostering
the integration of research and education in research-intensive learning
environments and can play an important role in reconfiguring research practices
that challenge the distinction between practitioners and researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Syracuse University currently lacks comprehensive
infrastructure for supporting research endeavors that generate and analyze DV
data. Because of the lack of robust DV infrastructure, researchers at the
University have not been able to engage in research on questions that are best
addressed by methodologies that generate DV data. The requested equipment and
software will have a direct and immediate impact on faculty in three disciplines
involved in research in Science Education, Teacher Education, Instructional
Technology, and Linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
research supported by this equipment is in the areas of science teaching and
situated cognition that refine and enhance science pedagogy, which will be
integrated into K-12 and higher educational practices and will include pre-
service and in-service teachers. Undergraduate and graduate researchers will
work on all of the projects enabled by this grant.