* 0959622
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Direct Write Electron Beam Lithography System for Exploring Mesoscale Science, Materials, and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2012
* Paul Crowell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2012
* USD 1,389,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective: The ability to control and
manipulate matter at a few tens of atoms allows researchers to investigate a
regime between the atomic-scale where quantum mechanics dominate and the bulk-
scale. The availability of this capability is critical to the success of both
academic and industrial researchers who are making devices or studying physical
effects at these scales. This project addresses this need through the
acquisition of a high resolution electron-beam lithography system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The University of Minnesota is
conducting leading edge research in magnetics, mesoscale superconductivity,
nanoelectronics, nano electromechanical systems, quantum dot devices, nano scale
imaging, surface enhanced Raman, and other areas. All of this work is critically
dependent on the ability to write extremely fine lines. This proposal seeks
funding for the acquisition of a 100 keV field-emission electron-beam
lithography system for the Minnesota Nano Fabrication Center (NFC). NFC supports
a large and growing group of users with innovative projects from across the
nation and has proven its ability to operate and maintain complex systems for
its user base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Minnesota is a key node in
NSF?s National Nano Infrastructure Network with more than 600 users last year.
Enhancing graduate education of these researchers will be a major impact. NFC is
also a central hub for Nano-Link, a regional center for nanotechnology AAS
education. The proposed tool will be used as part of the Nano-Link effort to
demonstrate cutting edge pattern definition and quantum effects that can be
readily understood by technical education professionals.