* 0959511
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Nanotom-Computed Tomography System for Revolutionizing Metallic Biomaterials Research, Education and Training
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,11/30/2011
* Devdas Pai, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 11/30/2011
* USD 682,890.00

0959511&lt;br/&gt;Sankar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computed tomography (CT) is the 3D-reconstruction
of projections of an object viewed from different directions. CT non-
destructively generates a fully 3D model of samples that allows many
possibilities for analysis: the non-destructive visualization of slices (a very
powerful aspect), arbitrary sectional views, pseudo-color representations and
pore analysis. Technological advances have led to progressive improvements in CT
resolution and accuracy. In the past, synchrotron radiation-based microCT
(SRìCT) has been the high resolution technique of choice. Nanotomography
(nanoCT), a recently developed technique, exploits X-ray sources with sub-ìm
focal spot size to yield spatial resolutions down to 200-300 nm. NanoCT enables
a large range of applications ranging from low-absorbing biological samples to
high-absorbing metal objects such as metallic implant materials. The proposed
system provides room for future expansion to design and incorporate appropriate
accessories for high-resolution in situ visualization of material behavior in in
vivo environmental conditions, as dictated by research findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of NCAT's NSF ERC-RMB is to revolutionize
metallic biomaterials and underlying sciences and technologies, leading to
engineered systems that will interface with the human body to prolong and
improve quality of life, coupled with the development of a vibrant, diverse
workforce well-prepared for the multidisciplinary and global challenges and
opportunities of the new millennium. The mission is to deliver on the potential
of bio/nanoengineering to dramatically improve treatments for orthopedic,
craniofacial and cardiovascular ailments. The goal is to develop new implant
materials and tunable biodegradable metals that can grow and adapt to the human
body and eventually dissolve when no longer needed.