* 0959935
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Precision Wafer Aligner / Bonder for 3-D Integrated Nano-Opto-Electromechanical Systems (NOEMS).
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Robert Magnusson, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 04/30/2012
* USD 535,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
integration of optical, electrical and mechanical systems at nano- and micro-
meter scale, thus enabling novel biomedical, energy harvesting and structural
health monitoring devices and systems, otherwise not possible. The approach is
to use a wafer aligner and bonder system for precision alignment and bonding of
a diverse set of substrates including semiconductor wafers, glass substrates,
metals and polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in
combining top-down and bottom-up fabrication techniques to pioneer new
interfaces between semiconductor-based devices and biomolecules that can be
tailored for specific applications, both as sensors and actuators / controllers
of biological phenomena. The interrogation of bio-molecules and understanding of
real cellular interactions require 3-D biocompatible structures, chambers and
interfaces. Ranging in length scales from a few nanometers to many microns,
inter and intra-cellular mechano-transduction signals play important roles in
many aspects of cellular functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Precision
Wafer Aligner / Bonder will be part of NanoFab at UT Arlington, which is an
interdisciplinary resource open to scientists within and outside of the
University. The Dallas-Forth Worth metropolitan region is home to more than 400
high tech institutions. As a user facility, the NanoFab will make the wafer
aligner / bonder available 24/7 to these researchers and provide them training
for usage. An annual workshop as well as an online discussion forum dedicated to
3-D integration will be established.