* 0959761
* MRI-R2:  Development of Owens Valley Solar Array to a Community Facility
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Anthony C. Readhead, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 09/30/2013
* USD 5,121,584.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pricipal Investigator's (PI's)
team will develop new and improved instrumentation and infrastructure for the
existing Owens Valley Solar Array (OVSA), and thereby create a major university-
based facility serving a broad scientific community. The team will upgrade OVSA
from its current complement of 7 antennas to a total of 15, with the addition of
8 new antennas. They will also replace existing OVSA control systems, wiring,
and signal processing systems with modern, more capable, and more reliable
electronics using new technologies. The project will result in a world-class
facility for scientific research at microwave radio frequencies, focused on
space weather physics and solar astronomy. Solar radio emission is very
sensitive to the physics of space weather processes. The enhanced OVSA facility
will provide key diagnostic observations of the magnetic and thermal structure
of the solar atmosphere, the release of magnetic energy in the corona, and the
space weather consequences of solar activity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This effort
will provide the scientific community with new and powerful tools for radio
astronomy in general, as well as a unique combination of spatial, spectral, and
temporal resolution to exploit radio diagnostics of the Sun beyond what has
previously been possible. The improved facility will support the university
community by providing open data access and software tools for radio data
analysis, and by exploiting data sets and analysis techniques used in on-going
solar research in non-radio wavelength bands. The PI's team will invoke a rich
heritage of radar design work to accomplish a wide range of science objectives
that has been thoroughly vetted by the National Research Council of the National
Academy of Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide jobs to US
small industry and to the local economy, and will offer technical training and
scientific research experience for students, as well as young scientists and
engineers. This development effort will provide trainees with much-needed
instrumental expertise in the fields of broadband radio frequency engineering,
high-speed digital electronics and signal processing, and high performance
computing. The project includes well-integrated education and training plans for
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as for post-doctoral researchers
and entry-level engineers. The instrumentation and software developed by this
project will provide new tools for classroom use, and will enlarge the base of
researchers who will be able to apply interferometric imaging techniques and
radio emission physics to studying key problems in solar physics, space weather
physics, and astrophysics. The PI expects that new discoveries enabled by the
new OVSA facility will help us improve the reliability of our technological
systems on Earth and in space.