* 0959322
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* J. Thomas Ippoliti, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 04/30/2013
* USD 246,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor
J. Thomas Ippoliti and colleagues Bartholomew Dahl, Thomas C. Marsh and William
H. Ojala from the University of St. Thomas will acquire a 400 MHz nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer with an autosampler unit. The instrument
will be used to support research activities such as: 1) design and synthesis of
oxazolidinone antimicrobial agents, photochromic naphthopyrans and biodegradable
polylactides capable of adhering to metal stents, 2) exploration of use of a
tethering lactone unit in the design and synthesis of biaryl molecular switches,
3) examination of nucleic acid nanoscaffolds containing a single guanine-rich
oligonucleotide sequence motif, and 4) co-crystallization of isostructural pairs
of "bridge-flipped" benzylideneanilines and phenylhydrazones.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials
chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching
as well as research.