* 0959470
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an Aberration-Corrected Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research and Education at UIC
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Luke Hanley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/29/2012
* USD 1,999,999.00

0959470&lt;br/&gt;Klie&lt;br/&gt;U. of Illinois at
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is an essential
tool in the study of atomic-scale structure-property relationships of functional
nano-materials. With the development of aberration correctors, the spatial
resolution of TEMs operated at 200kV has now reached 70 pm. While most
aberration-corrected TEMs are optimized to achieve the highest spatial
resolution, their analytical capabilities are limited by a moderate energy-
resolution (~0.8 eV at 200 kV) and the inability to perform in-situ experiments.
This project will acquire a next-generation aberration-corrected TEM, with
unprecedented spatial and energy resolution for multidisciplinary research and
education at UIC. The JEOL ARM 200CF incorporates many recent innovations
including a next-generation spherical-aberration probe-corrector (70 nm spatial
resolution), a high-brightness cold-field emission electron source (0.3 eV
energy-resolution), variable acceleration energy (between 80-200 kV), as well as
improved mechanical, thermal and magnetic shielding. The instrument is unique in
its abilities to provide ultra-high resolution for imaging and spectroscopy in
the temperature range between 80-1000 K using in-situ heating/cooling holders.
It provides the faculty involved in this project the unique abilities to study a
broad range of interdisciplinary problems, including correlated behavior in
complex oxides, thermal stability in metal/oxide interfaces, heat transfer
filled carbon nanotubes, as well as the interaction of airborne nanoparticles
with human cells. The instrument will be operated by UIC's Research Resources
Center, a center of excellence for teaching and training of advanced TEM. The
faculty at UIC will further use the instrument to develop strong collaborative
interactions with groups at surrounding academic institutions and industrial
laboratories to maximizing the outreach opportunities for training and research
of UIC's diverse student body. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano-materials are essential
to the advancement of virtually all technological devices. To study and improve
upon nano-materials we must examine them on an atomic level. Transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) is one of the fundamental means by which atomic
structures of such nano-material can be studied. Until recently, the spatial
resolution of every conventional TEM was inherently limited by the aberrations
of the optical imaging system. However, the development of aberration
correctors, the equivalent of a pair of reading glasses, which correct for some
of the microscope's aberrations (e.g. astigmatism), has allowed us to improve
the spatial resolution of atomic-scale images by more than a factor of three.
Such significant improvements in spatial resolution will enable us to study
atoms which have previously been beyond the range of our instrument
capabilities, and to see far greater detail of a material's structure. In
addition, atomic resolution can now also be achieved in the temperature range
between 80 K and 1000 K, which will allow the direct examination of dynamic
processes in nano-materials. This project will acquire an aberration-corrected
TEM, and upgrade this instrument with an electron source, which provides a
cleaner (i.e. monochromatic) electron beam to further improve its imaging and
analytical capabilities. This instrument allows the UIC faculty to study a wide
range of materials from new structures converting excess heat into clean energy,
to materials for more efficient data storage, and the effects of welding fumes
on human lung cells. The instrument will be housed in a centralized facility at
UIC, and provides access not only to researchers at UIC, but also to scientists
from all over the world. The installation of this instrument dramatically
improves the teaching and outreach capabilities of the involved faculty at UIC,
and establishes a regional center of excellence in a central Midwest location
providing unparalleled TEM instrumentation access to students and scientist from
four Universities, two National Laboratories and countless industrial research
labs in the Chicagoland area alone.