* 0959138
* EAGER: Privacy-preserving measurements of the Tor network to improve performance and anonymity
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* William Regli, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 08/31/2011
* USD 299,967.00

As the Tor network has grown since 2003 to almost 2000 volunteer relays, the
anonymity that it can provide has grown too. This project is measuring Tor's
network characteristics and usage, laying the foundation for evaluating its
anonymity and improving performance. The project is addressing three components
of this challenge. First, it invents new algorithms for collecting Tor network
load and usage data safely, including new metrics to ensure that collected data
doesn't harm privacy too much yet is still useful for research. Second, it
collects and make available aggregated data about the live Tor network over
time, and design and deploy new tools to manipulate and understand this data.
Third, it identifies which measurements are necessary to support the wider
performance and anonymity research questions, do the measurements, and feed the
results into the anonymity community's ongoing research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Activity 1: Directory and network
data. Analyze patterns in directory authority opinions to tune them for better
network anonymity and performance, and then track long-term characteristics like
churn rate so researchers can simulate design changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Activity 2: Performance data. Design and perform
measurements &lt;br/&gt;to better understand why the Tor network has high (and
highly variable) latency. Early investigations show that queuing inside Tor's
relays contributes to this latency. Discovering what exactly is wrong with Tor's
congestion control mechanisms will allow designers to learn whether proposed
&lt;br/&gt;improvements actually help. The project will also investigate other
theories of how to improve performance, such as: a) Tor's round-robin scheduling
approach should prioritize interactive traffic over bulk traffic; b) incentive
systems could encourage users to relay traffic; c) Tor's path selection
&lt;br/&gt;algorithms should load balance better over the relays; and d) clients
should handle variable latency and connection failures by dynamically adapting
to observed network quality.