* 0959311
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of Leica Laser Scanners, Surveying GPS SmartStation, and ISI InteliCamera (LaSurCam) Instrumentation
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Sue Moore, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 01/31/2013
* USD 310,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This equipment will be used to create
accurate and realistic three-dimensional computer models of natural features and
built structures. Modern, highly-accurate surveying instruments, and new
technology known as "fused imagery" will be employed. Fused imagery combines
rapidly acquired, laser-scanned, spatial point clouds (X-Y-Z data) with
photographic color information for each scanned point. Research will include the
creation of models of structures (buildings, bridges, highways, structural
failures, etc.); topographic and geologic features (outcrops, fractures,
surficial depressions, dunes and details of former shore lines, etc.);
geomorphologic changes due to natural or artificial processes (coastal cliff
erosion, landforms produced by active faulting, quarry walls and steps,
earthwork, etc.); archaeological excavations (Civil-War fortification sites,
prisoner-of-war sites, etc.); and studies in biogeography (identification of
forest-floor vegetation and moisture influences on bird
habitats).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diverse disciplines included in the work
reflect the breadth of impact and resulting benefits to society in multiple
fields. The work will advance building modeling techniques of architects,
engineers, and construction professionals. The scope includes evaluating the
rising sea level effect on the Georgia barrier islands while also enhancing
current understanding of groundwater movement and potential sources of
contamination. New information will be gathered on ground deformation associated
with the San Andreas Fault. Benefits to society include public-oriented
visually-enhanced interpretation of archeological sites, dissemination of visual
images online and via on-site interpretive centers. Students at all levels will
experience and interpret sites remotely. Significantly, the research will
attract and motivate many students to strengthen their education with on-going
undergraduate and graduate research experiences