* 0959020
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Thermal Manikin and Guarded Sweating Hotplate for Optimization of Functional Apparel Systems to Regulate Heat and Moisture
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Patrick Kinnicutt, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 12/31/2012
* USD 349,997.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project requests funds to acquire
a physiological monitoring and biofeedback system, a sweating thermal manikin
and a guarded sweating hotplate. This instrumentation enables the researchers to
empirically measure temperature and humidity flow from the human torso through
various fabrics, finishes and garment assemblies. From this empirical data,
computational models will be developed to model this flow as a function of body
location, allowing prototype apparel to be designed and tested on humans to
evaluate the human comfort level and the functional apparel's performance at
regulating temperature and moisture. The results of this research can be applied
towards the design of functional apparel for enhancing performance in sports,
military, protective wear, work wear while improving human
comfort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research results may show the importance of
human centered design on the development of functional apparel. Currently,
functional apparel is designed to manage temperature and moisture without
considering the differences in temperature and humidity in different locations
of the human torso, leading to increased material costs by using expensive
fabrics and/or finishes where they are not needed. One outcome from this
research may be the manufacture of functional apparel which perform their
desired functions (such as effectively managing heat and moisture of a
physically active individual) while increasing perceived comfort and reducing
the cost to purchase the apparel. This instrumentation and data will also be
used directly by students in computer science, mechanical engineering and
apparel design in a multidisciplinary team environment.