* 0959552
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of Equipment for Rare Earth Spectroscopic Studies of Sol-Gel Glass Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Daniel Boye, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2013
* USD 168,432.00

0959552&lt;br/&gt;Boye&lt;br/&gt;Davidson College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sol-gel
derived glass containing fluorescing rare earth (RE) ions are potentially useful
in applications such as lasers, optical sensors, and fiber optic and photonic
devices. However, the optical behavior of RE-doped sol-gel glasses is not yet
fully understood. The work proposed here will use optical spectroscopy to answer
fundamental questions about the ways that sol-gel glass structure influences RE
fluorescence yield. Two primary non-radiative decay mechanisms have been
identified: deactivation through vibrational excitation of neighboring hydroxyl
complexes and the silica matrix, and energy transfer among clustered RE ions on
pore surfaces. This project will explore new synthesis techniques, including the
use of drying control chemical agents in the starting solutions, to reduce
fluorescence quenching. RE ions will be used as spectroscopic probes of
structural parameters such as pore connectivity to aid in identifying the most
effective methods for minimizing the RE-hydroxyl interactions. In addition,
studies of energy transfer among RE ions will be used to explore how RE ion
distribution in the porous sol-gel matrix correlates with synthesis protocols.
These measurements will be crucial in optimizing the optical performance of
these materials by achieving a more uniform distribution of RE ions in the
glass. The goal is to obtain a deeper understanding of the fluorescence behavior
of the RE ions, leading to a new class of more efficient fluorescent materials
for the applications listed above. Our innovative research program in materials
science involves collaboration between faculty and students at three
undergraduate liberal arts colleges - Davidson, Hamilton, and Whitman Colleges.
The new equipment provided by this grant will expand each laboratory's unique
ability to perform time-based and cw spectroscopies. Undergraduate students will
be involved in every aspect of this cross-disciplinary project and will benefit
from increased opportunities to perform research with state-of-the-art equipment
at the different participating colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman
Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sol-gel
materials have interesting uses in a surprisingly broad range of disciplines -
from coatings on aircraft to hosts for biologically active enzymes. The sol-gel
glass process uses readily available starting materials and relatively low
temperatures to produce glasses with optical behavior comparable to glasses made
by the traditional melt process. Creating new optical materials that are
potentially useful in applications such as phosphor lighting, lasers, optical
sensors, and fiber optic and photonic devices is the focus of our efforts. Our
innovative research program in materials science involves collaboration between
faculty and students at three undergraduate liberal arts colleges - Davidson,
Hamilton, and Whitman Colleges. By leveraging the strengths of our individual
laboratories, we will continue to make significant progress in understanding the
ways that energy is absorbed, transferred and released by fluorescing Rare Earth
(RE) ions in the glass. Undergraduate students are involved at all stages of
this research process from grant writing to experimental design and
implementation and on to publication in refereed journals and presentations at
professional meetings. In fact, two of our recent students have received
national recognition for their research. The new equipment provided by this
grant will greatly expand each laboratory's unique ability to examine the time
evolution and energy distribution of light emitted by RE ions in these
materials. Building on the existing synergy of our collaboration, an increased
number of students will be provided with more varied opportunities to explore
cutting edge scientific ideas while working with state-of-the-art equipment. Our
scientific goals are to obtain a deeper understanding of the interaction among
RE ions, and between RE ions and their glass host, leading to a new class of
more efficient fluorescent materials available for optical applications.