* 0959097
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Data Analysis and Visualization Cyber-Infrastructure for Computational Science and Engineering Applications(DAVinCI)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Danny Sorensen, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 04/30/2013
* USD 2,928,889.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will acquire and operate a new
facility, Data Analysis and Visualization Cyber-Infrastructure for Computational
Science and Engineering Applications (DAVinCI), that will use hybrid a design
that integrates high-throughput serial and tightly-coupled parallel computing as
well as General-Purpose Computing on Graphics Processing Units (better known as
GPGPUs). DAVinCI is speci&amp;#64257;cally designed for large computations
requiring fast I/O on large datasets and will integrate storage and
visualization to support a wide array of data-intensive science and engineering
applications. In addition, we will establish a center for 3D stereo
visualization with active tracking for analysis of large simulations and
datasets in order to ful&amp;#64257;ll researchers? critical need to rapidly
view and analyze the results of large computations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DAVinCI will be used by researchers tackling a broad range
of science and engineering problems including earth, environmental science and
energy research, natural hazards and physical infrastructure research,
bioscience and bioengineering research, and physics, space physics and astronomy
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DAVinCI will also serve to interface high-
performance computing at Rice with national resources, such as TeraGrid. The
machine and visualization center will be available to the entire Rice community
and their local and national collaborators. It will therefore promote
quantitative research in the social sciences and other divisions of Rice and
beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DAVinCI will enhance the research training of
hundreds of undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral fellows in
science and engineering. It will directly impact the educational experience for
all students as high-performance computing and computational problem solving are
included by Rice faculty in courses at all levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DAVinCI
will be a primary research tool for some undergraduate research projects in
Rice?s Century Scholars program, and also a critical tool used by the many
undergraduates working on NSF funded research. Furthermore, a diverse group of
graduate students as well as many undergraduate students from the NSF sponsored
Rice Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program,
established to promote the advancement of under-represented minorities in the
STEM &amp;#64257;elds, will bene&amp;#64257;t from use of these new
computational resources in their training. A special summer program to
familiarize students with high- performance computing and to teach computational
problem solving skills will be organized. The availability of this powerful
facility to new faculty will further support the Rice NSF ADVANCE program?s
efforts to recruit top women faculty to Rice in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;