* 0959280
* MRI-R2:  Development and Deployment of Automated Continuous Wave Quantum Cascade Laser Instruments For On-Site Monitoring of the Four Isotopomers of Nitrous Oxide
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Ronald Prinn, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,035,845.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Nitrous oxide (N2O) is both a significant greenhouse gas (radiative forcing in
2009 is approximately 0.17 W/m2) and a large contributor to the catalytic
destruction of the stratospheric ozone layer. Its mole fractions in the
atmosphere continue to rise from a natural preindustrial value of about 270
parts per billion (ppb) to about 322 ppb today. However, there are major
uncertainties in the global cycle of this third most abundant long-lived
greenhouse gas. To address these uncertainties, the investigators propose the
development and deployment of two automated high frequency laser-based
instruments for analysis of the isotopologues and isotopomers of N2O. Isotopic
ratios will be monitored using tunable infrared laser differential absorption
spectroscopy (TILDAS) with continuous wave (CW) quantum cascade (QC) lasers.
This technology is well suited for long-term deployment at remote sites as the
instruments are fully automated and can also be accessed and controlled via the
Internet. The new instruments will monitor four isotopologues/isotopomers of
nitrous oxide. Continuous surface measurements of the mole fraction of N2O have
provided an important resource in analysis of the global budget through inverse
modeling studies, but the utilization of these mole fraction data has reached
the limit of information that can be extracted and leaves large uncertainty
remaining. The development of high-frequency isotopomer/isotopologue measurement
capability will greatly enhance current ability to differentiate between the
natural and anthropogenic contributions to its budget at the spatial and
temporal resolution needed for scientific understanding and policy verification.
The deployment at one of the AGAGE (Advanced Global Atmospheric Gases
Experiment) stations (that has been measuring trace gases including N2O on site
since 1978) will produce an unprecedented set of data including isotopomers with
identical molecular mass. Similarly, the in situ high-frequency measurements at
field sites of the isotopic signatures of the dominant nitrous oxide sources
could potentially yield new insights into source dynamics and isotopic
variability.

The project will facilitate the collaboration between Aerodyne Research, Inc.
(U.S. small business) and Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) for the
development of a new generation of isotope monitoring equipment. Graduate
students will actively participate in the development and be trained as future
atmospheric chemists with strong instrumental background. The MIT instrument
will be used for undergraduate level class projects as well as for undergraduate
and graduate thesis research projects, and will also be open to collaborative
projects with researchers outside MIT.