* 0959337
* RAPID: Biologically-mediated methanogenesis and acetogenesis in the hydrothermally altered sediments of the Guaymas Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Samantha Joye, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2010
* USD 59,845.00

Abstract

Intellectual Merit. Sediment microbial communities recycle organic matter to
inorganic building blocks throughout the sediment column. In deeply buried
sediments, however, thermal cracking of organic matter plays an additional, but
similar role. In the Guaymas basin, biologically-mediated and thermal
decomposition processes co-occur, creating a complex mixture of organic matter
breakdown products. In this project, the PI's will examine the processes of
biologically-mediated methanogenesis and acetogenesis in Guaymas Basin
sediments.

Specifically, the PIs will evaluate rates of methanogenesis and acetogenesis in
sediments collected from areas of active hydrothermal fluid venting and from
flanking areas dominated by convective cooling (e.g. reduced hydrothermal flow).
Additional experiments will quantify the impact of temperature and pressure on
these important biologically-mediated processes that transform carbon dioxide
and organic carbon into methane (methanogenesis) or carbon dioxide and hydrogen
into acetate (acetogenesis).

Broader Impact. This work will clarify the role of biological processes in
producing methane and acetate in the organic rich, hydrothermally influenced
sediments of the Guaymas Basin. While thermogenic processes are assumed to
account for the majority of methane and acetate production in this Basin, the
possibility of biological-mediation is underscored by the presence of methane
producing archaea in a variety of habitats.