* 0959297
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a High Performance Computing cluster with a fast interconnect to enable shared-use, college-wide computational investigations at Hamilton College
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Wei-Jen Chang, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 177,950.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Adam
Van Wynsberghe, Wei-Jen Chang, Natalia V. Connolly and Nathan Goodale of
Hamilton College will acquire and operate a high-performance Beowulf-style
computing cluster. This computing cluster will enable faculty in the departments
of chemistry, physics, biology and anthropology to employ cutting edge
computational technology in their research labs and classrooms. Research
projects to be investigated include studies of the eukaryote tree of life,
development of new tools for the study of dark energy, studies of infrared
galaxies, examination of ribonuclease catalysis and a survey of influenza
neuraminidase inhibitors.

A computing cluster is a group of linked computers that work in concert to
achieve vastly more computational power than the individual machines. These
clusters make it possible to solve complex problems in areas such as molecular
dynamics simulations and statistical analysis that require extensive
computational power. The computational infrastructure made available by this
award will be used in sophisticated research projects and in courses across a
variety of disciplines introducing numerous undergraduate students at Hamilton
College to scientific computing.