* 0959228
* MRI-R2: Development of a Correlation Force Spectrometer
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2013
* John Walz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 661,240.00

0959228&lt;br/&gt;Ducker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An improved understanding of the nanometer-scale
motion of fluids is central to the development of our understanding of complex
fluids and biomolecules. The PI proposes to develop an instrument that measures
the forces acting during the natural motion of molecules and fluids, with
capabilities that exceed all current instruments. This instrument will measure
the correlated motion of two antiparallel cantilevers that have atomic force
microscope (AFM) tips or colloidal spheres attached to the free ends. The fluid
between the tips will couple the two cantilevers such that the correlated motion
is sensitive only to the intervening fluid. This antiparallel arrangement will
greatly diminish the contribution of the cantilevers compared to conventional
AFM. Measurement of the correlated motion results in a large increase in signal-
to-noise ratio because the correlation is not sensitive to electronic, optical
or mechanical disturbances on individual cantilevers. Moreover, even the thermal
noise on the individual cantilever is not part of the correlation signal, so the
instrument will have a lower noise floor than is theoretically possible for
existing single cantilever AFM techniques. The instrument will be capable of
measuring the mechanical properties of individual molecules tethered between the
two cantilevers, as well as the viscoelastic properties of complex fluids with
nanometer resolution at frequencies up to hundreds of kHz. Also, the simplicity
of the mechanical concept provides a relatively easy path for ultimate
development of an inexpensive and small instrument.