* 0959526
* MRI-R^2: Acquisition of powder X-ray diffraction instrument for faculty research and undergraduate education
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Maria Parr, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 117,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor Christoph Geiss and colleagues Jonathan
R. Gourley, Ralph O. Moyer, and Maria Parr from the Departments of Chemistry,
Physics and Environmental Science at Trinity College will acquire a powder X-ray
diffractometer which will be capable of providing good quality structural
(Rietveld) analyses which can also be used as an analytical instrument for
classroom use. The instrument will be used to support research activities such
as: 1) characterization of iron-minerals in sediments and soil; 2) fault zone
fluid migration pathways; 3) trace metal sediment concentrations in impaired
watersheds; 4) synthesis, structure and characterization of ternary metal
hydrides and hydrogen storage; 5) structure and characterization of Yb2RuH6(D6);
6) high pressure X-ray diffraction of A2RuH6 compounds; and 7) characterization
of transition metal complexes and archaeological
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and
precise measurements of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. A powder
diffractometer allows diffraction studies in powdered crystalline materials. The
studies described here will impact a number of areas, including chemistry,
materials chemistry, geology, archeology and the environment. This instrument
will be an integral part of teaching as well as research.