* 0959361
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) Surface Analysis Instrumentation for Enabling Research and Education in Greater Philadlephia
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Giuseppe Palmese, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,125,000.00

0959361&lt;br/&gt;Lau&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed MRI-R2 application is for the
acquisition of a state-of-the-art x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) surface
analysis instrumentation system for the Greater Philadelphia region. The XPS
system will be established as an openly accessible multi-user shared
instrumentation facility at Drexel University that serves as a focal point for
significantly enabling research and training activities in the scientific
community in the region. Currently, there is no shared XPS facility widely
accessible by different users in Greater Philadelphia. Equally important, there
are a significant and diverse range of research programs In the area that have a
critical need for an XPS system but have limited access to one. As such, the
proposed instrumentation will address a key void in enabling leading edge
research. At Drexel University, major research initiatives, including the Drexel
Plasma Institute and the Drexel Nanotechnology Institute, as well as many
individual faculty research projects will be enabled by the XPS system. In
addition, numerous research efforts at the University of Pennsylvania, Villanova
University and Rowan University will be considerably aided by easy access to
such an system. Specifically, this proposal highlights emerging research
activities that will be positively impacted by the XPS instrumentation,
including major efforts in sustainable energy, biomedical technology,
nanotechnology and advanced materials currently funded by the NSF and other
agencies. These research activities require a multicapability XPS system that is
able to perform quantitative surface-specific chemical analysis of all types of
samples like metals, inorganics, organics, ceramics, polymers and composites.
The system will provide for these research activities macro- and micro-area
elemental and chemical state spectroscopy and imaging, angle resolved depth
analysis, sputter depth profiling using argon and polyatomic ion guns for hard
and soft materials, respectively, in situ variable temperature measurements, and
Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) for spectroscopy and mapping with a spatial
resolution below 100 nm.