* 0959496
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an 850 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Interdisciplinary Research at the University of Delaware
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2013
* Cecil Dybowski, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2013
* USD 2,171,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor Tatyana Polenova and colleagues Cecil R.
Dybowski and Sharon Rozovsky from the Chemistry and Biochemistry Department at
the University of Delaware will acquire a very specialized 750 MHz NMR
spectrometer with a series of probes that will support research in solutions and
solids. The instrument will be used to support exciting research activities in
areas such as: 1) biophysical and bioinorganic chemistry; 2) structural biology
of proteins and protein assemblies; 3) materials for photonics, alternative
energy, and environmental remediation applications; 4) bioengineering and
biomaterials; and 5) molecular cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. A high-field NMR spectrometer provides exceptional
sensitivity. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to
chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have a positive impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry, the environment and biochemistry. This instrument will be
an integral part of teaching as well as research.&lt;br/&gt;