* 0959631
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a GC/MS triple quadrupole for the characterization of terrestrial plant biomarkers in complex  environmental media at TAMUG
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2011
* Patrick Louchouarn, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/28/2011
* USD 150,791.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This award will fund the acquisition of a gas chromatography
triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (CG-TQ-MS/MS), an electron multiplier, and
an oxidation system. These instruments will support research on 2 major topics,
1) the transfer of terrigenous organic matter (TOM) from watersheds to aquatic
systems in both dissolved and particulate forms and 2) the impact of biomass
combustion on air quality in urban and rural settings. Such transport is
strongly dependent on hydrological processes in the watershed with short-lived
flood events playing a substantial role in large-scale pulse transfers. The PIs
will investigate how hydrological shifts predicted by climate change scenarios
may impact the overall transport of natural organic matter in natural and
perturbed (e.g. urban) watersheds. The Arctic project is also introducing lignin
as an additional tracer for upper Arctic Ocean ventilation processes in order to
reconcile recently observed discrepancies among other established oceanographic
tracers. In particular, TOM tracers will help to identify the different
components of the Arctic freshwater cycle. The GC/MS will also contribute
analytical capacity to recent research at TAMUG in characterizing the
composition of combustion-derived particles depositing over urban to rural
watersheds. Biomass combustion is a major source of atmospheric particles that
affect air quality at the local to regional scale and climate at the regional to
global scale. Climate fluctuations, and in particular changes in drought
cyclicity and intensity are strong drivers of wildfire events which themselves
contribute substantially to atmospheric aerosol loads.