* 0959438
* MRI-R2 Acquisition: Establishment of a Core Facility for the Hierarchical Analysis of Bone
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Johannes Thewissen, Northeast Ohio Medical University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 583,523.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National Science
Foundation, the Skeletal Biology Research Focus Area (SBRFA) centered at the
Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine and Pharmacy (NEOUCOM) will
acquire three major research instruments: 1) a high-resolution CT scanner
(Scanco vivaCT75 ÂµCT scanner); 2) a machine to test the strength of bone and
other tissues (Instron ElectroPuls E3000 Universal Testing Machine) and 3) a
machine to quantify DNA expression levels (Applied Biosystems 7900HT Real-Time
PCR system). While the SBRFA has strong support from NEOUCOM and the state of
Ohio in terms of space and faculty, the equipment will fill a major gap in the
focus area by establishing state-of-the-art core facilities for studying bone
and cartilage biology. The equipment will help the focus area reach its full
potential in collaborative and integrative research and training in skeletal
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The uniqueness of the SBRFA relative to other
skeletal research groups throughout the country is its integrated perspective on
studying skeletal biology. SBRFA researchers study bone and cartilage across all
levels of organization from molecular pathways to the evolution of whole
organisms. The equipment will initially support 13 projects studying bone that
are either ongoing or in preliminary stages. Most projects are collaborative and
will incorporate more than one instrument. In fact, SBRFA researchers identified
the equipment to promote integrative studies of bone form (CT scanner),
performance (UTM) and molecular processes (RT-PCR). The CT scanner will be
involved in scanning objects ranging from fossil skeletons to artificial fingers
that have been bioengineered to replace amputated elements. The UTM will be
integrated with CT scanning in studying the relationships between bone form and
strength. Finally, the real-time PCR system will identify molecular events that
occur as bone responds to loading as well as novel applications documenting gene
expression during skeletal development. Current funding for these projects spans
four NSF divisions, demonstrating the breadth of research in the focus area.
Because SBRFA researchers transcend several subfields of skeletal biology in
their collaborative efforts, the research projects facilitated by the
instrumentation have the potential to generate novel findings that cross
traditional disciplines in skeletal biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
establishment of core facilities with these three major pieces of
instrumentation will promote research training for postdoctoral fellows,
graduate and undergraduate students as well as junior faculty affiliated with
the SBRFA. The instrumentation will facilitate collaboration among SBRFA members
at NEOUCOM and affiliated institutions through shared access to these facilities
designed for cross-disciplinary research. Moreover, regional collaborations will
be enhanced through alliance with the Austen BioInnovation Institute in Akron,
OH - a developing project among five regional institutions (including NEOUCOM)
dedicated to revolutionizing research, economic development and healthcare in
northeastern Ohio. Specific benefits to graduate education will focus on
training students to research scientific questions using a multi-disciplinary
toolkit. Undergraduate research experiences will be enhanced by new research
opportunities. Finally, the instrumentation will be incorporated into community
outreach through "hands-on" programs supported by participating SBRFA faculty
that expose K-12 students in northeastern Ohio to the scientific research
process.