* 0959679
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an Environmental Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Education at North Caroline Central University
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Darlene Taylor, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 01/31/2012
* USD 489,000.00

0959679 Wu North Carolina Central U.

Technical Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

Nanostructured materials are increasingly important to fundamental and applied
research in a wide range of scientific disciplines. This proposal requests
funding for a high resolution environmental field emission scanning electron
microscope (FESEM) to support nanoscience research and education across science
departments and research institutes at North Carolina Central University (NCCU),
including projects focused on: (1) Development of semiconductor quantum dots and
nanowires for advanced optoelectronic devices; (2) Health and environmental
effects of nanoparticles; (3) Polymer nanocomposites for drug delivery and
photovoltaic applications; (4) Nanostructures for biomedical imaging; and (5)
Metal nanostructures for control of light through surface plasmon resonance
effects. This FESEM, which includes energy dispersive x-ray and electron
backscattered diffraction systems, will provide timely access to size, shape,
elemental composition and crystallographic phase data with nanoscale resolution
that are critically important to ongoing research at NCCU. The low vacuum
capability of the requested FESEM enables imaging of the wide variety of
materials studied at NCCU (including nonconductive or biological samples)
without time consuming and resolution limiting preparation steps. Acquisition of
the FESEM will enhance research across multiple scientific disciplines at NCCU,
increasing the depth, productivity and scope of ongoing projects, opening new
research avenues, and improving the research experiences of many NCCU students.
A remote operation software accessory will enable demonstration of the
instrument in any location with internet access, facilitating introduction of
nanoscience to large introductory classes at NCCU and local K-12 classes.

Layman Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

Nanometer sized materials are of great interest due to their unique physical
properties and their potential impact for applications ranging from imaging of
cancer cells to generation of electricity from sunlight. This proposal requests
funding for a high resolution environmental field emission scanning electron
microscope (FESEM) to support nanoscience research and education across science
departments and research institutes at North Carolina Central University (NCCU),
including a wide range of projects focused on the impact of nanoscale materials
in optical devices, biomedical imaging and human health. This FESEM, which
includes energy dispersive x-ray and electron backscattered diffraction systems,
will provide timely access to data on sizes, shapes, elemental compositions and
structures with nanoscale resolution that are critically important to these
projects. This FESEM is capable imaging of the wide variety of materials studied
at NCCU (including biological samples that are difficult to image with
conventional scanning electron microscopes) without time consuming and
resolution limiting preparation steps. Acquisition of the FESEM will enhance
research across multiple scientific disciplines at NCCU, increasing the depth,
productivity and scope of ongoing projects, opening new research avenues, and
improving the research experiences of many NCCU students. A remote operation
software accessory will enable demonstration of the instrument in any location
with internet access, facilitating introduction of nanoscience to large
introductory classes at NCCU and local K-12 classes.