* 0959687
* MRI-R2: Acquisition for the Critical Infrastructure Security and Assessment Laboratory (CISAL)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Ming Yang, Jacksonville State University
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 04/30/2013
* USD 415,600.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong need for research activities
on critical infrastructure protection motivated the establishment of a research
facility at Jacksonville State University (JSU) whose primary purpose is to
investigate, develop, implement, and assess security technologies for critical
infrastructure protection. This cross-disciplinary project undertaken by the
Mathematical, Computer and Information Sciences (MCIS) and the Engineering and
Technology departments represents a novel approach of establishing a
cybersecurity-focused research laboratory facility that emulates multiple
configurations of real industrial control systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project builds upon the existing STEM knowledge base in the areas of network
security, risk assessment, security compliance, industrial controls, and digital
forensic analysis to enhance existing and develop new security technologies in
an area of national need. The lessons learned and the experiences gained in
designing and utilizing the facility will provide a blueprint for the design of
similar facilities in medium to large sized institutions of higher education. A
key component of this project is the collaborative effort that will take place
between JSU, area community colleges, and industrial partners in maximizing the
utilization of the proposed research facility through active collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of new and the adoption of existing STEM
knowledge nuggets, including the creative research techniques in security,
networks, and industrial controls, will provide exemplary materials to
institutions with diverse demographics. JSU, having been recently designated by
the National &lt;br/&gt;Security Agency (NSA) as a National Center of Academic
Excellence in Information Assurance Education, is in a unique position of being
able to contribute to broadening the participation of the underrepresented
groups through the diversity of its student population. In addition, this
project will target smaller institutions of learning, including institutions
that traditionally serve underrepresented groups, as future collaborators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration between JSU, area community colleges and
industrial partners can serve as a model for future collaborations between
institutions of higher learning and the industrial sector. The results of our
research and project evaluation will be disseminated using a dedicated Web
server ? a cost-effective approach to closing the gap between those who have
access to rich learning opportunities and those who do not. We will initiate a
pilot workshop for community college instructors and industry personnel on the
utilization and capability of the research facility. Since the reach of this
project can extend beyond STEM disciplines, the project will also provide
orientation workshops to faculty members of other disciplines to stimulate a
cross-pollination of research methods and ideas that will impact information
security.&lt;br/&gt;