* 0959447
* MRI-R2 Consortium Acquisition:  Targeted Expansions of the Skynet Robotic Telescope Network's Wavelength, Geographic, and User-Community Footprints
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2013
* John Ford, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gary Schmidt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,795,854.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this day of modern large telescopes,
small telescopes are still actively making significant contributions to our
knowledge about the universe and its constituents, from Gamma Ray Bursts at the
edge of the universe to nearby stars and solar system bodies. A consortium of
colleges in the southeastern United States has assembled an impressive network
of small telescopes spread around the globe under the leadership of Dr. Daniel
Reichart of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Originally designed
for the specific purpose of rapidly following up on "transient events" - sudden
changes on the sky due to the explosive death throes of stars for example -
their telescopes are also heavily used by both professional researchers and
their students at a number of colleges and universities in the southeast as well
as by elementary and secondary educators and their students. Dr. Reichart and
his team are now planning to add new capabilities to the network, providing
increased coverage around the globe to monitor our changing skies. Optical
telescopes work best at night of course, so if astronomers want to monitor
objects in the sky around the clock, they must have telescopes spread around the
world. To be sure of the coverage, it is also necessary to have multiple
telescopes in case the weather is bad at some of the locations. The National
Science Foundation's Major Research Instrumentation program is providing the
funding for the new telescopes through its Division of Astronomical Sciences.