* 0959406
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Smart X2S Automated Bench Top Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Debasish Kuila, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 231,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor Zerihun Assefa and colleague Debasish
Kuila from the Department of Chemistry at North Carolina Agricultural &amp;
Technical State University will acquire an automated bench-top single crystal
X-ray diffractometer. The instrument will also be used by researchers at the
University of North Carolina at Greensboro and will support research activities
such as: 1) study of disruption of metal-metal interactions and extended linear
chains by organic solvent molecules; 2) synthesis, X-ray crystallography, and
photoluminescence studies of high-coordinate gold(I) complexes with tertiary
phosphine ligands; 3) use of light harvesting ligands to enhance emission from
metal sites; and 4) study of small prototype molecules of biological,
bioorganic, and bioinorganic interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three
dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here will impact a
number of areas, including chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research at this
historically black university.