* 0959425
* Acquisition of a Thermal Cycler and QPCR Instrument to Incorporate Molecular Biochemistry into Undergraduate Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2010
* Derek Wright, Lake Superior State University
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 11/30/2010
* USD 45,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from the NSF MRI-R2 program
allowed Lake Superior State University, a small, public primarily undergraduate
institution, to acquire two systems. The first is a thermal cycler, an apparatus
that amplifies segments of DNA via the polymerase chain reaction process. The
second is a quantitative polymerase chain reaction system. The instrumentation
expands current research in molecular biology, and allows faculty and students
to progress in the area of molecular biology research. Projects include
identification and monitoring of microbial species in drinking and recreational
water, studies of Blastomycosis caused by the dimorphic fungal pathogen
Blastomyces dermatitidis, investigations of the mer operon in the bacterial
community of the Upper St. Marys River associated with the Cannelton Industries
Superfund, and the recovery of the New York state-endangered round whitefish
(Prosopium cylindraceum). The instrumentation is also used to promote
undergraduate research; introduce fundamental molecular biology techniques into
the undergraduate chemistry curriculum; and support faculty, student, and
community partnerships. Student training and teaching will impact a large
fraction of the Native American students pursuing baccalaureate degrees at Lake
Superior State University. Results from the studies enabled by the new equipment
are disseminated by student and faculty presentations at regional and national
meetings, and through publication in peer-reviewed journals.