* 0959056
* VAMAS Workshop: Measurement Needs for Emerging Materials and Technologies; held Winter of 2010 at the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* John Mecholsky, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

This award will be used to help support an international workshop to be held in
Gaithersburg, MD early in 2010. The goal of the workshop is to identify and
prioritize material measurement needs relevant to rapidly growing technologies.
In many developing technologies, the science underpinning the needed measurement
procedures does not exist. This workshop will be held under the auspices of the
Versailles Project on Advanced Materials and Standards (VAMAS) whose mission is
to promote world trade in products that depend on advanced materials, though
international collaboration that provides the technical basis for harmonization
of measurement methods, codes of practice and standards. Support will be used
for the travel expenses of internationally recognized experts in various fields,
who would describe the scientific issues underpinning the needed measurement
technology. Possible workshop topics include:

? Carbon nanotubes for electronic, sensor, and composite applications ?
Photocatalytic materials ? Materials for thermoelectric applications ? Fuel cell
materials ? Materials for organic photovoltaics

The results of this workshop will provide the basis for the initiation of new
VAMAS projects addressing the fundamental measurements needed to achieve
consensus on the performance characteristics of the devices and components being
developed, as well as on the properties of the materials making up these
devices. Young investigators will be invited to participate in the workshop and
to play a part in the development of the required international standards.
Attendance from developing economies will be encouraged as well in order to
enhance international commerce in advanced technologies.