* 0959371
* Culturing Psychotherapy, Transforming Selfhood in Postsocialist China
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Li Zhang, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2013
* USD 148,230.00

Dr. Li Zhang, of the University of California at Davis, will undertake research
on the impact of rapid socioeconomic transformations on the remaking of psychic
life and concepts of what it means to be a person. The research will be carried
out in China, where the breathless pace of market reforms has engendered
profound changes and ruptures in not only economic and social structures but
also the mental and emotional lives of Chinese citizens. Faced with the
increasingly competitive and stressful lives, more middle-class urbanites are
turning to professional psychological counseling and therapy to grapple with
their anxiety, mental distress, and personal problems. Thus postsocialist China
provides an ideal setting in which to explore a phenomenon that is taking place
worldwide.

To investigate this "inner revolution," Zhang will focus on one of China's
emerging psychotherapy movements. The research will be conducted in the city of
Kunming in southwestern China. Data will be gathered through a mix of social
scientific methods, including: participant observation of counseling sessions,
semi-structured interviews with therapists and clients, illness narratives,
media analysis, and archival research. Her research will address the following
questions: Why do some Chinese people today seek psychotherapy and how do they
make sense of their experiences? How are Western-originated psychotherapy models
altered and adapted to suit Chinese cultural sensibilities? What kind of
therapeutic relationship is emerging? How do Western therapeutic notions of the
private self intersect with Chinese understandings of the socially embedded
self? What are the implications for these individual-level changes for Chinese
society more generally?

This research is important because it is addressing a worldwide phenomenon. By
integrating psychology, psychiatry, and anthropology, the researcher will be
able to illuminate the complex relationship among illness, culture, healing, and
personhood in an increasingly interconencted world. By suggesting a culturally
sensitive way of grappling with emotional disorders, this research has a
transformative potential to improve mental health practice and policy in a
country of increasing global significance.