* 0959182
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of Land and Conservation in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Analia Villagra, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2011
* USD 13,500.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: The politics of land and conservation in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil

Abstract Conservation has never been an innocent endeavor. Rather, the decision
to preserve and protect flora, fauna, and ecosystems emerges from socially
specific systems of valuation. Historically, intervention into the natural world
has occurred often as part of colonial and imperial agendas; Brazil in
particular has long connoted "the natural" in Western philosophy. Yet this
romantic vision does not do justice to Brazilian understandings of nature, its
protection, and the modern scientific techniques that make this possible. This
investigation is organized around the efforts to save the Golden Lion Tamarin
(GLT), which is the focus of one of conservation's rare success stories and is
also a potent symbol of both the extraordinary and the everyday. The project
aims to understand how conservation professionals, states and NGOs can develop
integrated agendas that treat conservation not as a state of emergency but as a
continuing condition for the safeguarding of life and the promulgation of social
justice. This research project will address the intersection between land
rights, visions of social justice, and conservation politics in the Brazilian
Atlantic Forest in the State of Rio de Janeiro's lowland coastal region. Methods
include in-depth ethnographic work among small agricultural communities that
border the GLT reserve, life histories of former members of land-based social
justice movements, participant observation among the scientists and educators of
the Golden Lion Tamarin Association (AMLD) and archival work on land claims and
agricultural history in the region.

The researcher has developed a plan to disseminate data and conclusions with
people at the field site as well as to a wider scientific community. This plan
relies on use of existing educational institutions and community radio stations
in Brazil as well as more standard networks of scientific professionals in
Brazil and throughout the world. Ii order to be accessible to small farming
communities, the researcher will work with a community-run radio station to
develop a brief, Portuguese language segment descrbing results of the project,
as well as allowing community respone. The project's results are expected to
inform social and political processes around the world.