* 0959272
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Micro-Raman and Micro-IR Spectrometers for a Multi-disciplinary Spectroscopy Laboratory at Union College
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2012
* David Hayes, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 12/31/2012
* USD 270,000.00

0959272 Hayes Union College

Technical Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

Micro-FTIR and micro-Raman spectrometers will enhance a state-of-the-art
Materials and Molecular Characterization Facility at Union College, currently
serving the research needs of eight faculty and their students in four science
departments and two engineering departments. These instruments will enhance
current projects including using fission track analysis in dating geological
samples, polymer nanocomposites for photovoltaic application, identification of
environmental pollutants in aerosol samples, sorption and photochemistry of
environmental contaminants, thermodynamics of nanoscale confined systems,
nanomaterials characterization, and art conservation research. Micro-Raman and
micro-FTIR are complementary instruments and in combination will broaden the
capabilities of our characterization lab to allow for molecular and structural
characterization of samples. Noninvasive capability of the micro-Raman system
along with its long working distance will be especially helpful to several of
these research projects. In addition, the acquisition of these instruments will
support Union's long-standing commitment to incorporate research as an integral
part of the undergraduate curriculum and to develop innovative,
multidisciplinary teaching and research opportunities through state-of-the-art
instrumentation. These instruments will be integrated into individual student
faculty projects and classroom laboratory training to enrich the research
experience of our undergraduates. They will also be used during our open house
workshops designed to showcase modern characterization instruments for local
high school students and their teachers.

Layman Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

Materials characterization is important in many areas of engineering and
scientific research. Researchers in materials characterization use a variety of
instruments and laboratory measurement methods to learn about the elemental and
molecular make up, and the composition of the samples they are investigating.
This information not only helps with the understanding of how the materials were
formed, but also their function and behavior. The micro-Raman and micro-FTIR
instruments are two of the most versatile and most commonly used instruments for
micro characterization. Researchers at Union College will use these tools to
further their analysis of geological samples and environmental pollutants,
characterize nanomaterials in polymer nanocomposites for photovoltaic
applications as well as nanoscale confined systems, and aid with identification
of pigment and binders in art conservation research. The acquisition of these
instruments will support Union's long-standing commitment to incorporate
research as an integral part of the undergraduate curriculum and to develop
innovative, multidisciplinary teaching and research opportunities through state-
of-the-art instrumentation. These instruments will be integrated into individual
student faculty projects and classroom laboratory training to enrich the
research experience of our undergraduates. They will also be used during our
open house workshops designed to showcase modern characterization instruments
for local high school students and their teachers.