* 0959896
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of Nanomechanical Systems for in situ Mechanical Characterization of Materials in Application Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,09/30/2013
* David Puleo, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2013
* USD 580,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI-R2) award is to acquire several complementary instruments to establish a
strong capability in micro- and nano-characterization of mechanical behavior of
materials in controlled environments and under external stimuli. Specifically, a
nanoindenter and a nano-impact/fatigue tester will be acquired that are capable
of operating in controlled temperature, atmosphere, and liquid environment while
under thermal, electrical, electrochemical, and biological stimuli. The
instruments will enable and enhance several research and education activities,
including understanding and developing: (1) new materials for electrochemical
energy storage; (2) lightweight materials for aerospace and automotive
applications; (3) lead-free soldering for electronic interconnects, micro-
electromechanical devices (MEMS), and micro-fluidic devices; and (4)
biomaterials and multi-functional, smart materials for biomedical applications.
Advancing these technologies requires measuring, at the micro- and nano-meter
scale, mechanical behavior of functional and structural materials in application
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the coming decade, coupled mechanical-X
(where X can be thermal, electrical, electrochemical, or biological stimuli)
will emerge as an active field of scientific pursuit with a broad range of
applications. In situ nanomechanical measurements at application conditions will
accelerate materials research in many critical technology areas, including more
powerful and longer lasting batteries, lighter and stronger materials for
automobiles and airplanes, and more robust bio-compatible and bio-degradable
implants. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit through hands-on
laboratory training and participation in the research using the in situ
nanomechanical systems. The instruments will be accessible to faculty members,
students, and industrial partners from multiple disciplines who have a shared
interest and a common need for nanomechanical characterization. The research
activities enabled by the instruments will impact critical areas such as
automotive, aerospace, electronics, medicine, and energy conversion and storage.