* 0959915
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of Endoscopic Particle Image Velocimetry System and Multiprocessor Computer for Fluid Mechanics Research
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* David Wootton, Cooper Union
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 152,827.00

0959915&lt;br/&gt;Wootton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An endoscopic particle image velocimetry (PIV)
system and multiprocessor computer will be acquired for mechanical and
biomedical engineering fluid mechanics research and projects at the Cooper
Union. The PIV system is designed for visualizing and measuring two-dimensional
velocity and turbulence fields in steady and unsteady flows of gas or liquid, at
sample rates up to 15 fields per second, in internal flow devices with
restricted optical access. Conventional light sheet optics will be acquired for
use in wind tunnels and other optically accessible experiments. The
multiprocessor computer is a custom 16-core workstation with 64 GB of RAM,
designed for large computational fluid dynamics model simulations. These
powerful tools will be used to train masters and undergraduate students in fluid
mechanics research using both experimental and computational methods, in a
variety of projects, including fluid mechanics of rigid and deformable models of
the upper airway in obstructive sleep apnea, fluid mechanics of chronic cyclic
hypoxia research equipment, improved in-cylinder flow characteristics in
homogeneous charge compression ignition engines to reduce hydrocarbon emissions,
and a variety of undergraduate automotive and wind tunnel projects.
Undergraduate students will be exposed to PIV in required fluid mechanics and
lab courses, and will be able to receive training and apply PIV to research and
design projects. Students taking computational fluid dynamics courses will be
introduced to parallel processing and have the opportunity to use the
multiprocessor workstation during course projects as well as research projects.