* 0959764
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Versatile Electron Beam Nanolithography Instrument for Patterning on Planar and Curved Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Nitin Samarth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2013
* USD 675,000.00

0959764&lt;br/&gt;Mayer&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania State U. University
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI-R2 grant will fund the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art Vistec EBPG5200ES electron-beam nanolithography instrument that
will be a centerpiece of the Penn State Nanofabrication Laboratory's mission to
transform diverse materials, including semiconductors, complex oxides,
ferromagnets, superconductors, polymers and molecules, into advanced nano-
devices and systems. This flexible and versatile nanolithography system will
enable direct patterning of complex features on substrates up to 200 mm in
diameter and up to 10 mm thick, with a demonstrated sub-10 nm pattern resolution
and sub-15 nm stitching and overlay accuracy. In addition, the instrument will
open fundamentally new avenues in nanolithography because it will be equipped
with a z-lift stage that allows software-controlled dynamic stage height
adjustments for patterning on substrates with extreme topography and curvature.
This unique capability will create research and development opportunities in
diverse fields such as nano-electronics, nano-biotechnology, and nano-optics. By
way of the National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network, the instrument's new
features, flexible interface and remote internet operability will offer a fresh
approach to education, training and outreach that is readily accessible to a
broad and diverse population of users from academia, industry, and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology are
creating entirely new research and development opportunities in diverse fields
such as electronics, optics, energy, life sciences, and medicine.
Nanolithography plays a central role in these advances because it is one of the
primary techniques used to create structures with features that are as small as
10 nm. This MRI-R2 grant will fund the acquisition of a state-of-the-art Vistec
EBPG5200ES electron-beam lithography instrument that will be a centerpiece of
the Penn State Nanofabrication Laboratory. By way of the National Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Network, this system will be used to transform diverse functional
materials, including semiconductors, ferroelectrics, ferromagnets,
superconductors, polymers and molecules, into complex integrated nanodevices and
systems. In addition, it will open fundamentally new avenues in lithography
because it will be equipped with hardware and software for direct nanopatterning
on substrates with extreme topography and curvature. This unique capability will
enable groundbreaking research in nanotextured surfaces to prevent coagulation
in artificial artery grafts as well as optical metamaterials for perfect optical
mirrors, lenses, and cloaking devices. The instrument's new features, ease of
use, flexible interface and remote internet operability will offer a fresh
approach to education, training and outreach that is readily accessible to a
broad and diverse population of users from academia, industry, and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Penn
State Nanofabrication Laboratory, as an NSF National Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Node (NNIN) site, is an open access national user facility that
helps scientists and engineers from academia and industry to advance the
frontiers of nanoscale science and engineering. The laboratory's mission builds
on core research strengths at Penn State University to establish strategies for
integrating diverse materials - semiconductors, complex oxides, superconductors,
ferromagnets, polymers and molecular systems - into micro and nanoscale devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes the acquisition of a Vistec
EBPG5200ES advanced electron beam nanolithography instrument that will play a
central role in this laboratory's mission. The equipment has stateof-the-art
performance that will be critical to more than 20 ongoing and future projects in
basic science and engineering, primarily funded by NSF. The instrument is
capable of direct patterning of features on substrates having a variety of sizes
and thicknesses, with demonstrated sub-10 nm pattern resolution and sub-15 nm
stitching and overlay accuracy. In addition, the instrument will open
qualitatively new avenues in nanopatterning because it will be equipped with a
z-lift stage that allows software-controlled dynamic stage height adjustments
for patterning on substrates with extreme topography and curvature. This unique
instrumental aspect - not currently present at any other national user facility
- will enable projects such as nanotextured surface engineering of cylindrical
blood conduits to prevent coagulation in blood-contacting medical devices and
the design of optical metamaterials by nanoscale patterning on curved precision
optical components. The Vistec instrument is modular in form and function and is
designed to be readily upgradable as the technology improves or as the need
arises over the estimated 15-year lifespan of the system.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: The proposed instrument will be used by investigators from diverse
disciplines (electrical, chemical and mechanical engineering, materials science,
physics, chemistry, biology and medicine) to tackle problems of imminent concern
in their respective fields. These encompass topics in mesoscopic physics (e.g.,
mesoscopic transport in novel superconductors, graphene and nanowires,
magnetization control in single and interacting nanomagnets), nanoelectronics
(e.g., deep submicron thin film transistors, semiconductor nanowire
electronics), nanophotonics (e.g., coherent spin dynamics in photonic molecule
lasers, photonic crystal design of nanophotonic lasers) and nanobiology (e.g.,
miniaturized implantable renal assist devices). All the senior personnel who
will use the instrument have established track records of carrying out high
impact research.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The instrument's ease of use,
flexible interface, and remote (internet) operability will help forge new
directions in education, training and outreach in advanced nanofabrication
technology at the graduate, baccalaureate, associate, and post-degree
professional levels. These efforts will include modular lithography tutorials,
remote demonstrations, technical operations and user certification training
courses. The Penn State Materials Research Science and Engineering Center and
several minority-serving institutions, including the City College of New York,
University of Puerto Rico, Texas A&amp;M, have already established mechanisms
for enhancing research and training opportunities for women and under-
represented minorities through the NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduatesprogram. These programs will benefit from exposure to the
instrument?s capabilities with introductory tutorials and demonstrations on
nanofabrication and mentor-supervised usage. The instrument will also be made
available to the Penn State Advanced Technology Education program and partner
institutions, which include many minority serving community and technical
colleges. Finally, with the assistance of NNIN external liaisons and Vistec, the
instrument?s internet-based interface will be used to develop a new "remote hub"
model that will assist external users at hubs to design and implement remote
projects. This scheme will start with existing partners in academia (e.g., CCNY)
and industry, and will then be extended to other venues for far-reaching
national impact.