* 0959442
* MRI-R2:   Acquisition of a high-intensity X-ray diffractometer for macromolecular crystallography
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Martin St. Maurice, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2012
* USD 601,079.00

Abstract

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Major Research Instrumentation-Recovery and Reinvestment (MRI-R2) award
funds the acquisition of an X-ray diffractometer to support basic research
programs through the departments of Biological Sciences and Chemistry at
Marquette University. The instrument also has broad inter-institutional use,
supporting the basic research programs of additional faculty members at regional
institutions. The diffractometer supports and enhances research programs that
address structural aspects of biological macromolecules in a wide variety of
systems. These programs include research on the structure and function of
metabolic enzymes, protein-protein interactions contributing to essential
cellular complexes, structural mechanisms of gene transcription and regulation,
and the structure and function of proteins with antibacterial or antifungal
activity. Structural biology is integrally tied to an undergraduate education in
biology, biochemistry, and chemistry. The X-ray diffractometer at Marquette will
be used to expose both graduate and undergraduate students to the increasingly
accessible technique of macromolecular crystallography. Projects that involve
the crystallization of proteins and DNA are well suited to undergraduate
researchers who are gaining their first experience in the laboratory.
Undergraduate students conducting independent research at Marquette learn
crystallization techniques and gain first-hand experience with the X-ray
diffractometer. Demonstrations are also performed for high school students in
the Milwaukee School of Engineering's "Students Modeling a Research Topic"
(SMART) program and in Marquette's Equal Opportunities Program. The addition of
the X-ray diffractometer for macromolecular crystallography complements
Marquette's infrastructure in NMR and small molecule X-ray crystallography, and
enhances Marquette's ability to perform cutting edge research while maintaining
our dedication to providing students with a diverse spectrum of research
activities and opportunities. Results from the studies enabled by the new
equipment will be disseminated by student and faculty presentations at regional
and national meetings, and through publication in peer-reviewed journals.