* 0959858
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Scanning Laser Doppler Vibrometer System
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Thomas Huber, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 310,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will acquire a scanning
vibrometer for a multi-disciplinary research program. A vibrometer uses the
Doppler shift of a reflected laser beam to measure the vibration of objects
without contact. In this project, the vibrometer will be used to investigate the
ultrasound radiation force excitation technique; this technique uses the
interference between two ultrasound sources to vibrate macroscopic and
microscopic objects without contact. The other major goal of the project is to
use the scanning vibrometer for research in musical acoustics. To produce their
characteristic tones, musical instruments are sophisticated systems that often
involve nonlinear oscillators, coupled to complex resonant structures. The
project will enable a more thorough understanding of how these musical
instruments work. Undergraduate students will be involved in all aspects of the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements obtained using the vibrometer will
lead to a better understanding of the unique capabilities available using
ultrasound radiation force excitation of microcantilevers. This may impact areas
that rely on the vibration of microcantilevers, including ultras-sensitive mass
detection and atomic force microscopy. The musical acoustic studies will have an
impact because of the close collaboration between academic researchers and
actual instrument builders. Undergraduate students will have the opportunity to
collaborate with well-known researchers who will have remote access to the
scanning vibrometer through Gustavus? cyber-enabled acoustics lab. Students and
the general public will benefit from classroom demonstrations in acoustics and
oscillations that use the scanning vibrometer via the cyber-enabled lab or web.
Results will be disseminated widely in presentations, publications, and via a
web site.