* 0959853
* Whole Air Sampling Measurements and Data Analysis from the Stratosphere-Troposphere Analyses of Regional Transport 2008 Experiment and the HIAPER Pole-to-Pole Observation Campaign
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Elliot Atlas, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2013
* USD 533,560.00

This project combines research related to two major airborne atmospheric
chemistry studies: the recently completed Stratosphere-Troposphere Analyses of
Regional Transport 2008 Experiment (START08) and the on-going High-performance
Instrumented Airborne Platform for Environmental Research (HIAPER) Pole-to-Pole
Observation (HIPPO) campaign. The START08 experiment was designed to examine the
chemical structure of the extratropical upper troposphere/lower stratosphere
(UT/LS) in relation to dynamical processes of a range of scales. Tracer
measurements in well-defined meteorological conditions were a key component of
the experimental design. The research will continue the data analysis in
collaboration with others on the START08 team. In particular, this project seeks
to use the unique trace gas data set from the PI's AWAS (automated whole air
sampler) measurements and related measurements to examine tropospheric
intrusions into the stratosphere, to evaluate mixing time scales for
stratosphere-troposphere exchange, and to estimate age spectra in the UT/LS
region. Further, the data will be used for comparison of chemical model
simulations to satellite derived distributions and relationships in the UT/LS.
The HIAPER Pole-to-Pole Observation (HIPPO) project is a multi-year research
effort that focuses on understanding the global carbon cycle, on defining large-
scale rates of tracer transport in the troposphere, and on understanding sources
and sinks globally for carbon gases. While the emphasis of HIPPO is on carbon
cycle gases, the project includes the measurement of a wider range of trace
gases that complement that analysis of the major carbon cycle gases and provide
additional characterization of hemispheric scale air quality and gases relevant
to ozone chemistry. The PI will participate in the remaining three HIPPO global
surveys and subsequent data interpretation to complete the seasonally resolved,
global distributions of climate-relevant trace gases, which provides a unique
benchmark of measurements for understanding emissions, transport, and as an
unprecedented test for model simulations of global atmospheric
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The measurement and analysis of the suite of
trace gases will add to the understanding of the relationships between
greenhouse and carbon cycle gases and other climate-relevant trace gases in the
atmosphere. The project also supports the development of a deployable aircraft
instrument as a community resource by direct comparison to National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) flasks commonly used throughout the NOAA
global network. Finally, the HIPPO and START08 projects, and these measurements,
will involve training of students and post-doctoral scientists, and the project
will add to the development of graduate and undergraduate courses in atmospheric
chemistry and environmental science.