* 0959817
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for New Mexico State University
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Elba Serrano, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2013
* USD 664,603.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation-
Recovery and Reinvestment (MRI-R2) award funds the purchase of a confocal
microscope to support a diverse array of research and teaching activities at New
Mexico State University. The instrument will be housed in NMSU's centralized
microscopy facilities and administered by the Electron Microscopy Laboratory to
improve current and future research and training for the university and
surrounding community. The new confocal microscope will support research in
cellular and developmental biology, neurobiology, animal/microbial interactions,
plant molecular biology, nanotechnology and chemical biology. The projects will
take advantage of the microscope's ability to perform tandem scanning for live
cell imaging, a spectral detector to separate overlapping spectra, which will be
essential for applications requiring non-traditional excitation/emission
spectra. The new system substantially broadens the research capacities of
faculty members and of graduate and undergraduate students, enhancing careers in
multiple scientific fields. The new instrumentation also offers significant
opportunities for research training and education. The 18 participating
investigators mentor over 100 graduate and undergraduate students, (60% female,
57% underrepresented minorities), and these numbers reflect a history of
commitment to the recruitment and training of women and other underrepresented
groups. The system will be used in support of educational and outreach
activities including the continued offering of 2 courses, the introduction of
confocal microscopy in other existing Biology courses and demonstrations for
STEM programs aimed at recruiting and enhancing the research skills of women and
underrepresented minority students and faculty at NMSU and throughout the state
of New Mexico. The opportunity for students to use state-of the- art fluorescent
imaging and analytical tools will profoundly impact their research projects,
rendering them more competitive in gaining entry to top graduate programs or
obtaining top postdoctoral positions. Data from the new system will be
disseminated by publication in peer-reviewed journals, and by student and
faculty presentations are regional or national meetings.