* 0959712
* Union Contracts and the Negotiation of Work Hours and Schedules
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Dan Clawson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2014
* USD 197,182.00

SES-09659712 Dan Clawson Naomi Gerstel University of Massachusetts, Amherst

This study asks why employees work the hours and schedules they do, and proposes
to answer this question by analyzing labor union contracts and the negotiations
producing them in occupations that vary by gender and class. Building on our
prior research on four occupations, the research proposed here focuses on three
of the same occupations -- nurses, nursing assistants, and EMTs (emergency
medical technicians)-- with minor attention to the fourth, doctors, who are much
less likely to be unionized. Union contracts and the negotiations surrounding
them are a valuable but untapped data source. Not only are unions players in the
process of shaping hours and schedules but more importantly their contracts and
negotiations provide a site where we can examine the expression of employer and
employee preferences, the arguments and power each deploys, the compromises each
makes and the characteristics of each that shape their preferences, arguments,
conflicts and compromises. We hypothesize, first, that these contracts,
negotiations, and the conflict they address will often center on issues of time,
and, second that both the specific concerns and the resolutions they develop
will vary by gender and class. The proposed research will analyze 183 union
contracts. We will first examine clauses on hours and schedules in the union
contracts. Standard codes will be developed that apply across all occupations,
and cover both broad categories (for example, time off) and detailed sub-
categories (for example, holidays, vacations, sick leave, personal time, family
leaves). Using descriptive statistics and multivariate techniques, the study
will examine the extent to which these vary across occupations and from one
union to another within each occupation. Next the investigators will conduct
interviews with employers and employees about the negotiations surrounding the
union contracts, selecting ten sites each for nurses, nursing assistants, and
EMTs, and two sites for physicians, in order to understand the concerns and
issues that each side identified as most important, which members participate,
and the reasons for the compromises they make. At each site we will interview
two union-side contract negotiators and one employer-side negotiator.

Broader Impacts

The research will have a broad impact both because it advances scientific
knowledge and has practical implications for the daily lives of employees and
employers. The research will contribute to social science understanding of
organizations and families by rigorously and systematically examining the
processes that underlie a set of much-debated outcomes; it does so by examining
the points of stress that lead people to collective action. It makes innovative
use of a data source -- union contracts and the negotiations over them -- rarely
if ever used to systematically and rigorously examine points of stress. In
practical terms, the proposed research addresses key concerns in employees'
daily lives and key challenges faced by employers. Elucidating the aspects that
employers and employees focus on, and finding ways to help reduce the strains
they face, could reduce costs, improve organizational outcomes, and give
employees more control over their lives at and away from the workplace.