* 0959524
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of Mass Spectrometers for Earth Systems Science Research at Stony Brook University
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2013
* J. Kirk Cochran, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,200,000.00

0959524&lt;br/&gt;Cochran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation Recovery and
Reinvestment (MRI-R2) Program grant supports a thermal ionization mass
spectrometer (TIMS) and a multi-collector, inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) equipped with a laser ablation (LA) microprobe system.
The LA-MC-ICP-MS and TIMS instrumentation will support a wide array of research
themes undertaken at SUNY-Stony Brook and adjacent academic institutions. Seven
research groups are represented, spanning 15 scientist's research interests.
Research fields include marine geochemistry, paleoceanography, environmental
geochemistry, hydrogeochemistry, paleoclimatology, paleontology, toxicology,
geochronology, and igneous petrology. The PIs wish to establish a research
center which will support interdisciplinary research in the broad areas of
geochemistry and geochronology. Active areas of PIs research and intended new
research directions include: Thorium isotopic studies of aquatic particulates in
order to elucidate particulate sinking fluxes which would utilize the requested
MC-ICP-MS; age dating of detrital zircons and carbonates using U-Pb, U-series
disequilibria and Re-Os dating techniques for geochronologic control in
paleoclimate and paleontologic and paleoenvironmental investigations which would
utilize both the TIMS and MC-ICP-MS; development of Strontium isotopic proxies
of paleosalinity requiring thermal ionization mass spectroscopy; the use of
Radium isotopic tracers of groundwater discharge into coastal waters; and the
use of Boron/Calcium ratios and Boron isotopic proxies of paleo-pH in the ocean;
and Nd/Sm dating and provenance studies of eolian marine sediments. The new
instruments will support SUNY-SB researchers, post-docs and students as well as
outside collaborators. Extant SUNY-SB REU programs are targeted for curriculum
instrument integration, PIs plan outreach efforts to include interface with an
extant Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program and engagement of High
school students through an existing fellowship program. The requested new
instrumental capabilities will foster across campus and external collaborative
research, much of which is focused on societally-relevant environmental and
climate change issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***