* 0959108
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Radioisotopic and Astronomical Time Scales for the Cretaceous
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Bradley Singer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2015
* USD 424,401.00

Collaborative Research: Integrating Radioisotopic and Astronomical Time Scales
for the Cretaceous

PIs: Brad Singer, Steve Meyers, Brad Sageman

The Cretaceous period, between about 146 and 66 million years ago, was a time of
sustained global warming during which atmospheric CO2 levels likely surpassed
800 part per million, similar to the amount predicted for 2100 by ?business-as-
usual? emission scenarios. Cretaceous strata record evidence of high sea level,
remarkably cyclic sedimentation thought to reflect orbitally-forced climate
oscillation, high biological productivity, large scale igneous activity, and
major perturbations of the carbon cycle during ocean anoxic events (OAEs).
Understanding these phenomena, and their influence on fluxes into and out of the
marine carbon reservoir, can provide deep-time analogues and a rich context for
possible greenhouse scenarios of the future. However, a major limitation on our
understanding of these deep-time analogues is the lack of accurate chronologies
for assessing timing and rates of climatic and oceanic change. This project
comprises a complete re-calibration of the Cretaceous time scale via new
radioisotopic dating of volcanic ash beds integrated with chemical profiling and
time-series analysis of sediment sequences aimed at detecting the influence of
earth?s orbit and solar energy budget on sediment deposited in a shallow ocean
setting. This will provide a solid foundation for the Cretaceous in the next
iteration of the geologic time scale and should help resolve a number of
outstanding problems. Moreover, the intercalibration of the 40Ar/39Ar and U-Pb
radioisotopic chronometers - based on a common set of sanidine and zircon-
bearing volcanic ash samples - will provide geologic tests of these decay
systems, thereby addressing a primary goal of the NSF-sponsored EARTHTIME
initiative and the entire geochronology community. This project will support two
graduate student theses at UW-Madison and forge collaborations with active
research groups in Europe, Canada and the US. Because Cretaceous strata also
supply most of the global petroleum and natural gas reserves, our efforts to
improve the 4-D understanding of Cretaceous rocks has high societal relevance
with respect to these energy resources. To raise public awareness we have
developed an outreach plan with staff of Lake Pueblo State Park, CO, which had
1.8 million visitors in 2008 and is home to one of the world's most classic
exposures of Cretaceous strata, including the Cenomanian-Turonian Global
Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP). Working in collaboration with the
Park and Pueblo County school kids, as well as scientists at the USGS in Denver,
we will design and install signs that highlight the science of geologic age
determination and significance of the GSSP.