* 0959365
* MRI-R2:   Acquisition of Applied Biosystems SOLiD 3 System for Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Rachel O'Neill, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 11/30/2012
* USD 407,672.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;Funds from the NSF MRI-R2 program have been
awarded to the University of Connecticut to support the purchase of an Applied
Biosystems SOLiD3 massively parallel nucleic acid sequencer. The new sequencer
supports research endeavors in a broad range of traditional and non-traditional
model organisms addressing questions at the forefront of ecology, evolutionary
biology, developmental biology, cancer biology and molecular genetics. The 20
primary users of the instrument are part of a non-fee-for-service consortium of
users, the Center for Applied Genetics and Technology (CAGT). The CAGT members
use the SOLiD3 instrument and data in training and outreach activities from K-12
education through postdoctoral training. SOLiD3 training has been added as a new
section to the highly successful course "Theory and Practice of High-Throughput
Genome Analysis", and is used to provide hands-on training for faculty, staff
and graduate students. The CAGT provides assistance to support the inclusion of
modern genomics technology acquired under this MRI into the research sites
involved in the UConn Mentor Connection program for high school students each
summer and offers a one day workshop during the Mentor Connection period to
introduce students to the "future of genomics research" facilitated by next
generation sequencing platforms. In addition to active involvement in recruiting
minorities to STEM disciplines through such collaborations as the NSF AGEP and
PSM programs in the CAGT at UConn, the instrumentation will be used in a planned
workshop associated with the Next Generation Sequencing in Non-Traditional Model
Systems conference. The acquisition of the SOLiD3 further enhances the workforce
through training future scientists in this technology, upstream molecular
techniques and downstream data analysis. Results from the research and outreach
efforts will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journal publications, and
through student and faculty presentations at regional and national meetings.