* 0959092
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Multiple Collector Inductively-Coupled Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) for Multi-Disciplinary Biogeochemical Research at Penn State
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Carmen Martinez, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2013
* USD 724,002.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multiple-collector inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) funded by this award allows Penn
State University (PSU) geoscientists and biochemists, who have contributed to
the use of intermediate mass isotope systems (such as Ca, Cu, Fe, Li, and Mo)
over the past ten years, to extend their contributions in these research areas,
lead new initiatives in method development, and train students in advanced
research methods. The instrumentation will be housed in a state-of-the-art clean
laboratory facility, managed within the multi-user, cross-campus Materials
Characterization Laboratory, and run on a daily basis by a MC-ICP-MS specialist
who will train new users and help incorporate the instrument into established
courses focused on data collection and analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MC-
ICP-MS will support research aimed at elucidating fundamental isotopic
systematics that will aid geoscientists in the examination of the past using
geochemical proxies. Such research clarifies how the Earth system operates,
illuminates critical feedbacks (such as those in the weathering-climate system),
and suggests strategies for reading the rock record. The PSU MC-ICP-MS will
promote innovative scientific projects led by both senior and junior researchers
in ways that external instrumentation cannot. The instrument will (1) increase
the speed with which funded research projects are completed, (2) allow for
future method development in new isotopic systems, (3) enhance student training,
and (4) promote collaborative research between disciplines. The MC-ICP-MS will
benefit &gt;15 researchers at PSU and nearby institutions since no similar
instrumentation exists within ~200 miles. Outreach activities, publications, and
conference talks will guarantee regional and global impact of the
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;