* 0959377
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Multi-Department Research Projects at Gonzaga University
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Joanne Smieja, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 172,449.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Eric
Ross and colleagues Patrick Ferro, Mara R. London, Joanne A. Smieja and Brook O.
Swanson of Gonzaga University will acquire an inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (ICP-MS) This instrument will provide advanced elemental analysis
capabilities at the university and expand research opportunities of faculty and
undergraduate investigators in the Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Biology, and Civil and Mechanical Engineering. Research projects to be
undertaken include studies of molecular films, analysis of metal ion association
with lipid bilayers, investigations of crustacean biomaterials, environmental
studies of radioactive and heavy metals, development of water treatment methods
for developing countries, and investigations of solar cells and hydrogen storage
materials. These projects will allow undergraduate students to engage in
fundamental and applied research that will have local, national and
international impact.

An inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer is a type of mass spectrometer
that uses a high-energy plasma to generate ions from a sample. The masses of the
ions produced are measured by the mass spectrometer providing an elemental
analysis of the sample. Since this highly sensitive instrument is capable of
detecting ions at extremely low concentrations, it is valuable for trace
analysis of environmental contaminants. The instrumentation provided by this
award will be available to Native American students and high school teachers
through the Gonzaga Indian Education Outreach Program.