* 0959334
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an XRD, Raman Spectrometer and Sorption Analyzer for the Creation of a Materials Characterization CyberLab
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Cesar Lozano, Universidad Del Turabo
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 173,242.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor
Rolando M. Roque-Malherbe and colleagues José Duconge, César Lozano, Francisco
Marquez-Linares and Agustín Ríos from the School of Science at Universidad Del
Turabo will acquire a powder X-ray diffractometer that will also be utilized by
scientists from the Department of Chemistry and Physics as well as the Institute
of Physical Chemical Applied Research. The instrument will be used to support
research activities and education programs in the synthesis, characterization
and properties of new or modified zeolites, silica, molecular organic
frameworks, carbon nanotubes, porous anodic materials, semiconductor and
metallic nanostructured catalysts, proton conducting and oxygen permeable
perovskites.

An X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full
three dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles,
and provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. A powder diffractometer allows diffraction
studies and analysis of powdered crystalline materials. The studies described
here will impact a number of areas, including chemistry, materials chemistry,
and geology. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research.