* 0959379
* NSF Symposium: Innovations in the Undergraduate Curriculum Fostered by the CCLI Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Cindy Burkhardt, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 02/28/2015
* USD 36,350.00

Three Symposia entitled "NSF Catalyzed Innovations in the Undergraduate
Curriculum," are being organized and convened at the Fall National Meetings of
the American Chemical Society (ACS) to be held in Boston, MA (2010), Denver, CO
(2011), and Philadelphia, PA (2012). Three Symposia entitled "NSF Programs That
Support Undergraduate Education," are being organized and convened at three
different Spring Regional Meetings in 2010, 2011, and 2012. Since 1987, Symposia
sponsored by the National Science Foundation have been a part of the Division of
Chemical Education (CHED) Program at the Fall National Meetings of the American
Chemical Society. Each Symposium has provided a forum for the dissemination and
discussion of innovative projects made possible through the Instrumentation and
Laboratory Improvement, the Course and Curriculum Development, and the Course,
Curriculum, and Laboratory Improvement-Adaptation and Implementation - Phase I,
and current -Type 1 Programs. These Symposia have been well attended and both
anecdotal and survey evidence suggest they have been responsible for numerous
curricular changes at other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. Recipients of recent (last five years) Course, Curriculum, and Laboratory
Improvement-Phase I or -Type 1 awards are invited to discuss the innovations and
improvements that have been implemented into the undergraduate science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) curriculum at their colleges and
universities. The Symposia highlight innovative projects that have been pivotal
in curricular reforms by providing a forum for discussion between those who have
carried out the innovations and those just beginning to explore the means to
implement changes. At the Regional Meetings, programs in addition to CCLI
offered by the Division of Undergraduate Education are highlighted with the same
expected outcomes as the Symposia at the National Meetings.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The Symposia provide a means of dissemination for
successful CCLI projects to a broader audience than might otherwise be possible.
Faculty members at National ACS Meetings often attend sessions dealing with
their research areas at the expense of sessions dealing with science education
issues. These Symposia provide a forum in which valuable information is
presented in a relatively compact timeframe and at one location. The Symposia at
Regional Meetings provide exposure of NSF programs to faculty, especially those
at two-year institutions, who may not attend a National Meeting for a variety of
reasons. Personal contacts made at the Symposia are often pursued at a later
date. The on-going website at http://www.radford.edu/nsfsymposium has provided a
convenient source for information about a variety of NSF-sponsored projects, NSF
programs, and department and individual results concerning a wide variety of
innovations made in the undergraduate curriculum.