* 0959053
* MRI-R2: Development of the Next-Generation CAVE Virtual Environment (NG-CAVE)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Jason Leigh, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2013
* USD 701,815.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-59053&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Johnson,
Andrew E.; Brown, Maxine, Leigh, Jason, Peterka, Tom&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Illinois - Chicago &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Dev. of the Next
Generation CAVE Virtual Environment (NG-CAVE)&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing the Next Generation CAVE (NG-CAVE),
supports 15 research projects from local institutions. These projects in
multiple domains (Astronomy, Astrophysics, Art, Bioengineering, Earth Science,
High Performance Computing, Homeland Security, Neuroscience, Rehabilitation,
etc.) are poised to use NG-CAVE for their large visualization needs. Just as
cyberinfrastructure provides better access to greater volumes and varieties of
data, from data storage systems, online instrumentation, and/or major
computational resources like the TeraGrid and future Petascale facility,
advanced visualization instruments serve as the eyepieces of a telescope or
microscope, enabling researchers to view their data in cyberspaces and to better
manage the increased scale and complexity of accessing and analyzing the data.
NG-CAVE is such an eyepiece, providing researchers with powerful and easy to use
information-rich instrumentation in support of cyberinfrastructure-enabled
scientific discovery. It provides users with the ability to see 3D content at
nearly 106 Megapixels.&lt;br/&gt;For the Electronic Visualization Laboratory
(EVL) at the institution, NG-CAVE represents the culmination of decades of
experience and expertise developing immersive environments, from the room-sized
CAVE virtual environment in 1992, to the office-sized ImmersaDesk in 1994, to
the GeoWall in 2000, and the more recent ultra-high-resolution LamdaVision
tiled-display wall and autostereoscopic Varrier-tiled-display wall. Each new
generation of visualization instrumentation has provided scientific communities
with one or more advanced features (higher resolution, unencumbered stereoscopic
viewing, multi-Gigabit connectivity, and intuitive user interfaces), better
coupling worldwide scientific virtual organizations, and better integrating
scientific workplaces with globally distributed
cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;NG-CAVE provides an alternative approach to
constructing CAVEs by using new near-seamless flat LCD technology augmented with
micropolarization, rather than traditional projection technologies. The net
effect is a new CAVE that has 3D acuity to match human vision, can be scaled
near-seamless to even greater resolution, is affordable compared to projection-
based approaches, requires little maintenance, can be used for both 2D and 3D
stereoscopic viewing, and can support multiple simultaneous viewers. The
instrument also opens new opportunities in computer science research at the
intersection of large-scale data visualization, human computer interaction,
virtual reality, and high-speed networking,&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This project provides state-of-the-art equipment, opportunities, and
supervision to enhance undergraduate and graduate research and education. The
new NG-CAVE supports 10 classes in Computer Science, Art and Design, and
Biomedical Science departments. It provides scientific communities with highly
integrated virtual-reality collaboration environments; it enables working with
industry to commercialize new technologies for the advancement of science and
engineering and to continue ongoing partnerships with many of the world's best
domain scientists and computer scientists in academia and industry, who readily
become early adopters of new instrumentation and who provide students with
summer internships and jobs upon graduation. Thus, this instrument enables US to
maintain its leadership position in high performance computing and contributes
in the advancement of complex global issues (e.g., environment, health, homeland
security, economy, etc.), which, in turn, benefit society as a whole.