* 0959827
* BPC-DP: A Planning Grant for Establishing UTeach-CS
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Calvin Lin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 01/31/2012
* USD 180,232.00

The University of Texas, Austin proposes a planning grant to bring its Computer
Science Department and UTeach program together with the goal of creating UTeach-
CS. UTeach started at The University of Texas as a new way to prepare secondary
science, math and computer science teachers. It is a unique collaboration
between the Colleges of Natural Sciences and Education, supporting
undergraduates who want to teach, college graduates who want to return for
certification, new teachers looking for a supportive community, and experienced
teachers who want an advanced degree. It has proven to be so effective that it
is now being replicated at universities across the United States. Yet few
Computer Science students participate. This planning grant will do preliminary
work to establish a UTeach-CS program at the UT-Austin and to help replicate it
at other universities. In particular, the outcomes include (1) an understanding
of how to better market UTeach and the teaching profession to CS students and IT
professionals, (2) the development of a UTCS Bachelor?s degree plan that better
accommodates the UTeach certificate, (3) an understanding of the prospects and
challenges of replicating our UTeach-CS program to replication sites within
Texas, (4) the exploration of CS curricula for training math and science
students who are not CS majors and for training high school teachers who are not
certified to teach CS, and (5) a plan for growing UTeach-CS beyond this first
year and for replicating it to other institutions supported by the UTeach
Institute. This effort is in alignment with the CISE CS/10K goal of dramatically
increasing the number of US high school computer science teachers by the year
2015.