* 0959864
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of genomic and bioinformatic technology to promote research at the University of Puerto Rico
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Jose Garcia-Arraras, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2013
* USD 637,664.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation-
Recovery and Reinvestment (MRI-R2) award funds the purchase of a next-generation
sequencing system for the University of Puerto Rico- Rio Piedras. The new
sequencer system will support a range of research projects investigating
biodiversity research in the Neotropics. The new system will significantly
enhance research productivity and the training of students in this area. Focal
research areas are: 1) environmental genomics, 2) developmental genomics, 3)
evolutionary and ecological genomics, and 4) bioinformatics. All projects foster
inter- and trans- disciplinary synergies and interactions among research fellows
within each research area, with other research areas, the University of Puerto
Rico, and the local, national and international scientific communities. The
intellectual merits of this project are fourfold: 1) enhance competitive
research in a primarily Hispanic serving institution of secondary education; 2)
train next generation of researchers in the use of world class genomic and
bioinformatics techniques; 3) provides higher visibility for basic science
research as a science career option to Hispanic students by providing
competitive and attractive research training opportunities and, 4) builds an
operational mechanism for inter- and trans-disciplinary research within the
University of Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico and the Caribbean. The broader impacts of
the proposed activities include an expansion of genomic and bioinformatics
services to the University of Puerto Rico research community. In addition to
these services, seminars and workshops to researchers and students throughout
academic institutions in Puerto Rico will incorporate data from the new
sequencing system. Such activities result in significant synergic and
integrative activities in research, education and knowledge-transfer among
disparate research areas that use genomic science. The acquisition will also
support efforts to increase access to genomic data and the numbers of trained
Hispanic minority professionals engaged in research and education. Data from the
studies performed with the new sequencer will be published in peer-reviewed
journals, and disseminated by student and faculty presentations at regional and
national meetings.