* 0959148
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of Stable Isotope Instrumentation for High Precision Paleoclimatic and Environmental Research at the Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Peter Schlosser, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2012
* USD 811,868.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds the acquisition of one
Picarro L1102-ia analyzer (for wavelength-scanned cavity ring-down
spectroscopy), two Thermo Delata V+ mass spectrometers, and one Elementar
Isoprime with Dual Inlet and Multiprep systems to replace aging analytical
equipment in the stable isotope facility at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory
(LDEO). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These new instruments will allow a broad array of
researchers at the LDEO, and elsewhere, to continue their cutting-edge research
involving high precision analysis of stable isotopes in water, carbonate
samples, and organic samples, including tree-ring cellulose and compound-
specific organic extracts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the new
instruments, while supporting existing researchers in climatology, will also new
research endeavors in the field of biogeosciences. As currently envisioned, a
new LDEO Biogeoscience Research Instrument Cluster would support research
projects that serve to catalyze new avenues of collaborative and integrative
research in paleoclimatology, hydrology, paleohydrology, paleoceanography, and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts involve maintaining a high
quality national and international focal point for paleoclimate research as well
as an extensive plan to involve a diverse cadre of undergraduate and graduate
students in the research of the Observatory. There are plans to leverage another
NSF-funded activity -- the Secondary School Field Research Program (SSFRP) -- to
provide hand-on research and mentoring for dozens of underrepresented minority
high-school students drawn from New York City borough high schools.