* 0959296
* MRI-R2:   Acquisition of an Agilent 7890A Gas Chromatograph for Northern Kentucky University
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Hazel Barton, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2013
* USD 81,101.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from the MRI-R2 program was
provided to support the purchase of an Gas Chromatograph (GC) to provide on-site
capabilities for research projects in ecosystem and restoration ecology,
microbiology, and chemistry at Northern Kentucky University (NKU). Research with
the new instrumentation is focused on understanding how community plant dynamics
influence the flux of greenhouse gases (e.g. nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide, and
methane) in aquatic ecosystems. Specific projects focus on managing and
restoring aquatic systems to minimize greenhouse gas emissions. Additional
research is being conducted to examine microbial ecosystem dynamics within
starved, subterranean cave environments. The GC system will allow an expansion
of research capabilities to examine the role of methanogenesis, fermentative
hydrogen production and nitrogen fixing and cycling in community energetics.
Data from these studies provide for a better understanding about what drives
greenhouse gas fluxes in aquatic systems, which is critical when proposing
ecosystem management strategies to curb global warming. Also, understanding the
factors that induce mutualistic interactions and energetic associations in
microbial communities, we may better understand the factors that render the
majority of microbial species unculturable in the laboratory. NKU is a regional
university serving the Greater Cincinnati metropolitan area. The university is
primarily an undergraduate institution dedicated to hands on research as a
teaching tool. In support of this rationale, the Biology Department puts a heavy
emphasis on undergraduate research experience. The GC will allow faculty at NKU
to mentor undergraduate students in additional field and lab techniques on an
instrument that is commonly used in industry, and academic labs. Professors in
both the Biology and Chemistry Departments at NKU will also utilize the GC in
hands-on courses to demonstrate analysis of known and unknown gases to expand
the teaching potential of this machine. Data and findings from the research and
education activities enabled by the GC system will be disseminated through
student and faculty presentations at regional and national meetings, and through
publication in peer-reviewed journals.