* 0959465
* MRI-R2: Development of Electrostatic Levitation Facility for Neutron Scattering Studies of Liquids to be used in Fundamental Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Kenneth Kelton, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,158,677.00

0959465&lt;br/&gt;Kelton&lt;br/&gt;Washington U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of
scientists and students from Washington University in St. Louis, Iowa State
University in Ames, Iowa, the University of Tennessee in Knoxville, Tennessee,
and the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, will
develop a novel facility for neutron scattering studies of high temperature
liquids (NESL, Neutron ElectroStatic Levitation). The liquids will be levitated
in high vacuum using electrostatic levitation, thus avoiding container
contamination. Liquids and glasses are probably the least understood phases of
matter, with many outstanding questions concerning their physical properties and
atomic structures. An understanding of how they crystallize and, in some cases,
become glasses with cooling is incomplete. Furthermore, novel phase behavior and
phase transitions in liquids at temperatures below their melting temperatures
(supercooled) are largely unexplored. Since most elements are liquids only at
elevated temperatures and react strongly with container materials, experimental
studies of their structures and properties are difficult or impossible to
accomplish. NESL will allow structural and dynamical studies of high-temperature
liquids, both above and below their equilibrium melting temperatures. NESL will
be optimized for elastic and inelastic neutron scattering studies, and used on
the recently completed SNS, the world's most intense pulsed accelerator-based
neutron source. NESL will have a tremendous impact on fundamental and basic
research, and will serve as a catalyst for expanded national and international
collaborations. It will allow pioneering studies of evolving short and medium
range order in and liquid dynamics, addressing fundamental questions that have
profound applied as well as basic interest. When coupled with specialized ESL
chambers at Washington University and Iowa State University, NESL will create a
unique opportunity for coordinated structural and property studies of solids,
liquids and metastable phases, for sample temperatures up to
3000K.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While liquids and glasses have been subjects of
study for millennia, they are probably the least understood states of matter.
Key questions center on their structure at an atomic level, and how this
structure determines their properties and their ability to change to other
states. For example, in 1721, Fahrenheit discovered that under proper conditions
liquids can be held at temperatures below their melting temperature without
crystallizing (a common example of crystallization is when liquid water turns
into ice). Surprisingly, almost 300 years later we still don't completely
understand the origin of this resistance to form the crystal phase, nor do we
understand the atomic processes that occur during crystallization and their
relations to the liquid atomic structure. In addition to discontinuous
transformations like crystallization, if they are cooled fast enough, liquids
can also solidify by a continuous process to become a glass, where the atoms are
frozen into the structure of the liquid. While cooling through the glass
transition has been a technique commonly used by glassblowers for centuries to
make intricate and beautiful glass objects, the process is poorly understood,
claimed to be the most challenging unsolved problem in the physics of materials.
Neutron scattering studies of liquids offer a unique way to unravel these and
related questions. However, a key problem is that the liquid cannot be held in a
container, since contact with the container will induce crystallization before
measurements of the supercooled liquid (i.e. liquid below its melting
temperature) can be made. Building on their successes in the development of
techniques for x-ray scattering studies of liquids, a team of scientists at
Washington University in St. Louis, Iowa State University in Ames, Iowa, the
University of Tennessee in Knoxville, Tennessee, and the Spallation Neutron
Source (SNS) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, will develop a facility that is
unique in the world, to be used at the SNS for neutron scattering studies of
levitated liquids, thus avoiding the need for a container. In addition to their
importance to basic understanding, the capabilities that this facility offers
will have profound practical technological importance, leading to refined
methods for materials development.