* 0959328
* MRI-R2:  Development of a Low Temperature Single Spin Tunneling Force Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Clayton Williams, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 563,115.00

0959328&lt;br/&gt;Williams&lt;br/&gt;U. of Utah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI:
Development of a Low Temperature Single Spin Tunneling Force
Microscope&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent advance in Scanning Probe Microscopy has
made it possible to image individual electron trap states in dielectric surfaces
with atomic scale spatial resolution. In this method, a single electron is
induced to tunnel between a scanning probe tip and an electronic state at the
surface. Each individual electron tunneling event is detected by electrostatic
force. This project aims to expand this exciting new capability to the detection
and manipulation of single electron spins. A liquid helium temperature Single
Spin Tunneling Force Microscope will be developed, capable of performing single
spin Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) measurements and single spin manipulation.
The instrument will consist of a low temperature Atomic Force Microscope,
modified for force detection of spin-dependent single electron tunneling events
with ESR excitation. The proposed instrument represents an entirely new approach
to atomic scale single spin detection. It is based on the utilization of spin-
selection rules, in contrast to previous approaches based on the detection of
weak magnetic force detection. The instrument will enable chemical/physical
identification (g-factor, energy, wavefunction imaging) of individual
paramagnetic states, such as point defects found in dielectric and semiconductor
materials, with atomic scale spatial resolution. It will also provide a means to
study atomic scale magnetic fields and spin relaxation processes and will open a
way to read out individual nuclear spins that are hyperfine coupled to adjacent
electron spins. The project will train undergraduate and graduate students
(emphasis on underrepresented groups) in state of the art atomic scale
measurement techniques, and open up new collaborations with research groups
within and outside the University of Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin is a fundamental property
of electrons and some nuclei, which causes them to act like tiny bar magnets.
Techniques allowing the observation of spins have had a profound impact in the
past. The most prominent examples are based upon magnetic resonance, which is
employed in medical diagnostics and analytical methods for chemistry and
materials science. Most of these techniques detect many billions of spins. A few
previous experiments conducted on very selective spin systems have demonstrated
single spin detection. Most of these however could not resolve the spatial
location of the spins very well, while others required extremely low
temperatures. The proposed project aims to develop a new microscope which is
able to detect individual electron spins with atomic scale precision over a
range of temperatures. This instrument is called the Single Spin Tunneling Force
Microscope. It is based on the quantum mechanical tunneling effect, a phenomena
that allows electrons trapped in one region to traverse an impenetrable barrier
and reappear on the other side. Tunneling of single electrons has already been
observed with force microscopy. Tunneling can be influenced by electron spin. In
the proposed instrument, spins are detected using the principle of spin
dependent tunneling. The development of the proposed microscope could lead to
dramatic progress in many research fields. The ability to observe individual
spins in many materials and molecular systems could lead to breakthroughs for
future spintronic devices. It could also significantly contribute to the
development of quantum computers and help to understand atomic scale defects
which influence conventional electronic materials and devices. The study of
these defect spins can lead to insights into strategies for improvements in
solar cells, semiconductor lighting devices, displays and computer applications.