* 0959807
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Wavelength Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Tarek Abdel-Fattah, Christopher Newport University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 09/30/2013
* USD 253,030.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Tyler
A. Sullens and his colleagues Tarek Abdel-Fattah, Kathleen E. Brunke and Lauren
Ruane will acquire a Wavelength Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer
(WDXRF). It will support the Center for Coastal, Environmental, and Atmospheric
Studies (C2EAS) at the university. The following areas of research will be
impacted: a) fate of fissionable material in plant and soil environments, b)
elemental characterization of atmospheric aerosols, c) effects of mycorrhizal
fungi on metal accumulation in plants, d) development of nanomaterials for the
absorption of heavy metals from contaminated soils, e) remediation of
contaminated soils and air: detecting and quantifying heavy metals on military
sites (focus: lead), f) preservation and restoration of marine artifacts, and,
g) uptake efficiency and fate of metals in a created wetland.

Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence (WDXRF) spectroscopy enables
researchers to obtain elemental analysis of materials through non-destructive
means. X-rays irradiate a sample causing core electrons from atoms to be
promoted to higher energy orbitals. The relaxation of these electrons results in
emission (fluorescence) of secondary X-rays characteristic of the element. Since
this will be the only regional WDXRF facility in SE Virginia, it will be made
available to other research institutions in the area (Hampton University,
Elizabeth City State University, Norfolk State University, Old Dominion
University, and College of William and Mary, NASA, Jefferson Laboratory National
Accelerator Facility).