* 0959958
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Robots and Robot Accessories for Interdisciplinary Faculty and Student Research at Fayetteville State University
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Sambit Bhattacharya, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2013
* USD 175,092.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." Proposal #: 09-59958 PI(s): Bhattacharya, Sambit; Almeida,
Michael; Czejdo, Bogdan, D.; Montoya, Daniel Institution: Fayetteville State
University Title: MRI-R2: Acq. of Robots and Robot Accessories for
Interdisciplinary Faculty and Student Research Project Proposed: This project,
acquiring four research grade robot platforms along with accessories required
for navigation, robot vision, and robot-human interaction within a hybrid
architecture, enables research in mobile reactive and hybrid robots. It also
forms the basis of a robotics laboratory for conducting such research. The work
addresses research in the following areas: spatial and temporal representation
and reasoning using cognitive maps, stereo vision and object recognition, rapid
modification and testing for correctness of reactive behaviors, and human
experience of embodiment using robots. Although the institution currently
utilizes educational robots in teaching activities, a robot platform suitable
for human-robot interaction research is needed. Currently, no advanced robotics
research facility exists at FSU or other local universities. The acquisition of
this equipment for a Robotics Lab strengthens interdisciplinary collaboration
between the Departments of Psychology and Mathematics and Computer Science.
Students in Psychology benefit from learning about computer hardware components
and programming algorithms, while students in Computer Science learn about and
work with concepts of cognitive psychology. A room within the science building
at FSU is currently being refurbished to conduct the research projects described
in this proposal, and store the robots. The PI and a co-PIs are responsible for
installation of the robots at FSU. Most accessory and software installation in
the robot bases will mainly be done by the vendor before shipping, so very
little time and effort will be required to get started using the robots. Since
one robot base will be used per project described in the proposal, there is no
initial allocation needed. A long term maintenance contract from the vendor is
included as part of the proposal. Broader Impacts: The equipment enables
research activities involving undergraduate and graduate students, contributing
to train them in advanced scientific research methodology and application
development. This training benefits students from segments of population who are
traditionally underrepresented in the STEM disciplines since FSU is a minority
serving institution. The existing facilities at FSU are adequate for
introductory programming and behavior based robotics courses. This new equipment
and the space committed by the university to support the project enables
advanced research and training. The activities supported by the equipment
strengthen research at FSU. The new equipment will be available to regional
faculty who are interested in conducting research in robotics and related
fields.