* 0959343
* MRI-R2 Consortium: Acquisition of an Electron Beam Lithography System to Support Transformative Device and Materials Research in the Greater Houston Area
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* James Tour, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 02/28/2013
* USD 800,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective: The objective of this grant
application is to acquire an electron beam lithography (EBL) system to support
nanofabrication research in the Houston metropolitan area. Houston is home to
numerous research-intensive universities, the Texas Medical Center, and active
industrial research. The system will be installed at the University of Houston,
which houses the only shared fabrication resources in the Greater Houston area.
This acquisition will build on the existing tool set and provide state-of-the-
art nanofabrication capabilities to a broad user base, thereby elevating
nanoscience research in Houston to a globally competitive
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Acquisition of a dedicated EBL
system will enhance transformative research across a wide range of federally-
funded materials and device programs, including nanomagnetic devices,
biosensors, drug/gene delivery, resistive RAM, vertical electronic devices,
chemically-amplified imaging materials, nanopantography, magnetic
nanoconstrictions, nanowire interconnects, nanoscale light sources,
nanomechanics, microfluidics, and nanostructured spintronic devices. The
enabling EBL capabilities will stimulate development of new research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The EBL acquisition will enhance
the educational experience of more than 60 students at the University of Houston
(UH), University of Texas Health Science Center (UTHSC), and Rice University.
Team members will incorporate EBL training into educational programs at their
home institutions, including Integrative Graduate Education and Research
Traineeship at Rice; Research Experiences for Undergraduates at UH and Rice;
Research Experiences for Teachers at UH; Alliances for Graduate Education and
the Professoriate at UH and Rice; Awards to Stimulate and Support Undergraduate
Research Education at Rice; and Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education at UH.