* 0959105
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) for Research. Research Training, and Education at Southern University a Research Undergraduate Institution (RUI)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Guoqiang Li, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

0959105&lt;br/&gt;Walker&lt;br/&gt;Southern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, conventional Transmission
Electron Microscopy (TEM) has evolved into an exquisite technique capable of
providing direct information on the structure of materials not adequately
handled by x-ray analysis or, more important, on local structure rather than the
average structure determined by x-ray or neutron diffraction analysis. With the
advent of high-resolution TEM, techniques now exist to probe the local structure
of complex systems. TEM has become an important research tool in the life,
physical, material, and environmental sciences. It is especially essential to
the study of complex systems such as tissue, polymers, gels, multi metal oxides,
etc. Accordingly, this award is for the acquisition of a high-resolution TEM
instrument to enhance the TEM capabilities, to allow us to use these advance
techniques to solve specific research problems, and to integrate our research
with education and student training at Southern University and A &amp; M
College, the largest Historical Black College/University (HBCU) and research
undergraduate institution (RUI). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman
Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the 200 kV TEM instrument is to strengthen and increase research, research
education, and training of students from Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Mechanical
Engineering, and Electrical Engineering at Southern University. Additionally,
this instrument will afford us high-resolution TEM capabilities and provide a
user friendly and efficient TEM instrument for routine and state-of-the-art
high-resolution TEM. There are two specific objectives: The first objective is
to enrich and enhance research with Transmission Electron Microscopy an
indispensable research tool, and the second objective is to provide
opportunities for students to become familiar and participate in TEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TEM facility will yield new insights by
providing researchers at Southern University at Baton Rouge (SUBR) with a new
state-of-the-art analytical tool that will immeasurably enhance the quality of
their research. The TEM facility will foster a research atmosphere complimentary
to undergraduate teaching, while continuing SUBR's mission to combine research
and teaching in a highly productive manner for the training and development of
young, highly talented engineers and scientists of the future. The TEM facility
will play an important role in the training of minority scientists who will be
better prepared to become future materials scientists, chemists, physicists,
and/or engineers. In particular, this project will also have a significant
impact on faculty and students at SUBR by exposing them to Transmission Electron
Microscopy related research, a field where the number of minority students is
very scarce. The high-resolution TEM at SUBR will catalyze the students'
interest and encourage them to pursue graduate studies in engineering and the
sciences.