* 0959525
* MRI-R2: Development of an long wavelength nonlinear optical microscope for harmonic and autofluorescence imaging of biological tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Paul Campagnola, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 02/28/2013
* USD 435,013.00

0959525&lt;br/&gt;Campagnola&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problems of overlapping spectra, photobleaching,
low signal to noise and light scatter pose serious limitations on what can be
achieved in practice in imaging tissues by fluorescence. Over the last 10-15
years nonlinear optical microscopy techniques have been developed and adopted
widely, largely due to their ability to overcome many of these limitations. Most
current nonlinear optical microscopes use excitation wavelengths between
700-1000 nm, as this is the standard tuning range of the widely used Ti:Sapphire
femtosecond lasers. While these near infrared (NIR) wavelengths provide
significantly deeper penetration (few hundred microns vs. 10 s of microns) into
tissue than achievable with confocal laser scanning microscopes using visible
excitation sources (e.g. 488, 514 nm), it would be of great biological and
biomedical benefit to further improve upon this limit to achieve about 1 mm for
imaging the collagen structure associated with tumors and other pathologies. To
address this need, this proposal will engage researchers from biomedical
engineering, physics, plant biology, cancer biology, and biophotonics to build a
nonlinear microscopy platform capable of exciting intrinsic and extrinsic
fluorophores from 680nm to 1300 nm. The instrument will be constructed from a
Ti:Sapphire oscillator/ optical parametric oscillator (OPO) and a homebuilt
laser scanning microscope optimized for longer wavelength excitation. When
complete, the instrument will afford detection of 2 and 3-photon excited
fluorescence, Second Harmonic Generation and Third Harmonic Generation. We
anticipate that using the 1000-1300 nm tuning range provided by the optical
parametric oscillator will provide an additional 2-3 fold increase in imaging
depth in tissues. The successful construction and implementation of the
instrumentation will enable a wide range of dynamic cell studies ranging from
plant and cell models to animal models of breast cancer and ovarian cancer.
These studies will thoroughly examine the potential of long wavelengths for
deeper imaging and improved excitation of fluorophores that naturally excite
further into the NIR. This construction will lay down the experimental framework
for future biological studies that may benefit from longer wavelength based
nonlinear optical approaches.