* 0959066
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of  X-Ray Computed Tomography System for Imaging of Heterogeneous Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Charles Agosta, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 02/29/2012
* USD 210,960.00

0959066 Kudrolli Clark U.

Technical Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

Microfocus x-ray computed tomography is a versatile and multidisciplinary tool
for studying the internal structure of opaque materials. It will be used by the
faculty to investigate heterogeneous materials including packing of spherical
and non-spherical particles, geophysical flows, elasticity and crumpling,
biological materials, locomotion, and organic superconductors. The instrument is
capable of resolving features to less than 10 microns in 3-D and samples up to
150 mm in size, to allow unprecedented measurements to calculate strength,
electric and heat conduction, fluid permeability, and electromagnetic scattering
properties of heterogeneous materials from first principles. The x-ray
instrument will have a significant impact on undergraduate, graduate and post-
doctoral student training, besides being available as a research and diagnostic
tool for the scientific and engineering community in Worcester and neighboring
areas. The instrument will be operated out of Clark which is a liberal arts
university with approximately 2200 undergraduates and 800 graduate students,
with a strong tradition of involving undergraduate students in active learning
experiences. This proposed instrument will also complement a recent education
grant by the Sherman-Fairchild foundation to bring major scientific equipment on
imaging across spatial scales including an AFM and a radio telescope into an
inquiry-based science curriculum at Clark University. The x-ray system will
complement this equipment allowing researchers and students unprecedented access
to the internal structure of materials.

Layman Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

A microfocus x-ray computed tomography system is a versatile industrial
instrument that can be used to investigate a range of scientific problems at the
confluence of physics, materials sciences, and biological physics. It will
enable a new series of transformative research both as a measurement and
diagnostic tool at Clark University to calculate properties of opaque
inhomogeneous materials from first principles. The x-ray instrument will have a
significant impact on undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral student
training, besides being available as a research and diagnostic tool for the
scientific and engineering community in Worcester and neighboring areas. The
instrument will be operated out of Clark which is a liberal arts university with
approximately 2200 undergraduates and 800 graduate students, with a strong
tradition of involving undergraduate students in active learning experiences.
This proposed instrument will also complement a recent education grant by the
Sherman-Fairchild foundation to bring major scientific equipment on imaging
across spatial scales including an AFM and a radio telescope into an inquiry-
based science curriculum at Clark University. The x-ray system will complement
this equipment allowing researchers and students unprecedented access to the
internal structure of materials.