* 0959621
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* John Texter, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 207,275.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor Ruth Ann Armitage and colleagues Gavin
Edwards, Cory D Emal, Harriet A Lindsay and John Texter from the Department of
Chemistry at Eastern Michigan University will acquire a high-resolution time-of-
flight (TOF) mass spectrometer with direct acquisition in real time (DART) and
electrospray ionization (ESI) sources. The instrument will be used to support
research activities such as: 1) method development for rapid, non-destructive
characterization of organic cultural heritage materials in works of art; 2)
isolation, identification, and synthesis of biologically relevant molecules such
as polyphenols; 3) atmospheric chemistry of biogenic, volatile organic
compounds; 4) development of microwave-assisted reaction methodology; 5)
advanced materials such as porous co-polymers from ionic liquids; 6)
identification of end-groups in self-assembling block copolymeric materials; 7)
signal transduction pathways in the regulation of normal and cancer cell growth
and proliferation; 8) determination of microbial metabolites in rat cecal fluid
and in vitro co-cultures; and 9) insulin-based inhibitors of human islet amyloid
polypeptide.&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is an analytical technique used by
chemists and biochemists to identify the chemical composition of a sample and
its purity. TOF-mass spectrometry with ionization capabilities is an excellent
technique for obtaining accurate molecular weights on small and large molecules.
Use of this type of mass spectrometer has become a standard technique,
especially in studies involving labile molecules. This research will have a
significant impact in a number of areas, especially chemistry, materials
chemistry, the environment and biochemistry as well as in the preservation of
works of art. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research.