* 0959116
* EAGER:  Privacy with Respect to Private Corporations in the 21st Century: Legal and Computer Security Issues
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Robert Sloan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2012
* USD 100,000.00

This project addresses the question: What privacy rules should bind private
corporations? It does so through a collaboration between a legal scholar
knowledgeable about computer science issues and a computer scientist
knowledgeable about legal and policy issues. The common themes
running&lt;br/&gt;through the research are the current lack of agreed social
norms concerning privacy, the interplay between computer security and privacy
concerns, and the economic motivations that often are an important part of
understanding various agents? actions. The goal is to contribute to the
development of social norms concerning privacy that will simultaneously shape
and inform both the development of appropriate technologies and appropriate
business practices and laws. The interdisciplinary approach is essential to
achieving this goal; it is also surprisingly unusual: There are remarkably few
interdisciplinary examinations of privacy that effectively combine legal and
computer science expertise. This project is a step toward remedying this lack.
Together, the four aims address the immediate, serious, and unmet need for an
approach to information privacy that is at once technically and legally
sophisticated. The research will simultaneously shape and inform both the
development of appropriate technologies and appropriate laws.&lt;br/&gt;