* 0959620
* MRI-R2:  Development of a Polarimeter for the 10 Meter South Pole Telescope
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2013
* William Holzapfel, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 01/31/2013
* USD 1,259,490.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This proposal requests support for the development of a
state-of-the-art polarization-sensitive receiver SPT-POL that will be used to
conduct a program of cosmological research with the 10-meter South Pole
Telescope (SPT). The SPT-POL will be installed on the SPT and used to measure
the polarization anisotropy of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) radiation
from scales of an arcminute to degrees, starting in austral winter 2012. From
the analysis of the resulting polarization maps, the project will determine the
angular power spectrum of the CMB B-mode polarization (curl component) induced
by the lensing of the intrinsic E-mode polarization (curl-free component) by
large-scale structures. The lensing B-mode spectrum provides sensitivity to the
neutrino masses through their impact on the growth of the large-scale, lensing
structure. The project will also search for the large angular scale B-mode
polarization signal imprinted on the CMB by inflationary gravitational waves
generated in the first instants of the Universe. Detection of the inflationary
B-mode spectrum would be a spectacular test of the Inflation theory of the
origin of the Universe and will set the energy scale of the Inflationary epoch.
In addition to the CMB temperature and polarization anisotropy data, the
obtained datasets will include a wealth of information including catalogs of
massive galaxy clusters and extragalactic millimeter and submillimeter sources.
Continued reliance on students provides a broader impact of this proposed
research and firmly grounds this effort in its educational mission. The project
will contribute significantly to the training of the next generation of
scientists by integrating graduate and undergraduate education with technology
and instrumentation development, astronomical field observations, and scientific
analysis. The sharing of forefront research with non-scientists will be extended
beyond the university through a well-established and vibrant educational network
that reaches a wide audience at all levels of the educational continuum.