* 0959382
* MRI-R2 : Acquisition of a Heterogenous Terascale Shared Campus Computing Facility
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,08/31/2011
* Cheng Wang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2011
* USD 199,480.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-59382&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Fisher,
Robert T.; Cowles, Geoffrey; W., Gottlieb; Sigal, Khanna, Gaurav; Wang,
Cheng&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth &lt;br/&gt;
North Dartmouth, MA 02727-2300&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI-R2: Acquisition of a
Heterogeneous Terascale Shared Campus Computing Facility&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed :&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a heterogeneous terascale parallel
computer cluster incorporating graphics processing units (GPUs), services an
inter- and multi-disciplinary group of mathematicians and computational
scientists and engineers, and their undergraduate and graduate students. This
shared campus research instrument leverages an existing small-scale cluster
without GPUs at UMass-Dartmouth resulting in a combined system of more than four
times the size. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the proposed cluster contains 32 8-way
nodes (256 cores) plus one NVIDIA Tesla GPU per node for a total of 32 GPUs. The
cluster is not intended to be a general computing resource, but rather highly
specialized instrument necessary for the development of high-performance
algorithms for scientific computation by the group of researchers in the
proposal. Researchers will take advantage of the incorporation of the GPUs in
each node to develop hybrid parallel and many-core-architecture-based computing.
The investigators will abstract out these GPU-accelerated solvers into an open
source GPU Scientific Library (GPUSL), which will be cleanly separated from the
overlying simulation codes through a set of well-defined interfaces.
&lt;br/&gt;Faculty members from the Physics, Mathematics, Marine Science and
Civil Engineering departments at UMass-Dartmouth have formed a scientific
computing group that will become the core management and user group of the
shared computational resources. The research foci of the group range from
Evolution of Giant Molecular Clouds (using the FLASH code) to Coastal Ocean
Modeling (using the FVCOM code) to the Simulation of an Incompressible Turbulent
Convective Fluid. Activities of this group include research collaborations,
weekly team meetings for the sharing of expertise on numerical algorithms, co-
advising of students, and a development of a multi-disciplinary doctoral
program. &lt;br/&gt;The cluster will be housed in the Campus Information
Technology Services (CITS) data center at UMass-Dartmouth, and directly
supported by the CITS Enterprise Systems Administration Team. This team will be
responsible for preventive maintenance session backup and recovery of user disk
space. The access to the machine and its allocation will be handled by a
Research User Group Committee which will be responsible for soliciting proposals
from faculty members seeking computer time and will also be responsible for
balancing the research needs of the faculty, graduate, and undergraduate
students in the user base.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
availability of this cluster allows for the training of the next generation of
high performance computing experts, and supports a new interdisciplinary Ph.D.
program in computational science, currently in development. Graduate students
benefit from the opportunity to develop cutting-edge parallel and GPU-
accelerated algorithms for a variety of challenging physical problems, in a
multi-disciplinary setting. The cluster also directly benefits undergraduate
education, as part of the NSF-funded Computational Science for Undergraduate
Mathematics Students (CSUMS) project, which aims to prepare undergraduate
students for, and engage them in, a sustained research experience in
computational mathematics. The approach is to recruit promising high school
seniors, then guide freshman and sophomores students through research topics in
computational science, and culminate by mentoring seniors through carefully
selected research projects.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, UMass-Dartmouth has a
successful tradition of broadening higher-education access to underrepresented
students through its College Now Steps Toward Abstract Reasoning and Thinking
(START) program. Over its 40-year history, the program has played a significant
role in broadening STEM access to disadvantaged students to women and
underrepresented minorities; in particular, approximately 25% - 30% of START
students in recent semesters are underrepresented minority persons of color. For
the scientific community, all computer codes developed on this enabling cluster,
including the GPU Software Library, will be released via a dedicated website,
immediately impacting more than 2500 researchers worldwide who use the community
codes FLASH and FVCOM.