* 0959422
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an automatic isothermal titration microcalorimeter
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Sanku Mallik, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 351,764.00

0959422&lt;br/&gt;Mallik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative proposal from the North Dakota
State University and the University of South Dakota requests funds to purchase
an automatic isothermal titration microcalorimeter (auto-ITC200 from Microcal/GE
Healthcare Biosciences) for Biomaterials research and education. The proposed
instrument determines binding parameters (i.e., stoichiometry, association
constant, enthalpy and entropy) in a single experiment, employing a very small
sample size (5-10 g per experiment). The instrument determines binding constants
in the range 102 - 109 M - 1 and the limit can be further enhanced by employing
competitive binding techniques. It is fully automated to run 50 samples per day.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, 10 faculty researchers (25 graduate and 20
undergraduate students) at NDSU and USD are studying the interactions of peptide
nanofibers, lipid- and polymer-based nanoparticles with proteins, DNA fragments,
aptamers and antibodies. Complete thermodynamic characterization of the binding
is a critical need for all of these research projects. However, the only ITC
available is located in the Biochemistry Department at NDSU and the instrument
is more than 12 years old (VP ITC from MicroCal Inc., purchased in 1997) and the
injection assembly is not communicating properly with the control computer. The
instrument is inadequate to satisfy the needs of the growing numbers of
Biomaterials researchers of the two universities. In addition, this instrument
is not set-up as a cost-center and often the access is fairly restricted. The
proposed auto-ITC200 instrument will ensure that the faculty researchers and
their students at NDSU and USD have access to a state-of-the-art
microcalorimeter. This will also impart appropriate training to the graduate and
the undergraduate students at both universities. The proposed instrument will be
set-up as a cost-center and the generated user fees will be used for maintenance
and upgrade. To effectively share the instrument between NDSU and USD, cyber
infrastructure-based protocol will be followed for time allocation, data
processing and data retrieval using the North Dakota NSF EPSCoR supported, high-
speed network connection.