* 0959117
* An Astronomically-tuned High Resolution Benthic Isotope Stratigraphy for the Late Paleocene and Early Eocene
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* James Zachos, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

TOWARD AN ASTRONOMICALLY-TUNED HIGH-RESOLUTION BENTHIC ISOTOPE STRATIGRAPHY FOR
THE PALEOCENE AND EARLY EOCENE

JAMES ZACHOS, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, SANTA CRUZ EAR-0959117

ABSTRACT The late Paleocene to early Eocene (~58 to 52 Mya) represents one of
the most climatically dynamic periods of Earth?s past. It is characterized by a
gradual long warming trend that culminates in the warmest conditions of the last
90 m.y., the Early Eocene Climatic Optimum. Recent investigations, however, have
found that the long-term warming trend was punctuated by several short-lived
(transient) warming events (tens of thousands of years in duration), referred to
as hyperthermals or Eocene thermal maxima. These events, which include the
extreme Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM, ~56 Mya), are thought to have a
common origin, possibly involving orbital forcing amplified by carbon cycle
feedbacks. Other proposed driving mechanisms, particularly for the PETM, include
volcanic outgassing and/or the decomposition of marine methane hydrates. To
assess whether the PETM and other thermal maxima were triggered by orbital or
other forcing, we intend to establish the temporal relationship of these events
to the long-term background variability (i.e., periodicity) in climate and the
cabon cycle. To this end, utilizing a deep sea core recovered from the south
Atlantic, we will construct the first high-resolution, astronomically-tuned
benthic foraminiferal stable carbon and oxygen isotope time series for a ~5-6
m.y. segment of the upper Paleocene-lower Eocene. These and other records will
allow us to establish the relative timing and phasing of the thermal maxima to
excursions in the carbon cycle, thus providing constraints for quantitatively
evaluating the nature of climate ? carbon cycle coupling during periods of
warming. In addition to this application, the astronomically-tuned isotope time-
series will serve as a standard isotope reference section by which all other
Paleocene and early Eocene deep-sea sequences can be compared. In this capacity,
it will be possible to use the carbon isotopes to correlate and calibrate
segments of marine sedimentary sections to our tuned record, thereby
significantly improving the accuracy of age models. This will facilitate
transfer of the astronomical calibrations to sections with exceptional
magnetostratigraphy, and thus the geomagnetic polarity time-scale.