* 0959415
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of an X-ray Computed Tomography system with loading capabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Beena Sukumaran, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 296,650.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The X-ray Computed Tomography with loading capabilities will be used to study:
a) granular material crushing and evolution of granular material fabric during
crushing; b) evaluation of deformation of the ferromagnetic, ferroelectric and
bonding materials under stress of Magnetostrictive-Piezoelectric Laminates to
optimize performance; and c) the performance of Magnetorheological Elastomers
(MRE) during compression loading leading to a more fundamental understanding of
its performance and thereby facilitating the creation of the next generation of
MRE materials. Rowan University and Southern New Jersey will be positively
impacted by the acquisition of the equipment by providing undergraduate and
graduate students with training in use of cutting edge technology and expanding
the equipment available for research at the South Jersey Technology Park.
Undergraduate students will be a vital part of the proposed research especially
through the Engineering Clinics. The timely acquisition will also enable various
other research projects especially with the addition of the medical school to
Rowan University. Every effort will be made to include minorities and women in
the research. As a result of the equipment acquisition and research that will be
enabled, the research team expects some publishable results, which will be
widely disseminated. The acquisition of the apparatus will also enable expanded
opportunities for foreign collaborations. The PI and co-PIs have also been
involved with various outreach efforts and the preliminary research will be
incorporated into these outreach activities.