* 0959888
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Raman and Thermal Analysis Instrumentation for Studies of Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* David Karpovich, Saginaw Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2013
* USD 308,954.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Professor David S. Karpovich, Jason J.
Pagano, Christopher H. Schilling, Tami L. Sivy and Ron R. Williams from Saginaw
Valley State University will acquire a Raman spectrometer, a thermal gravimetric
analysis instrument (TGA), and a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC). The
instruments will be used to study the production of novel biodegradable plastics
from regional agricultural and bio-fuel waste products and to analyze tubular
precipitation structures formed in geological and biological systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raman spectroscopy, thermal gravimetric analysis, and
differential scanning calorimetry will be used to correlate the spectral and
thermal properties associated with specific intermolecular interactions and
transitions in materials, with their physical/mechanical properties. The Raman
spectrum provides information on the chemical composition and structure of
materials. Thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) measures weight changes in a
material as a function of temperature providing information on the decomposition
or evaporation from a sample as it is heated. Differential scanning calorimetry
(DSC) measures the heat required to raise the temperature of a material and
helps to identify physical changes, such as phase transitions. The combined use
of these instruments will allow for the improvement of bio-plastics, optimizing
their tensile strength and reducing brittleness.