* 0959452
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Proton Transfer Reaction Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer for Atmospheric Chemistry
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Scot Martin, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 626,024.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports acquisition of a
state-of-the-art high-resolution proton-transfer time-of-flight mass
spectrometer (PTR-ToF-MS) that will be used to further understanding of the
atmospheric chemistry of biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOCs). This
instrument has the important advantage over the more common quadrupole PTR-MS of
a much better mass resolution, which allows isobaric ions of different elemental
composition to be separated. Research will include measurements of BVOC
emissions from forests and study of BVOC reactions with atmospheric oxidants in
the context of their ozone-forming potential and production of secondary organic
aerosols as well as the susceptibility of BVOC emissions to changing biological
and climatological factors. The studies will utilize a combination of field
measurements and laboratory reaction chamber experiments. While many previous
studies have looked at the formation of BVOCs, significant gaps in understanding
still exist. In particular, chemical models currently underpredict the organic
loading of atmospheric aerosols by factors of 4 to 8. It is hypothesized that
this 'missing organic mass' consists of as-yet unidentified BVOC precursors
originating from plant emissions. The PTR-ToF-MS will be used to search for and
identify these compounds and quantify their emissions. Measurements will be made
at Harvard Forest, which was established as a Long Term Ecological Research
(LTER) site more than 20 years ago, and the Harvard environmental
chamber.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will be of great importance in the
context of both air quality and climate forcing. In addition, the instrument
will be used in the context of a new consortium for studies of biogenic
emissions and production of aerosols. Four New England institutions are proposed
as initial components of a regional center: Amherst College, Harvard University,
Boston College, and the University of Vermont. A focus of the center will be
enhanced research opportunities for undergraduates. Activities will include
monthly group meetings, summer and academic-year research opportunities that
will focus on undergraduate students, social activities to enhance mentoring and
networking, and biennial research symposia.