* 0959096
* EAGER: Secure Peer-to-peer Data Management
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Bhavani Thuraisingham, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 79,999.00

Peer-to-peer (P2P) networks have increased in popularity partly because they can
be implemented atop a diverse collection of hardware and software, making them
relatively inexpensive to deploy and maintain. The network infrastructure also
tends to be highly fault-tolerant, and bandwidth and other computational
resources tend to be well balanced across peers, making the network highly
robust. In practice, many P2P networks remain vulnerable to denial of service
attacks because the homogeneity of the network results in greater
interdependence among hosts. Many existing P2P networks also suffer from serious
data integrity vulnerabilities because it is easy for peers in the network to
lie to other peers about the data they serve. The confidentiality desired by P2P
users typically comes in two forms: Data confidentiality policies prohibit the
leaking of high confidentiality, shared objects to low-privileged peers, while
user anonymity policies prohibit the divulging of a user?s private information.
Trusted data management is a key layer in providing environments for trusted
collaboration. The team will use their secure P2P infrastructure with low level
security enforcement mechanisms as a basis for developing a reputation-based
trust management system to enforce discretionary access control. They will
provide a comprehensive solution for the design and development of secure data
management hosted on a peer to peer network, focused on query processing in such
an environment with considerations for confidentiality, integrity, and trust.