* 0959905
* MRI-R2: Development of an Integrated STEM Instrument with Nanoscale milli-Electron Volt Energy Loss Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Frederic Cosandey, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,972,867.00

0959905&lt;br/&gt;Batson&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers U. New
Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI-R2: Development of an Integrated STEM
Instrument with Nanoscale milli-Electron Volt Energy Loss
Spectroscopy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS) in
the Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope (STEM) is a bedrock quantitative
analytical technique for modern materials development. This partnership between
Rutgers University and Nion, Co., a small US business, will use aberration
correction methods to develop the first Angstrom-level EELS instrument capable
of 10 meV energy resolution. Using incident electron energies of 60-100 keV,
studies of electronic, photonic and vibronic behavior of soft and hard sub-
nanoscale materials will be possible. The instrument will include probe side
chromatic aberration correction, an innovative method for monochromator-
spectrometer energy registry, pre-spectrometer aberration correction, and a 2D
single electron counting detector optimized for high sensitivity and high
dynamic range. Accessible problems include: phonon and atomic/molecular
vibrational behavior in nanoscale objects, electronic behavior of interfacial
defects, energetics of configuration changes in carbon-based molecules, and
mapping of nanoscale photonic and plasmonic fields. The instrument will be a
superb tool for understanding structure-function relationships in numerous
materials of importance to societal applications such as photovoltaics, energy
storage, catalysis, high temperature hard coatings, nanoelectronics, photonics,
and emergent behavior based on nanoscale processes. The world-leading
combination of spatial and energy resolution will be valuable for motivating and
training of students by communicating atomic level functionality in very graphic
and visual ways. Rutgers diverse student body and its extensive outreach
community will both benefit from this capability. This user facility, accessible
to a broad portion of the scientific community, will be the first state-of-the-
art aberration corrected EELS/STEM facility in New Jersey, providing direct
access for both local educational and industrial users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials, particularly those developed on the
nanoscale, provide critical advances required to meet many of the demanding
societal problems confronting the next generations. The design of such materials
requires visualization of atomic level structure, composition, and bonding at
the finest level-atom by atom. For the past 50 years, electron microscopy,
combined with electron energy loss spectroscopy, has been a workhorse, providing
structure as well as atomic composition on the nanoscale and information on
atomic bonding. Nevertheless, the most recent demands of nano-scale materials
science require still more precise and sensitive tools. This partnership between
Rutgers University and Nion Co., a small US business, will produce a leap ahead
in electron spectroscopy capabilities to allow visualization of the function of
structures which contain only a few atoms -- even down to single molecules, a
region unattainable till now. The new tool aid the creation of new materials
required for efficient energy production and storage, catalysis,
nanoelectronics, photonics, and new materials yet to be created. The highly
visual information will also play a significant role in motivating students, and
preparing the future generation of advanced materials scientists and engineers.
The instrument will be located at Rutgers University in the Laboratory for
Surface Modification and will be administered by the Institute for Advanced
Materials, Devices and Nanotechnology. This facility will be a world leader,
bringing to the New Jersey region a new resource for the advancement of
scientific understanding, for educational outreach, industrial interaction, and
collaboration with other national and international scientific institutions.