* 0959521
* MRI-R2 Consortium:  Development of Forward-Angle Tracking Telescopes for Luminosity Monitoring at OLYMPUS
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2013
* Douglas Hasell, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2013
* USD 216,381.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable Hampton
University, under the leadership of PI Dr. Michael Kohl, to construct and
implement luminosity monitors for the so-called OLYMPUS experiment. The OLYMPUS
experiment (pOsitron-proton and eLectron-proton elastic scattering to test the
hYpothesis of Multi-Photon exchange Using doriS) at DESY Laboratory, Germany,
will be carried out in a multi-national collaboration. This experiment will
provide definitive information about how electrons interact with protons and
neutrons, thereby settling key uncertainties surrounding other electron
scattering experiments. The luminosity monitors will be built in close
collaboration with Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Dr. Kohl is one
of the originators of OLYMPUS and is pursuing it in a lead role as co-
spokesperson along with co-PIs Dr. Richard Milner and Dr. Douglas Hasell from
MIT. The luminosity monitors are considered essential in the overall OLYMPUS
setup to warrant the small anticipated systematic uncertainties and are the
responsibility of Dr. Kohl's group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI-R2 project
enables new research and educational opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students from minority populations, predominantly African-Americans.
This MRI-R2 will allow construction and testing of the instrument in a new lab
on the campus of Hampton University, in a newly constructed research building.
The active role of students and young researchers integrated in the OLYMPUS
collaboration prepares and trains them very effectively in their future role as
globally engaged scientists. In particular, attracting undergraduate students to
this program serves the underlying purpose of providing a pipeline of talented
undergraduate students towards graduate education in top schools and to
ultimately increase the number of underrepresented, in particular African-
American, PhDs, which is at the heart of Hampton University's mission.