* 0959808
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of Recording Media to Triple the Sensitivity of the VLBA
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Robert Walker, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey R. Pier
* 03/31/2011
* USD 507,258.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order for astronomers to have the
highest possible resolution to detect objects of the smallest angular size, they
require large telescopes, or they combine the light from telescopes that are
separated from one another. As the separation between the telescopes increases,
so does the ability to resolve finer details. The largest platform that is
currently in use for astronomy is the earth itself. Radio astronomers use radio
telescopes that are spread by thousands of miles in what is called the Very
Large Baseline Array (VLBA). A large number of important scientific problems are
investigated with the VLBA which also provides an important service in
determining the positions and motions of objects on the sky, a branch of
astronomy called astrometry. Astrometry is important for all astronomers, but it
also serves commercial and defense interests for satellite navigation and
calibration of the GPS system. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Radio astronomers at the
National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) have realized that they can
significantly increase the sensitivity of the VLBA by adding computing power and
data storage capabilities to the signal processing equipment that correlates the
signals from the telescopes. Their work, sponsored by the National Science
Foundation's Major Research Instrumentation program, will allow scientists to
see fainter objects to probe farther and deeper into space. It will also allow
them to improve the accuracy of measurements made for astrometry. The work will
be led by Dr. R. Craig Walker of NRAO in Socorro, NM.