* 0959401
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a High Performance Liquid Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry System
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Deon Miles, University of the South
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 04/30/2013
* USD 350,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor Deon Miles and colleague Robert E.
Bachman from the University of the South will acquire a high performance,
liquid-chromatograph, tandem mass spectrometer (HPLC/MS/MS) capable of handling
high molecular mass materials. The instrument will be used to support research
activities such as: 1) solution aggregates formed by platinum diimine complexes,
2) separation and identification of water-soluble semiconducting and metallic
nanoparticles, 3) isolation and characterization of cardiolipin from skeletal
muscle membrane phospholipid fatty acids, and 4) identification of
S-nitrosylated proteins and their degree of
nitrosylation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is used to identify
the chemical composition of a sample and determine its purity by measuring the
mass of the molecular constituents in the sample after they are ionized and
detected by the mass spectrometer. High pressure liquid chromatography is an
isolation technique that precedes the mass spectrometry analysis. It separates a
mixture into its several constituent chemicals which are then analyzed by the
mass spectrometer. These are widely used analytical techniques to identify and
quantify the chemical composition of a sample. It is important for students to
be trained using modern instrumentation. The research will have a significant
impact in a number of areas, especially chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research.