* 0960110
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of FEG TEM/STEM for Materials and Nanotechnology Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2013
* David Sellmyer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 03/31/2013
* USD 1,300,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0960110&lt;br/&gt;Sellmyer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;Installation of the
proposed field-emission (scanning) transmission-electron microscope (FE(S)TEM),
in a custom-designed facility at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, will
provide all researchers in nanoscale science and technology and in advanced
materials throughout the University of Nebraska with access to advanced
instrumentation for research use, research training, and related education. It
will enable faculty and students to characterize flexibly and efficiently the
detailed structure, composition, morphology and many properties of nanoscale
materials and devices, including interfaces and important imperfections at near-
atomic scale. This key enhancement will expand the ability of researchers to
visualize their particles, thin films, patterned surfaces, wires and devices in
ways that they need, but do not yet have access to in Nebraska or
nearby.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial scientific goals of research include
materials research on: quantum electronic, spintronic and magnetic phenomena and
device applications; chiral nanostructured hybrid materials; novel low-work-
function and semiconducting materials; and nanoscale hard-magnet materials
destined to provide more energy-efficient motors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
related research and training activities include greater emphasis on outreach
and research collaboration across the Nebraska and beyond, with the aid of the
integrated telemicroscopy facility of the FE(S)TEM. The FE(S)TEM will enable
enhanced recruitment of, and research productivity by, more graduate students,
and will enable the investigators to expand recruiting and work with students
from under-represented groups beyond present levels. The FE(S)TEM will be
featured in upper-level and graduate courses, and in materials research science
and engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LAYMAN ABSTRACT:
&lt;br/&gt;The operation and performance of each generation of the new materials
and technology that we quickly take for granted in the work place, in travel, in
communication, in entertainment and in personal life depends on the structure
and properties of the key constituents at the level of individual atoms and
molecules. Advanced electron microscopes, especially the field-emission
(scanning) transmission-electron microscope (FE(S)TEM) that will be acquired in
this project, provide researchers with the analysis tools they need to
understand the performance of their latest materials and devices and to conduct
research that enables the next generations of new materials and technologies.
Installed in our custom-created electron microscope environment, the FE (S)TEM
will provide for research use, research-training, and related education and will
expand the ability of researchers to visualize their particles, thin films,
patterned surfaces, wires and devices in ways that they need, but do not yet
have access to in Nebraska or nearby. The materials and technology applications
include: alternative and renewable energy capture, storage and supply; faster,
smaller and more secure communications and information technologies that also
demand less energy; detectors for use in national security, medicine, science
and space; and light, strong magnets for energy-efficient cars and
transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research and training
activities include added emphasis on outreach and research collaboration across
the Nebraska and beyond, aided by the integrated telemicroscopy facility of the
FE(S)TEM. The FE(S)TEM will help in recruiting, educating and training a more
diverse range of students for the U.S. and Nebraskan workforce. The FE(S)TEM
will enhance advanced-undergraduate and graduate courses, as well as all
materials research science and engineering education.