* 0960871
* Crime, War and Wealth in Pre- and Post- Invasion Iraq
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,09/30/2013
* John Hagan, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2013
* USD 170,226.00

SES-0960871 &lt;br/&gt;John Hagan &lt;br/&gt;American Bar
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;States do not fight wars in the same ways or
with the same consequences as in the past. Civilians are increasingly the
victims of new and contemporary wars. While repressive forms of crime against
civilians prevailed in the Iraq regime of Saddam Hussein, economic crimes
against civilians became more common during the post-invasion Coalition
occupation. The crimes of the past Iraq regime set a foundation of sectarian
fear and conflict that was released by the US-led invasion and which, in turn,
led to rampant crimes against civilians and their property. The research will
assess this sequence with three surveys that include more than 9,000 personal
interviews conducted before and after the regime change in Iraq. We will assess
whether a sequence unfolded in which ethno-sectarian strong state repression and
deprivation was followed in Iraq by a weak state in which fears about safety,
protection, and resource needs in turn caused extensive sectarian looting and
violent crime by gangs and militias. We will more specifically examine whether
the wave of violent crimes that peaked in 2005-6 also elevated ethno-sectarian
crimes against property to peak levels. The interview accounts will be used to
elaborate and illustrate statistical findings. There is little past analysis of
property losses during the occupation of Iraq. Yet the loss of household and
business wealth is assumed to be extensive, especially for Iraq?s more than four
million displaced persons. Previous work predicts that breakdown in state
control over crime and violence is most extensive in mixed community settings.
This is likely because conflict increases as contesting groups come into close
residential contact or in other ways. The research will test such predictions in
the post-invasion neighborhoods of Baghdad. We predict that the lower the
proportion of the largest ethnic group in a post-invasion neighborhood, and
therefore the greater the ethno-sectarian mix, the higher the level of property
and person crime. We further predict that a redistribution of wealth in Iraq
first began to emerge during a preliminary looting stage (2003-5), then peaked
with the rise of violent crimes against persons in a second stage (2005-6), and
finally declined in its volume but not in its re-distributional consequences in
the third period of the Surge (2007). The combination of data sets available for
this research allows a unique case study of the sectarian and economic
consequences of violent crime in a transition from a strong to weak state. This
is a kind of transition that may be increasingly replacing older forms of
military conflict. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Contemporary wars may
be less consequential for military targets than they are for the health and
socio-economic well-being of civilian victims. These losses and transfers of
wealth can be especially devastating for some while presenting enormous
opportunities for others. It is important in developing our understanding to
document and explain ethno-sectarian aspects of the redistribution of wealth in
settings such as Iraq. This understanding is essential to explaining how these
conflicts disrupt and destroy opportunities for growth and development where it
often is needed most. Traditional militaristic approaches to the understanding
of war in a changing world of international development and destruction are
often outdated. The primary goal of this case study in Iraq is to increase our
understanding of the socio-economic consequences of crimes against civilians and
their property, elements that increasingly characterize modern day
warfare.&lt;br/&gt;