* 0960022
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Focused Ion Beam - Scanning Electron Microscope (FIB-SEM) for Nano/Micro Fabrication/Characterization
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* David Kazmer, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,150,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)"
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Massachusetts at Lowell (UML) requests
support for the acquisition of a state-of-the-art Auriga CrossBeam Focused Ion
Beam - Scanning Electron Microscope (FIB-SEM) workstation from Carl Zeiss for
research and research training that are critical for workforce training and
regional economic development.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Complemented with
existing extensive resources, the FIB-SEM can simultaneously perform machining
and characterization of both conductive and nonconductive materials with best-
in-class resolution. It will enable in-depth, fundamental research and position
UML among the leaders in nanomanufacturing and plastics engineering research.
While a few ongoing research projects will benefit from the requested system,
several new programs that have been hindered by this lacking capability will be
initiated. In addition, the acquisition will strengthen UML?s fast-growing
research areas in nanomedicine, biomedical devices, and bioengineering. Last but
not the least, collaborations with nearby universities and local companies will
be enhanced. Examples include tooling for cost-effective nanomanufacturing
systems, high speed AFM tip arrays for high-rate nanomanufacturing, and
nanoparticle drug delivery systems.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The requested
equipment will immediately impact research by more than 20 faculty members from
nine departments. Graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students as well as industry
professionals will benefit from programs incorporating the FIB system. A unique
"machining" program will be piloted with the Nashoba Valley Technical High
School and extended to local technical high schools. In addition, UML has long-
standing ties with industry and flexible arrangements for equipment use.