* 0960242
* MRI-R2 Consortium: Development of Improved Instrumentation for the VERITAS Gamma-Ray Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Rene Ong, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,633,490.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). It will provide funds to improve the capabilities of the
VERITAS Gamma-Ray Observatory. Located at the F.L Whipple Observatory near
Amado, AZ, the VERITAS Observatory is one of only three ground-based gamma-ray
observatories in the world with sensitivity at the level of 1% of the Crab
Nebula flux, and the only such facility available to U.S. researchers. VERITAS
consists of an array of four, 12-meter diameter Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov
telescopes, which record the faint flashes of Cherenkov light resulting from the
interactions of Very High Energy gamma rays in the Earth's
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three proposed upgrades will substantially
enhance every VERITAS science goal. The primary outcomes will be to lower the
energy threshold of VERITAS and improve its sensitivity:&lt;br/&gt;- Camera
Upgrade: replacing the photo-detectors in the VERITAS cameras with more
efficient, super-bialkali devices will increase the overall Cherenkov photon
collection efficiency by 50%, equivalent to increasing the mirror diameters to
more than 14 m, but at a substantially lower cost;&lt;br/&gt;- Trigger Upgrade:
replacing the telescope-level trigger system with a more sophisticated, FPGA-
based device will allow faster coincidence windows and provide a path toward a
future topological array-level trigger;&lt;br/&gt;- Optical Monitoring/
Intensity Interferometry Upgrade: equipping the telescopes with a fast central
photodetector with continuous high speed data acquisition will enable
photometric, timing, and interferometric measurements of sources in the optical
(U/V) bands. This brings a unique scientific capability that does not exist on
any other ground-based gamma-ray observatory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this proposal include strengthening the VERITAS Collaboration's
Education and Outreach programs. Additional activities include the University of
Utah's vigorous undergraduate research program and initiatives, led by the Adler
Planetarium, to develop interactive visualization tools which explain and
illustrate the very high energy Universe to a broad audience. &lt;br/&gt;