* 0960914
* Eddy diffusivities in the Southern Ocean from an eddying model
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Julie McClean, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 04/30/2016
* USD 314,360.00

Realistic depiction of Southern Ocean eddy dynamics is critical in models used
for climate prediction. Mixing generated by mesoscale eddies is believed to play
an important role in the transfer of water masses and tracers across the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC). In turn, these water mass transfers are
thought to control the global overturning circulation and inter-ocean exchange.
The central goals of this project are to quantify Lagrangian isopycnal eddy
diffusivities in the Southern Ocean and to characterize their horizontal and
vertical distributions, and to assess their ability to parameterize isopycnal
eddy tracer fluxes across the ACC. These questions will be addressed using the
0.1 degree, 42-level global configuration of the Los Alamos National Laboratory
(LANL) Parallel Ocean Program (POP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Large uncertainty exists in the representation of Southern Ocean eddy mixing
processes in standard climate scale ocean models. The effects of eddies are
commonly parameterized using eddy diffusion, and climate scale models are very
sensitive to the magnitude of the eddy diffusion coefficients in the Southern
Ocean. Whether the sensitivity of the ocean circulation to surface forcing is
altered when using constant eddy diffusion coefficients rather than variable
eddy diffusion coefficients remains unclear, and, more fundamentally, it is
unclear if local, or even zonally integrated tracer transports are simulated
adequately by the eddy diffusion model. A related fundamental issue is to
determine the horizontal and vertical distributions of the eddy diffusion
coefficients. Different methods have resulted in conflicting magnitudes and
spatial distributions in the Southern Ocean. Lagrangian floats provide a way to
test the applicability of the diffusion model. Of order 10,000 numerical floats
will be deployed in the ocean model, at various locations within and outside the
ACC and at a range of depth levels to estimate Lagrangian diffusivities and
their spatial distributions. The skill of these Lagrangian diffusivities in
parameterizing zonally integrated as well as local eddy tracer transport in the
ACC will be assessed. This project will contribute to ongoing efforts to
reconcile conflicting diffusivity estimates for the Southern Ocean and will
ultimately allow us to assess how much the spatial structure of the
diffusivities matters in simulating Southern Ocean eddy fluxes
accurately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will contribute to
the early career development of a postdoctoral researcher. The research will
explore different ways to parameterize mixing coefficients, which will be
testable in predictive climate models. A detailed assessment of Lagrangian
methods and their relation to eddy fluxes and diffusivity estimates from other
methods will benefit efforts to analyze data from floats deployed all over the
ocean. In particular, the methods investigated in this study will contribute to
the interpretation of in situ data returned by the 180acoustic floats that are
being deployed as part of the NSF-funded Diapycnal and Isopycnal Mixing
Experiment in the Southern Ocean (DIMES) experiment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a contribution to the U.S. CLIVAR (CLImate VARiability and
predictability) program.