* 0960447
* Evolution:  Foundations, Fundamentals, and Disease; Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Robert Austin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 01/31/2011
* USD 26,000.00

The proposed meeting, "Evolution: Foundations, Fundamentals, and Disease" will
be held between December 7 and December 10 at the Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology will include three main themes: (I) Re-examining the
Foundations of Evolution, (II) modeling evolution using the concepts of physics,
and (III) The Role of Evolution in Biological Disease. The primary approach in
the first two sections will be to use ideas from physics of complex systems to
develop a complementary to biology understanding of evolution, while the second
part will focus on disease evolution. The participants will address fundamental
issues of the evolution of disease from both theoretical and experimental
perspective. This is a perfect time to re-examine the foundations of evolution
and its consequences. Humanity is now in the midst of a new flu pandemic and
Asia, and Hong Kong in particular, has been at the epicenter of pandemics in the
past. These pandemics are terrifying and at the same time a lesson on how little
we understand about evolution dynamics. While there have been many, many
meetings devoted to evolution, because of the 150th Anniversary of the
publication of the Origin of the Species, and the 200th Anniversary of the birth
of Charles Darwin, most of these meetings have been intensely biological in
nature. In contrast this meeting does not aim to praise Darwin but rather
critically look at the foundations of evolution and the connection between
evolution and disease progression from a physics perspective. The meeting will
bring together physicists and biologists to discuss basic the questions of
evolution from the point of view of physics and will be an excellent forum for
interdisciplinary research. In addition it will bring senior as well as junior
scientists from different countries and will not only contribute to the
education of the next generation of interdisciplinary researchers, but also to
international cooperation in science.