* 0960243
* MRI-R2: Development of POLAR-1, an expandable 5,000-detector CMB Polarimeter
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Chao-Lin Kuo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,966,178.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) observations hold a
remarkable wealth of information about the early Universe and they recently
transformed cosmology into a precision science. While the basic notion and the
ingredients of an expanding Universe are well established, fundamental questions
on the Universe's origin still remain unanswered. Measuring the CMB polarization
provides a powerful tool to address the most important of these questions. The
polarization pattern in the CMB can be decomposed into two distinct components,
E-mode and B-mode, and the latter (yet to be detected) can provide two
remarkable insights. With the detected B-mode polarization, one can study the
large-scale structure of the Universe and the parameters that affect this
structure, such as absolute neutrino mass and Dark Energy evolution. The degree-
scale B-mode polarization also should carry imprints from the Cosmic
Gravitational-wave Background (CGB), giving us a glimpse of the Universe during
its tiniest (10^-35) fraction of the very first second of life. This CGB signal
is a direct measurement of the energy scale at which the inflationary Big Bang
occurs. The proposal requests funds for development of an enhanced large-format
focal plane polarimeter POLAR-1 with 4,608 polarization-sensitive
superconducting bolometers operating at 150 GHz and integrated with a 1.5-m
reflective radio telescope. The proposed combination of angular resolution and
bolometer array size make it ideally suited to study both the lensing-induced
and the CGB-generated B-polarization. POLAR-1 will detect lensing induced
B-polarization with extremely high significance and search for CGB down to 2% of
the initial perturbation in power. The project's broader impacts would be in its
path-finding nature of building an instrument ~10x more sensitive to the CMB
polarization. As cosmology captures the public imagination, it is a remarkably
effective vehicle for stimulating students' interest in science. The project
will continue contributing significantly to the training of next generation of
scientists by integrating graduate and undergraduate education with technology
and instrumentation development, astronomical field observations, and scientific
analysis.