* 0960535
* Filtered Push: Continuous Quality Control for Distributed Collections and Other Species-Occurrence Data.
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* James Macklin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,640,289.00

Harvard University is awarded a grant to develop a networked solution to enable
annotation of distributed biological collection data and to share assertions
about their quality or usability. Internet inquiries that are posed to multiple
datasets may yield varying results depending on the suitability or quality of
the targeted data. In some cases it might be possible to inquire of experts or
software agents that can assist in determining the fitness for use; in other
cases such experts or agents might already have recorded an assessment of the
data. However, that information is not typically available to the originator of
the query. The proposed system will make these value-added assertions accessible
to the end users of biodiversity datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Filtered
Push network uses natural science collections as a reference implementation for
a cyberinfrastructure with which any community can render an expert opinion
about the quality of data, and the fitness for use of a data set or a subset of
records. The emergent knowledgebase of the Filtered Push network supports the
ability of interested parties to get immediate or historical access to these
annotations, filtered by criteria expressing constraints on their interests. The
network can also provide for the automatic execution of scientific workflows
triggered by expert commentary, by the introduction or discovery of new data, or
by a change in scientific viewpoints. As with the annotations, the outputs of
such workflows can be distributed to interested parties, software or human.
Filtered Push networks therefore allow for continuous quality control by the
scientific community, based on human expertise, statistical or logical machine
reasoning or advances in the domain science itself. The Filtered Push project
maintains a wiki at http://www.etaxonomy.org/mw/FilteredPush. This project is
part of a 10-year effort to digitize and mobilize the scientific information
associated with biological specimens held in U.S. research collections. The
images and digitized data from this project will be integrated into the online
national resource as outlined in the community strategic plan available at
http://digbiocol.files.wordpress.com/2010/05/digistratplanfinaldraft.pdf.