* 0960788
* Hyperpycnal River Plumes - an opportunity to study their transport and deposition in a controlled dam-removal experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Andrea Ogston, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 525,635.00

Hyperpycnal (high density) flows coming directly from the rivers and
continental-shelf fluid muds are considered to control considerable cross-margin
sediment transport but are difficult to study due to unpredictable nature of
such large discharge events. Dam removal on Elwa River of the Olympic Mountains
in Washington may allow the study of such events. Two dams will be removed over
a 2-year period on the Elwa starting in 2011, during which time models predict
turbidite formation and gravity flows (hyperpycnal plumes) in Juan de Fuca
Straits. The PI will utilize this opportunity to study the high-density flows
through real-time monitoring of suspended sediment in the rivers and offshore.
They hypothesize that most of the sediment discharged soon after dam removal
will move to relatively deep water as high density plumes move below the
influence of waves and currents. They will study four specific river discharge
conditions and the two peak discharges on Elwa will allow these conditions to be
investigated individually.&lt;br/&gt;Hyperpycnal flows to the ocean have not
been studied in any detailed before and the proposed work should bring new
information on the role of these elusive events on the dispersal of sediment to
the basins. The PIs plan to incorporate the work with some field based courses
and will support one graduate student.