* 0960422
* RUI - The Political Economy of IMF Surveillance
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,11/30/2013
* Martin Edwards, Seton Hall University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 11/30/2013
* USD 116,743.00

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has been the focus of a great deal of
scholarly attention in recent years. While we increasingly understand how the
IMF makes loans, whether or not the conditions attached to these loans will be
implemented by borrowing countries, and how to assess the broader effects of
these programs, we still know every little about the day-to-day work of the IMF.
One of the Fund's main jobs is to engage in annual reviews of member country
economies to ensure that countries are adopting growth-enhancing policies. In
contrast to the Fund's lending, very little attention has been paid to the IMF's
surveillance activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the barriers to learning
about surveillance has been that until very recently it was a private dialogue
between the Fund and the member country. In recent years, these consultations
have become transparent. Country decisions to release information regarding the
consultation allow us to understand how the IMF writes its reports and how IMF
surveillance affects both the responses of international markets and country
economic policies. In addition, understanding cross-country variations in
transparency tell us a great deal about how international norms
spread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions are important not merely because
surveillance is unexplored, but also because understanding the effectiveness of
IMF surveillance tells us about international cooperation more generally.
Scholars study IMF lending because it is an area in which there is enforcement:
countries that fail to implement loan conditions lose access to remaining
installments of the loan. By contrast, surveillance is not backed by
enforcement: any penalties that are incurred by countries not following the
IMF?s advice are (presumably) inflicted by international investors who might
withdraw capital. Learning about the effects of IMF surveillance helps
understand when other international organizations that lack enforcement power
can still be consequential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research strategy to be
used in this project is almost exclusively quantitative. Student research
assistants will help build datasets on country decisions to make their IMF
consultations transparent and on the effects of transparency on international
capital markets and country economic policies. In addition, the Principal
Investigator will go to the IMF archives to code the Fund's reports (both
published and not) to ascertain whether the Fund faces incentives to reveal
information about a country's economy accurately. Information from the archival
reports will in turn be used to build a dataset as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends our understanding of one of the most
important international organizations in the world. In so doing, it helps us to
learn about country incentives for transparency and how transparency matters.
Moreover, it helps devise broader lessons for international cooperation in
noneconomic areas. Moreover, because this proposed project is under the Research
at Undergraduate Institutions designation, it creates a nascent undergraduate
research cluster addressing these issues.