* 0960822
* Advances in Computerized Adaptive Testing: Modeling  Response Times and Constraint Management for Skills Diagnosis
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Hua-Hua Chang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2012
* USD 233,148.00

Computerized Adaptive Testing (CAT) has become popular in high-stakes testing
programs. Examples of large-scale CATs include the Graduate Record Examination,
the Graduate Management Admission Test, the National Council of State Boards
Nursing, and the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery. An advantage of CAT
over paper-and-pencil exams is that it provides more efficient estimation of
abilities because it can appropriately tailor item selection to the estimated
abilities of examinees. This research addresses two areas of critical importance
for CAT. First, flexible models for response times will be developed to assist
in controlling the duration of an exam, and also to assist in the measurement of
ability in appropriate circumstances. Second, statistical methods for constraint
management will be developed to ensure that an exam has sufficient information
to diagnose fine-grained skills while also providing an accurate summary
score.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the research will be to provide
technology to better utilize response-time information and also enhance the
ability of CAT to provide diagnostic information. Models for response-time
distributions will be developed that make few assumptions concerning functional
form and allow for dependence between response times and a latent trait that
represents ability on the studied domain. Estimation techniques will be
developed that may be used with data previously collected from exams
administered with CAT. Algorithms for utilizing estimated response-time
distributions will be constructed to better manage duration of exams and to
extract information from response times to better estimate the ability the exam
is designed to measure. In addition to addressing response times, the problem of
managing the diagnostic information to assess mastery of fine-grained skills
will be studied for exams that also aim to provide a single summary score. CAT
methods for adaptively selecting items to more efficiently provide a score will
be modified to simultaneously balance the coverage of skills and attributes of
interest.