* 0960536
* RUI: Descriptive Representation and Its Impact on the U.S. Courts
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2010,09/30/2012
* Nancy Scherer, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 09/30/2012
* USD 99,904.00

All political institutions require the public to view them as legitimate (i.e.,
public confidence and trust) in order to operate effectively. Courts are said to
be especially dependent on public trust as they lack purse and sword to enforce
their orders. This study will focus on one political theory known as descriptive
representation, which posits that institutions enhance their political
legitimacy by reflecting the gender, ethnic and racial make-up of the American
population. Such institutional diversity not only helps realize the ideals of
popular sovereignty, but also sends an important message to historically
underrepresented groups that they are welcome in the halls of power. Given the
spate of criticism of the Judiciary in recent years, the enhancement of the
courts? political legitimacy has never been more timely and important.
Accordingly, the research question at issue in this project is: how does
increased diversity on the federal bench impacts citizens? views about the
legitimacy of U.S. courts?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An innovative research design
will be used for this project ? a series of experiments using a national random
sample of subjects and conducted on the internet. Experiments have a critical
advantage over traditional surveys, for they establish causation, and not mere
correlation. The data collected for this survey will enable a wide array of
researchers in the social sciences, the legal academy, and the federal
government to better understand the relationship between race/gender and
institutional legitimacy. The data will prove especially useful to scholars of
Congress, the bureaucracy, the presidency, race and gender politics, and public
opinion ? many of whom are engaged with questions about the changing demography
in the U.S., and its impact on American politics. With the election of the first
African American president, diversity in our government has never been more
salient an issue. &lt;br/&gt;