* 0960078
* MRI-R2:  Development of Next-generation Imaging Spectrometer Based on a Tunable Liquid Crystal Filter
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2010,09/30/2013
* William Karl, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 775,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a solid state,
frequency-agile, imaging spectrometer based on an electronically tunable optical
filter. The instrument--referred to as the Liquid-Crystal (LC) Hyperspectral
Imager (LCHSI)--solves the difficult problem of imaging transient events at
multiple wavelengths simultaneously. At the heart of the LCHSI is a Fabry-Perot
etalon whose transmission characteristic is controlled via an electric field
applied across a liquid-crystal substrate injected into the gap. The substrate
is etched into four electrically-isolated regions which may be individually
controlled. The resulting quadrant filter is then coupled to beam diverting
prisms to produce four narrow-band images on a single detector. Each channel may
be individually tuned at millisecond cadence to thousands of narrow-band color
combinations. The instrument thus combines the wavelength agility of a
dispersion-based hyperspectral imager (HSI) with the imaging ability of a
filter-wheel camera. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This architecture has several
advantages over competing multi-spectral and hyper-spectral systems. The
combination of simultaneous multi-channel imaging and electronic tuning makes
the LCHSI extremely versatile. The use of a single optical chain and a solid-
state filter reduces size, mass, cost, and complexity. Static filters degrade
over time resulting in a drift of their center wavelength, rendering them
unusable; since an LC filter is tunable, it does not degrade, and need only be
calibrated periodically. The LC filter is also extremely robust; the technology
is thus a candidate for next-generation space-borne imaging
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the applications of this technology are
extremely broad, the initial demonstration of the LCHSI will be in the field of
aeronomy, targeting five common emissions in the airglow and auroral spectrum:
427.8, 557.7, 630, 732 and 777.4 nm. The 732 and 777.4 lines can be tuned in a
single quadrant, thus providing a test of the wavelength-hopping capability, as
well as the on- and off-band sampling mode. Testing will be carried out at the
NSF Upper Atmospheric Facilities at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and Sondrestrom,
Greenland.