* 0960549
* Collaborative Research:  Map of Life:  An Infrastructure for Integrating Global Species Distribution Knowledge
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Robert Guralnick, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2014
* USD 463,609.00

Yale University and the University of Colorado Boulder are awarded grants to
develop an interactive, online species distribution workbench and knowledge-
base, the "Map of Life", as the fundamental mechanism for documentation,
integration, and advance of human biodiversity distribution knowledge. Despite
hundreds of years of active exploration, human knowledge of the distribution of
biodiversity remains very limited. A fundamental factor in this shortcoming is
that the majority of direct and indirect information about species'
distributions has not been mobilized and integrated. While researchers can
readily access fine-scale environmental data with global coverage, access to
integrated species distribution information at validated precision remains
elusive. This collaborative project will develop a conceptual and
cyberinfrastructure framework for provisioning and improving reliable species
geographic range information. Map of Life will combine on a single website
expert range maps, survey data, and range maps adjusted for species habitat
suitability initially for terrestrial vertebrate species, with extensions
planned for other animal and plant groups. It will therefore serve the needs of
all those requiring estimates of species geographic ranges across taxonomic
groups and regions, such as scientists, land-managers, governments, policy-
makers and the general public. Users can upload data, edit input or output and
directly improve or comment on existing maps which will iteratively lead to more
advanced species distribution knowledge. Users can also download any and all
maps in different formats directly from the application or perform batch-
download for multiple species. Finally, simple richness and regional species
list tools will extend the products to users with a geographic focus.

Given that species range maps are one of the most commonly used and familiar
information products in biology, the potential broader impacts and benefits of
Map of Life to society are remarkable. Unlike printed range maps, the dynamic
nature of editable online range maps encourages the public to move from roles of
passive consumers to "prosumers"; they can both produce and consume information
and generate new knowledge. The Map of Life project also presents a unique
cross-disciplinary training opportunity in macroecology and biodiversity
informatics. Dedicated lab exchanges between Yale and the University of
Colorado, along with workshops and symposia at professional meetings will allow
extensive cross-fertilization of ideas. The PIs will also develop targeted map
and web tutorials illustrating the notion of human understanding of a species'
geographic range and will showcase those products at the Yale Peabody Museum and
the University of Colorado Museum of Natural History. Further information about
the Map of Life may be found at http://www.yale.edu/mapoflife.