* 0960229
* MRI-R2: Developing Instrumentation for measuring decoupled normal and lateral retention forces for systems of drops on surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Rafael Tadmor, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 119,342.00

0960229 Tadmor

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Tribology teaches that the lateral force required to slide two surfaces against
each other (friction force) is in fact proportional to the contact area. The
Amonton law, therefore, is a special case in which the contact area of a rough
surface happens to increase linearly with the load. The PI recently presented a
system in which the lateral force decreases with the normal force in spite of
the fact that the contact area increases. This happens for drops on surfaces,
and the discovery was enabled using an instrument that allowed for the first
time some limited decoupling between normal and lateral retention forces, namely
the Centrifugal Adhesion Balance (CAB). In this proposal the PI will develop the
CAB such that it will enable for the first time complete independent
manipulations of the normal and lateral retention forces, which is essential for
the study of the dependence of lateral retention forces on the normal forces.
Enabling the measurement will change the way we consider the mutual influence of
orthogonal retention forces. This will create a new paradigm in surface science
(aiming to find relation between normal and lateral retention forces) leading to
transformative research. Another feature that this will add to the CAB is the
possibility to decrease the normal force under zero lateral force. In this
configuration the drop can only move normal to the surface, and will eventually
fly off the surface at some negative normal force. Such an experiment will be
the first experimental direct test for the Dupre equation - a central issue in
surface science - thereby bearing the potential to radically change our
understanding of the Young-Dupre equation thereby leading again to a
transformative research. This instrument will be used to study drops on surfaces
and also any other case in which two orthogonal retention forces may influence
each other.