* 0960417
* Genetic and Demographic Approaches to Life History Evolution in a Wild Lemur Population
* SBE,BCS
* 06/03/2009,11/30/2014
* Richard Lawler, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2014
* USD 193,630.00

Understanding the ecological and genetic factors that shape variation in life
history traits is a central challenge in life history studies. This challenge is
particularly acute in populations structured by age and sex. Although numerous
studies receive their theoretical rationale from a life history perspective,
only a few empirical studies show how life history traits are shaped by biotic
and abiotic factors, and how these traits, in turn, affect population growth and
evolutionary dynamics. At present, insights into the proximate mechanisms that
shape life history schedules within populations come from a handful of easily
manipulated and/or captive organisms that have relatively "fast" life history
schedules. Understanding of which life history traits are key determinants of
fitness remains poorly characterized for long-lived, slowly sexually maturing
species such as most primates. The research aims of this proposal are: (1) To
determine how life history traits are influenced by genetic, sex-specific, and
ecological factors in a species with a slow life history schedule; (2) To
determine which of these life history traits are currently under selection; (3)
To determine patterns of phenotypic variation/covariation in these life history
traits (4) To determine patterns of additive genetic, environmental, maternal,
and cohort variation/covariation in these life history
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data for this project come from a continuously
monitored population of wild lemur, Verreaux's sifaka (Propithecus verreauxi
verreauxi). Molecular, demographic, and quantitative genetic techniques will be
employed to characterize the ecological and genetic factors that shape variation
and covariation in life history traits. Results generated from this project will
contribute to the development of demographic models that are capable of making
realistic projections of population persistence by incorporating relevant
ecological and genetic data. Results from this project will also be used to
inform conservation decisions and management strategies by ascertaining which
demographic traits influence population growth. As such, results from this
proposal will have both theoretical and applied implications for conservation
biology. Madagascar citizens will be trained in capture methods, and project
results will be incorporated into the academic curriculum at Boston University.