* 0960315
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Structural Dynamics and Surface Characterization System for Research and Educational Activities on Micro-scale Structures and Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Andrei Shkel, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 03/31/2011
* USD 449,362.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI-R2) award is to acquire a state-of-the-art fully-integrated
Micro Systems Analyzer (Polytec MSA-500). This tool allows quantitative three-
dimensional measurements of the vibration modes of structures and devices
ranging from centimeter down to nanometer scale, including micro and
nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS/NEMS), micro-fluids and biological systems.
Measuring and quantifying the response of small-scale materials and structures
to applied dynamical loads is essential in a variety of research fields. Such
experiments are often complicated by a number of stringent requirements, such as
non-contact technology, quick scanning of the entire surface of the object, very
high displacement resolution, and ability to characterize samples immersed in
aqueous solutions. This Micro Systems Analyzer meets all these requirements and
will be transformational in a number of existing projects, ranging from the
development and characterization of MEMS resonant devices (e.g. gyroscopes and
micro-load cells) and bio-MEMS platforms, to fundamental fluid mechanics
research on jet breakup and micro-fluidic systems, and physiological studies of
the human ear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Micro Systems Analyzer will critically
impact nearly every research endeavor that studies or utilizes microstructures
or microdevices. By complementing a fully equipped clean room, a state-of-the-
art microscopy center and a modern materials characterization lab, this tool
will provide the University of California, Irvine with a unique opportunity to
propel itself to the forefront of micro and nano systems research. The acquired
instrument will be made available to a variety of external users from UC sister
campuses, private educational institutions and local businesses. Further, this
Micro Systems Analyzer will open a variety of exciting educational
opportunities: besides being readily integrated into existing courses, it will
enrich undergraduate research opportunities through a variety of established
initiatives. Most importantly, it will play a substantial role in training the
next generation of researchers.