* 0960128
* MRI-R2: Development of a Pixel Detector for the Upgraded CMS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Alice Bean, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,694,428.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle physics stands at the
threshold of a new era of discovery as the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) begins
colliding-beam operations this fall. With the highest-energy collisions ever
created in a laboratory environment, the CMS collaboration (about 1600
physicists world-wide) will study some of the most fundamental questions of our
time, such as the origin of mass, the possible existence of supersymmetry, and
the hypothetical existence of extra spatial dimensions. The Compact Muon
Solenoid (CMS), one of two general-purpose detectors at the LHC (the other
detector is called ATLAS and has a similar number of collaborators), has been
designed to discover the new physics of this energy scale. At the heart of CMS
is the silicon pixel detector. The current device took years to design and build
and represents the state-of-the-art for this type detector. However, it is well
known that it will eventually fail due to radiation damage and a new device with
enhanced characteristics must be designed and built to take its place. This
award funds Professor Alice Bean, Professor of Physics at the University of
Kansas, and a consortium of six universities (Kansas, Kansas State, Illinois at
Chicago, Puerto Rico-Mayaguez, Rice, and Rutgers) to develop a detector that
will serve as a research instrument for the design of the phase 1 upgraded
silicon pixel detector for CMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts can be
divided into two categories - those related to the development of the research
and training infrastructure at collaborating institutions and those related to
the impacts on the field of high energy physics as a whole. In particle physics
the capability to design and build instrumentation is crucial to the success of
any university group in this field. This award provides the means for the
collaborators to enhance the prestige and capability of the respective
institutions at an international level. In addition, the development activities
will allow recruiting undergraduate students, especially women and minorities,
to help build this instrument and participate in the physics studies and should
help attract more students into physics and engineering.