* 0960316
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a high performance central computing facility at UCSB
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* John Gilbert, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2013
* USD 665,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-60316&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Brown,
Frank, L.; Fredrickson, Glenn, H.; Garcia-Cervera, Carlos; Gilbert, John, R.;
Van de Walle, Christian, G.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California-
Santa Barbara &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI-R2: Acquisition of a High Performance
Central Computing Facility at UCSB&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This
project, acquiring of a computational cluster to replace a six-year-old system,
allows access to fast mid-sized parallel computation to dozens of researchers
and serves as the institution's primary resource for parallel computation. The
system is structured for a variety of uses. Standard MPI computation is carried
out with a tightly coupled cluster of quad core processors, while 'fat nodes'
with 256 GB of RAM as well as local high speed disk storage service jobs that
require large shared memory. Researchers actively developing codes can take
advantage of the unique performance characteristics of GPU (graphics processing)
nodes. The system will have several NVidia Tesla nodes.&lt;br/&gt;The users of
the system are drawn from all five departments of the College of Engineering
(Chemical Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering,
Materials, and Mechanical Engineering), seven departments of the Division of
Mathematical, Life and Physical Sciences (Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry, Earth
Science, Ecology Evolution &amp; Marine Biology, Mathematics, Molecular Cellular
&amp; Developmental Biology, Physics, and Psychology), as well as the
departments of Economics, Geography, and Media Arts &amp; Technology from the
Division of Humanities and Social Sciences. In addition, the system supports
research in eight campus centers: Allosphere Research Facility, the California
NanoSystems Institute, the Center for Polymers and Organic Solids, the Institute
for Crustal Studies, the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, the Materials
Research Laboratory, the National Center for Ecological Analysis &amp;
Synthesis, and the Neuroscience Research Institute.&lt;br/&gt;The new system
will be housed in the same location as the previous one where the same
successful administrative and maintenance procedures used for the past six years
will be applied. The proposed cluster will be accessible via the UC Grid, a web
portal interface that makes high performance computing resources easy to use
from desktop machines (PCs or Macs). The acquired system will come with a three-
year warranty. Prior experience has shown that only a small number of nodes are
expected to malfunction during the useful lifetime (&gt; 3 years) of the
cluster. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The research enabled by the
campus-wide facility, interdisciplinary and collaborative in nature, is
available to the broad research community. The large majority of users, roughly
75%, consists of postdocs, graduate students, and undergraduates (5%), allowing
this award to accomplish NSF's longstanding goal of integrating research and
education. Outreach to K-12 takes place via a new initiative, The School for
Scientific Thought (SST), an extension to the Let's Explore Physical Sciences
(LEAPS) Program. Under the SST Program UCSB science and engineering graduate
students design and teach a course for an audience of high school students on
Saturdays. In addition, many of the faculty associated with this proposal
participate in the UC Leadership Excellence through the Advanced Degrees program
that has increased the number of underrepresented students in science and
engineering at UCSB.