* 0960913
* Collaborative Biodiversity Collections Computing
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* James Beach, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,858,718.00

The University of Kansas Center for Research, Inc. is awarded a grant for
continued development and maintenance of the Specify software for managing
biological collections (http://www.specifysoftware.org) . This award provides
for continued maintenance and support of the Specify version 6 software,
completion and refinement of essential functionality, and for development of a
long-term sustainability plan for the software. The Specify Software Project
supports biological collections computing with robust, professionally-engineered
specimen data management software. Specify is a layered software platform
designed for integration with internet services, and is extendible through plug-
ins. Specify is written in Java and runs identically on the three common desktop
environments: Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux. It is open source licensed and is
free for downloading. Specify is the most widely used computing platform in U.S.
biodiversity research centers and museums. It is currently the primary,
production database system for 189 U.S. collections located at 90 institutions.
International interest is also high with 69 collections at 41 institutions using
it to computerize their holdings information. During the previous four-year NSF
award period, Specify adoption increased an average of 16% per year and it has
had a similar growth rate since 1998 when NSF began funding the project.

Mobilizing species information from biological collections to the Internet
remains a large challenge, and requires software, software support and
innovative network services for collection data workflows. The taxonomic and
geographic information associated with museum voucher specimens is an
international treasure of data documenting the identity and distribution of life
on earth. In addition to their primary role in supporting systematics and
ecological research, this species occurrence data is extremely useful for
analyzing and predicting biological impacts caused by global scale climate
change, species invasions, and other kinds of large-scale environmental
perturbation. This project is part of a 10-year effort to digitize and mobilize
the scientific information associated with biological specimens held in U.S.
research collections. The images and digitized data from this project will be
integrated into the online national resource as outlined in the community
strategic plan available at
http://digbiocol.files.wordpress.com/2010/05/digistratplanfinaldraft.pdf.