* 0960160
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of GPS Equipment for Africa Array
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Charles Meertens, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2013
* USD 323,814.00

0960160&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation Recovery and
Reinvestment (MRI-R2) Program grant supports acquisition of 20 dual-frequency
GPS receivers and automatic weather stations (Met stations) that measure wind
speed and direction, liquid precipitation, barometric pressure, temperature, and
relative humidity. The new GPS/met stations will be installed by employees of
the U.S. non-profit corporation UNAVCO, Inc. at selected sites across the
African continent, with 15 to be collocated with existing seismic recorders that
are a part of a previously NSF-funded seismic network on the African continent
(AfricaArray; EAR - 0446647). All GPS and met data will ultimately be archived
within the UNAVCO data management system and openly distributed via the Web.
Operations and management responsibilities and costs will be distributed amongst
AfricaArray station operators in host countries, plus the Council for Geoscience
(South Africa), The University of the Witwatersrand (South Africa) and Penn
State, following the model currently used to operate and maintain AfricaArray
seismic stations. The AfricaArray geodetic network will enable unprecedented
observations of African continent crustal deformation for research in tectonics
with a particular interest in understanding the structure and mechanical
properties and evolution of the continental rift basin in East Africa.
Meteorological observations will dramatically expand current environmental
observational capabilities across the continent and would support climatological
and hydrological models. The PIs will engage underrepresented groups through
existing university collaborations with African educational institutions and
through opportunities for U.S. students at minority-serving institutions
opportunities to do research in Africa. A broader goal of AfricaArray has been
to couple training and research programs for building and maintaining a
geoscientific workforce for Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;