* 0960691
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: A Political and Economic Analysis of the Dynamics of Immigrant Identity Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Walter Little, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 04/30/2011
* USD 14,770.00

Doctoral student Maria Diaz Montejo, under the guidance of Dr. Walter E. Little,
will undertake research on how transnational migrant flows may influence,
reproduce, and change cultural traditions, identities, and social relations. The
research goal is to determine if migrants use cultural reproduction to build
networks across ethnic, cultural, class, and national boundaries, and what the
long term social, economic, and political effects of such efforts might be.

Leveraging previous research in Guatemala, this project will be carried out in a
community of Mayan migrants who are originally from Jacaltenango, Guatemala, but
now live in Jupiter, Florida. The investigator will conduct in-depth open-ended
and semi-structured interviews, surveys, and participant observation. With a
particular focus on the transformation of religious and other public
observances, she will gather data on possibile connections between Jakaltek
festival activities and Jakaltek immigration status, economic strategies, and
engagement with extra-community social networks.

The research is significant because it will contribute to social science theory
by helping to illuminate the complexities of migrant identity, seen as a dynamic
process of innovation and tradition. The research should contribute practically
to a better understanding of how relationships between immigrants and residents
come into being. Funding this research also supports the education of a social
scientist.