* 0960963
* III EAGER Collaborative Research: Exploratory Research on the Annotated Biological Web
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Louiqa Raschid, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 02/28/2013
* USD 131,000.00

The life science research community generates an abundance of data on genes,
proteins, sequences, etc. These are captured in publicly available resources
such as Entrez Gene, PDB and PubMed and in focused collections such as TAIR and
OMIM. A number of ontologies such as GO, PO and UMLS are in use to increase
interoperability. Records in these resources are typically annotated with
controlled vocabulary (CV) terms from one or more ontologies. Records are often
hyperlinked to those in other repositories, creating a richly curated biological
Web of semantic knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to develop tools to explore and mine this rich Web of annotated and
hyperlinked entries so as to discover meaningful patterns.&lt;br/&gt;The
approach builds upon finding potentially meaningful and novel associations
between pairs of CV terms cross multiple ontologies. The bridge of associations
across ontologies reflects annotation practices across repositories. A variety
of graph data mining and network analysis techniques are being explored to find
complex patterns of groups of CV terms cross multiple ontologies. The intent is
to identify biologically meaningful associations that yield nuggets of
actionable knowledge to be made available to the scientist together with a set
of golden publications that support the identified
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is that it
is unique in comparison to other bioinformatics data integration and analysis
projects. Data is integrated from across numerous sources including genes, gene
annotations, ontologies, and the literature. The exploratory nature (EAGER) of
this research is both with respect to the biological and the computer science
disciplines. From the biological viewpoint, a high level of speculation is
associated with any discovered biological patterns. Discovered patterns night
not necessarily meet criteria for experimental validation. The research
methodology combines algorithmic and analytical techniques from multiple
computer science sub-disciplines. While specific technical innovations are
expected, an inter-related set of computer science challenges needs to be
defined.&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential for broader impact since the
methodology can be applied to any type of interlinked resources on the
biological semantic Web as well as to any collection of hyperlinked resources.
This research is a collaboration between the University of Maryland and the
University of Iowa. For further information see the project web pages at the
following
URL:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/research/CLIP/RSEAGER2009/&lt;br/&gt;