* 0960551
* Collaborative Research: Examining the impact of the Freshman Teaching Academy on engineering student Future Time Perspective and Strategic Learning.
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Jonathan Hilpert, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 02/28/2011
* USD 50,462.00

Assessment/Research (91)

The project is a collaborative effort between investigators at Arizona State
University and Purdue University at Fort Wayne. Responding to the unprecedented
economic challenges, the engineering college at Arizona State University is
restructuring its first-year engineering experience in a way that also attempts
to improve persistence rates, study strategies, and student perceptions of
engineering as a profession, especially with regard to underrepresented student
populations. To achieve these goals, they are implementing an engineering
education camp -- an intervention designed to encourage collaboration and to
teach students to value mastery and success in solving problems rather than
outshining their peers. In addition, selected engineering faculty members are
participating in faculty training workshops and are working together to create
an interactive, engaging learning experience for their students. The
collaborating investigators are using a quasi-experimental study design to
compare data on these students with existing longitudinal data from an on-going
NSF project to determine if the intervention has an effect on student motivation
and learning strategies. The analysis includes cross sectional independent
samples comparisons between new and old cohorts, interviews and observations of
engineering instructors and their classrooms, and examination of differences in
population trajectories between treatment and comparison groups.