* 0960081
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Heterogeneous Supercomputing Instrument for Transformative Interdisciplinary Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Khidir Hilu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,992,527.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-60081&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Feng,
Wuchun&lt;br/&gt; Hilu; Khidir W.; King, Scott D.&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University &lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI-R2/Acq:Heterogeneous Supercomputing Instrument for Transformative
Interdisciplinary Research&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed :&lt;br/&gt;This project,
acquiring a versatile heterogeneous supercomputing instrument, called
HokieSpeed, in which each compute node consists of CPUs (central processing
units) and GPUs (graphics processing units), aims to empower faculty, students,
and staff across disciplines to tackle problems previously viewed as intractable
or that required heroic efforts and significant domain expertise to solve. The
instrument is expected to catalyze new approaches for conducting research via
synergistic amalgamation of heterogeneous supercomputing and cyber-enabled tools
that enhance ease of use. In particular, it should allow end users
to:&lt;br/&gt;- Make commonplace the ability to perform in-situ visualization
for rapid visual information synthesis and analysis, and&lt;br/&gt;- Control
their level of immersion in the discovery process from being immersed (a la
'human in the loop' intuitively making real-time decisions via a large-scale
gigapixel display), to observing the instrument automatically collect, organize,
and analyze data of visual analytics.&lt;br/&gt;Recent trends have exposed the
CPU as a 'jack of all computing trades, master of none,' thus giving rise to
heterogeneous computing instruments with multiple types of brains (e.g., CPUs
and GPUs). Though conventional wisdom believed in 2007 that missing genes in 699
microbial genomes was computationally infeasible, the PI led a team of more than
twenty interdisciplinary researchers from eight institutions around the world
and developed software cybertool instruments to integrate a set of distributed
supercomputing with more that twelve thousand CPUs to complete the task in ten
weeks. Coupled with the existing cybertools and those available from NVIDIA the
instrument should enable completion of the task in a day with only two
researchers. HokieSpeed will have 8,192 CPU cores and at least 61,440 GPU cores
in 40 square feet and deliver 35 times better peak performance, 70 times better
power efficiency, and 14 times better space efficiency than the current system
at the institution (circa 2003) while offering versatility by enabling discovery
through a large-scale gigapixel display and appropriately varying degrees of
interaction between human and machine. Creating new forms of social research,
and 'what if' scenarios for evaluation and promising to deliver research
advances across multiple disciplines, the results will be generated often in
real time allowing immediate in-situ visualization on a gigapixel
display.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Reaching a broad community, the
instrument is expected to herald a new age in multi-purpose and
interdisciplinary computing instrumentation creating a computational ecosystem
that simplifies access and use of the instrument to the masses. Students,
including females and underrepresented minorities, will learn about energy-
efficient computing, and visualization and interaction at large scale. Among
others, the project will also utilize programs that specifically service broader
impacts: MAOP (Multicultural/Minority Academic Opportunities Program), CTech2
(Computers and Technology at VaTech), and CRA-W's CREU (Collaborative Research
Experience for Undergraduates). Additionally, it will extend an experimental GPU
course and offer a workshop version for on-line instruction. Other activities
include K-12 outreach, and delivery by CREU of information technology (IT) to
rural and economically disadvantaged areas via virtual computing and the VaTech-
STEM K-12 Outreach Initiative.