* 0960778
* Spectral Energy Dissipation in Broad-banded Wave Fields
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Andrew Jessup, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 06/30/2014
* USD 766,620.00

This team has made significant progress toward remotely estimating energy
dissipation by wave breaking in the open ocean in a previous NSF-funded study in
which they validated remote observations of wind-wave breaking in the absence of
swell. This project will extend that research to broad-banded wave fields (i.e.,
mixed seas). The specific objectives are to: 1. Validate energy dissipation from
the Phillips (1985) distribution using simultaneous in situ observations in
broad-banded wave fields, 2. Determine the dependence of energy dissipation on
wave age and frequency-directional spread, and 3. Test the validity of a
commonly used equilibrium approximation, in which energy dissipation is balanced
by wind input.

Two field experiments will be conducted to estimate energy dissipation during
wave breaking via simultaneous remote and in situ observations. The experiments
will extend incrementally from recent observations of energy dissipation in
narrow-banded breaking waves on Lake Washington and Puget Sound (Thomson et al.,
2009). The first experiment will be in the Juan de Fuca Strait, and the second
experiment will be in the North Pacific. A Fourier based method (Thomson and
Jessup, 2009) that has performed well for remote observations of narrow-banded
waves will be adapted to broad-banded waves. A structure function method
(Gemmrich, 2009) developed for stationary Doppler profiles of in situ velocity
will be adapted to observations from a new free drifting platform.

Intellectual Merit Quantification of energy dissipation during wave breaking is
essential for accurate modeling of waves and the evolution of sea states. The
proposed research will continue testing and application of a hypothesis for
remotely estimating dissipation using the distribution of wave crests [Phillips,
1985]. The remote estimates are spectral, and thus ideal as input to numerical
models, however the estimates require determination of a scale-free breaking
parameter b. The Phillips formulation recently has been validated, including
determination of b, for narrow-banded wave fields (Thomson et al., 2009), but
not for the broad-banded wave fields that are typical of open ocean conditions.
The proposed research will expand the validation, while evaluating the
dependence of breaking on frequency-directional spreading, wave age, and wind
stress.

Broader Impacts The proposed research will include training of a PhD student,
who will participate in all aspects of the work. The proposed research will be
incorporated into ongoing outreach activities, including demonstrations during
Washington Weekend (University of Washington open house) and presentations at
KCTS public television?s Science Caf√©. Results from the proposed research will
be presented at conferences and in peer-reviewed journals. Potential
applications of the results include improved global wave models for climate
predictions and shipping/naval operations.