* 0960443
* Collaborative Research: G-SESAME Cloud: A Dynamically Scalable Collaboration Community for Biological Knowledge Discovery
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Philip Yu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 322,555.00

Clemson University and the University of Illinois at Chicago are awarded grants
to develop a dynamically scalable collaboration community, G-SESAME Cloud, for
biological knowledge discovery. The first aim of this project is to enhance the
popular G-SESAME tools (http://bioinformatics.clemson.edu/G-SESAME) in terms of
methodology, functionality, accuracy, efficiency, and scalability to address the
immediate needs of researchers who utilize G-SESAME tools in their daily
biological research. The ultimate goal is to build a community-based scalable
cloud computing infrastructure (G-SESAME Cloud) to help the biological
researchers disseminate their research results. This infrastructure will provide
a set of Web-based tools for biological researchers to automatically (or semi-
automatically) convert their GO-based biological programs developed in any
programming languages under any platforms into Web services and publish them on
the G-SESAME Cloud. Researchers can also use a configuration utility developed
in this project to easily configure their computing facilities into the G-SESAME
Cloud.&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a complete set of Web services for
measuring the functional similarity of biological entities using different
methods, and for discovering biological knowledge based on such similarity
values. The G-SESAME Cloud will provide a community-based, effective and self-
scalable cloud computing environment in which researchers can easily publish
their biological application software as a service (SaaS) and share their
computing infrastructure as a service (IaaS).&lt;br/&gt;The G-SESAME Cloud and
its GO-based Web services will release the burden of biological researchers from
learning Web technologies and maintaining their own computing facilities so that
they can focus on their research. The success of this project will set an
example for building self-scalable community-based biological Cloud to promote
resource sharing and SaaS, IaaS and PaaS (Platform as a Service) concepts in
biological research community. This project will also be used to train Computer
Science students, including women and minority students, on distributed
computing, data mining, and Web technologies.