* 0960776
* Collaborative Research:  Evolution and Fate of Eighteen Degree Water in the North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Susan Lozier, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2014
* USD 200,024.00

This project will examine the physical processes associated with the evolution
(formation, circulation, and destruction) of Eighteen Degree Water (EDW) within
the subtropical gyre of the North Atlantic Ocean. EDW is the archetype for the
anomalously thick and vertically homogenous mode waters that are typical of all
subtropical western boundary current systems. EDW is associated with a shallow
overturning circulation that carries heat northward and is an interannual
reservoir of anomalous heat, nutrients and CO2. Understanding the annual cycle
of EDW evolution, and in particular its associated circulation pathways and
destruction mechanisms, is important because though EDW is isolated beneath the
stratified upper-ocean at the end of each winter, it may reemerge in subsequent
years to influence mixed layer properties and consequently air-sea interaction
and primary productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pathways of EDW circulation,
the processes of EDW destruction, and the role of EDW in modulating ocean-
atmosphere heat exchange and nutrient supply to the euphotic zone will be
investigated. The plan is to synthesize a broad spectrum of observations
including a substantial in-situ dataset collected during the recently completed
CLIVAR Mode Water Dynamics Experiment (CLIMODE). This coordinated field effort
included a large array of profiling floats, a moored array, and several
hydrographic surveys. To supplement this unique dataset the investigators will
also examine contemporary and historical hydrography, Argo profiling floats,
surface drifters, satellite altimetry and ocean color fields, and output from
several eddy-resolving OGCM simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This project will test the long-hypothesized climatic importance of EDW
as an element of the North Atlantic's shallow overturning circulation and as a
short-term reservoir of heat, nutrients, and carbon. Significantly, this study
will advance understanding of the various processes that destroy EDW. In
addition, this study will, for the first time, compare and contrast the roles of
the large-scale, low-frequency circulation and the mesoscale eddy field in EDW
dispersal and destruction. Finally, the proposed work will provide a foundation
for comparative studies since mode waters are found in every ocean
basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Clarifying the role of EDW in the
exchange of heat between the atmosphere and ocean will support ongoing community
efforts to improve interannual-to-decadal predictability. For example, EDW and
its associated air-sea heat flux may have a direct impact on the year-to-year
variability of surface storm amplitude in the North Atlantic storm track near
the Gulf Stream. In addition, understanding the role of EDW in the storage and
exchange of nutrients will advance our understanding of interannual variability
in primary productivity. Rigorous model-data comparisons using the unique
CLIMODE dataset will also aid the broader community by providing an objective
assessment of the fidelity of eddy-resolving numerical models. Finally, the
project will support the training of two postdoctoral investigators and a
graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a contribution to the
U.S. CLIVAR (CLImate VARiability and predictability) program.