* 0960905
* Community Input on the Future of High-Performance Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,03/31/2011
* Thomas Zacharia, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* robert pennington
* 03/31/2011
* USD 49,882.00

The scale, resolution and fidelity of scientific simulations are limited by the
size and balance of the next-generation high performance computing systems.
Because of this critical dependency between computing resources and new
scientific capability, it is crucial to engage the scientific and HPC community
to develop an understanding of the requirements for new computing environments.

We will hold a series of quarterly workshops over the next year to bring the
community together to discuss these important issues and build a pathway for the
future of computational science.

A core group of 30 leading scientists, vendors and resource providers will be
selected to convene for a series of three one-day meetings. We will focus on
user requirements and lessons learned from the current programs including the
benefits and challenges of the current architectures and deployments. The final
workshop will engage 75 members of the community for one and a half days.

We will produce a concise summary of the state of the computing environments in
the US and around the world today, a set of quantitative descriptions of current
application requirements and how well those requirements match the computing
environment that is being provided through federal, state and other funding.
Included will be a projection of the future requirements for scientific and
engineering applications and a corresponding description of what the future
computing environment should be to meet these needs. The workshops reports will
also consider and comment on mechanisms by which the computing environment might
be provided over the next 5-10 years.

Broader Impact Continuing and developing the US supercomputing program will
complement existing and upcoming education, outreach and training efforts. These
efforts are geared to reach a wide range of people: from K-12 to post college,
under-represented groups and women and teachers and scientists.

Soliciting input from the entire community via a website will also allow
everyone to participate in this series of workshops, which is appropriate since
the entire community will benefit from the continuation of the supercomputing
program.