* 0960626
* Expanding Visualization and Analysis Tools for Comparative Microbial Ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Susan Huse, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 769,827.00

The Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) is awarded a grant to improve and develop
database-driven web-based tools for analysis and comparison of microbial
communities for microbial ecologists. Next-generation DNA sequencing
technologies allow ecologists to explore microbial communities at depths much
greater than ever before uncovering new organisms faster than names can be given
and accepted. The alternative taxonomic-independent approach of clustering
similar DNA sequences using regions of the SSU rRNA gene is now standard for
microbial ecology. The website will provide a variety of tools to allow
researchers to upload and cluster massively-parallel tag sequence data and will
provide a new clustering algorithm incorporating known information about
sequencing error rates, rates of evolution, and information about community
structure. Specifically, it will offer: (i) direct import of massively-parallel
sequences of any targeted gene and taxonomic identification of sequences from
any region of the ribosomal small-subunit gene; (ii) dynamic sequence-based
clustering using a variety of methods, including a new method to be developed
incorporating experimental and biological variables that does not inflate
diversity values; and (iii) improved tools for comparing microbial communities
that links sequence-based clusters to taxonomy and metadata. The website will be
freely available, and all software will be open source and, to the extent
possible, platform independent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation sequencing
provides far more data than many researchers have the bioinformatics capacity to
handle. The VAMPS website (vamps.mbl.edu) has already proven invaluable in
aiding research teams from around the world, including NSF-funded research
projects, by providing the bioinformatics support, database engine, and
computational resources needed to analyze these very large and growing datasets,
and by providing the only publicly-available interface for visually comparing
microbial community information derived from environmental sequencing. In
collaboration with the MBL's graduate and postdoctoral level Microbial Diversity
summer course and undergraduate Semester in Environmental Science, this project
will provide unique educational opportunities through its combination of data
from a variety of environments, metadata associated with the International
Census of Marine Microbes datasets, its integration of sequence cluster-based
and taxonomy-based analytical and visualization tools, and the instruction
provided by project developers.