* 0960882
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Policing Immigrants: Immigration and Local Governance
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Roger Waldinger, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 01/31/2011
* USD 10,480.00

Although the federal government has the exclusive authority to regulate
migration in the United States, increasingly, cities are creating immigration
policies aimed at expelling immigrants from their localities. This project
focuses on how local bureaucracies implement immigration control, using
Nashville, Tennessee, and its application of 287(g) as a case study. Authorized
under Section 287(g) of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Responsibility Act,
287(g) allows local law enforcement officials to check immigrants' citizenship
status and, if necessary, process them for deportation. In Nashville, both the
Police and Sheriff's Departments are implicated in 287(g) implementation; police
officers arrest people who are subsequently screened for immigration violations
by Sheriff's deputies.

The research strategy for this project involves interviews with stake-holders in
the 287(g) policy arena and ethnographic observations, including police ride-
alongs. Interviews with administrators and employees in local law enforcement
agencies are conducted to understand employee preferences with respect to 287(g)
implementation, as well as bureaucratic practices, professional identity,
professional norms, and perceived levels of external pressure. Interviews with
immigrant advocates uncover how, or if, their organizations pressure local
agencies for non-implementation, and get at the effects of 287(g) on the local
immigrant population.

Drawing from theories of bureaucracy suggesting that people on the front lines
of policy implementation make policy through their actions, this project
examines how 287(g) implementation depends on the preferences of actors in the
policy arena, and the institutional characteristics of local law enforcement
agencies. This research is important because it challenges assumptions about the
growing trend toward local immigration enforcement by demonstrating the on-the-
ground rules of immigration policing.