* 0960780
* EAGER: Exploratory Frameworks for Distributed Algorithms for Optimization Problems on Networks of Heterogeneous Sensors
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Sushil Prasad, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 10/31/2011
* USD 112,162.00

Many emerging critical applications such as those for target monitoring and
tracking, data gathering, querying and integration would increasingly be based
on networked computing platforms comprising heterogeneous sensor and hand held
devices. These will be dependent on distributed algorithms which can yield
accurate, power- and time-efficient solutions, providing the United States
commanding technical superiority in be-on-the-look-out-for (BOLO) and opponent's
center of gravity-related information arena. However, many of these applications
have underlying intractable NP-hard optimization problems, practically
restricting them to approximate solutions. The adverse result has been sub-par
state-of-art with algorithms employing ad-hoc greedy heuristics far removed from
problem structures, and therefore presenting critical vulnerability for
aforementioned applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This calls for a fundamental
exploration of these NP-hard optimization problems leading to distinctly
superior class of distributed algorithms in this arena, both theoretically and
practically. For past several years, the PI has been studying the sensor target
coverage problem to maximize network lifetime from the first principles. As
opposed to incrementally improving the greedy heuristics as has been routine
practice by various groups, the PI has succeeded in attacking the problem head-
on by exploiting the possibility of practically tractable local solution space
as seen from the perspective of each sensor. This novel approach has resulted in
(i) fundamental insights into the problem structure and its solution space; (ii)
a general algorithmic framework for distributed algorithms for related class of
coverage problems characterized by those wherein local sub-solutions
collectively yield feasible global solution; and (iii) a set of distributed
algorithms moving the state-of-art to 25% below an upper-bound on network
lifetime.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed algorithmic framework as well as
the overall approach are expected be applicable to other unrelated NP-hard
optimization problems over networks. This innovative exploratory project first
proposes to investigate whether the proposed algorithmic framework can be
effective for non-target-coverage related problems such as channel assignment in
cellular networks, vertex cover, and triangle packing. Next, the PI proposes to
explore whether the overall approach can be applied to other fundamental yet
critical problems such as for target tracking, data aggregation, and
channelization of ad-hoc mobile networks for real-time traffic. While there is
some road map for the former, very little is known for the latter. This lack of
definitive tools of the trade and early, untested, exploratory, high-risk high-
reward nature of the project are the primary reasons for this EAGER proposal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;