* 0960770
* Regional Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Feedback Processes Affecting Climate Along the California Coast
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Arthur Miller, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2015
* USD 652,703.00

Intellectual Merit: Recent satellite observations have revealed that mesoscale
sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies perturb the atmospheric boundary layer
by altering its stability and its consequent vertical transport of momentum and
heat. It remains unclear, however, how strongly these mesoscale flux anomalies
affect the mean and transient flows in both the atmosphere and ocean. Long-term
simulations with a realistic coupled ocean-atmosphere model that resolves
oceanic mesoscale, the ocean driven surface fluxes, and the associated
atmospheric boundary layer and tropospheric response are needed to better
understand the effects of these feedbacks.

This research effort will use coupled and uncoupled model runs in conjunction
with observations to address several key issues in mesoscale ocean-atmosphere
interaction in the California Regional Sector: What are the local effects of
mesoscale ocean-atmosphere coupling on the cloud cover and atmospheric flow
along the California Coast? What are the remote effects of mesoscale ocean-
atmosphere coupling on the fine-scale atmospheric circulation, rainfall
patterns, snowfall patterns and land surface processes along the coastal, in the
central valleys, and over the interior mountain regions of California? What are
the effects of mesoscale ocean-atmosphere coupling on the evolution of coastal
upwelling frontal structures along the California Coast?

These feedback effects will be investigated using a high-resolution regional
coupled ocean model that couples the Regional Ocean Modeling System to the
Regional Special Model. Coupled and uncoupled runs of downscaled large-scale
atmospheric reanalysis fields will be compared side-by-side to assess the
effects of mesoscale surface flux anomalies on the atmospheric boundary layer,
overlying tropospheric flows and oceanic upwelling frontal flows. A new strategy
will be applied by running the coupled model in coupled mode, but with mesoscale
SST variations spatially smoothed to remove ocean mesoscales in the coupler
(only) to unambiguously identify the impact of the ocean mesoscale on the
atmospheric circulation. Extensive physical diagnostics and observational
comparisons will further elucidate the processes that link the mesoscale
feedbacks to the local and remote atmospheric and oceanic responses.

Broader Impacts: Improved understanding of the impacts of mesoscale atmosphere
ocean coupling will form the foundation for determining likely changes induced
by global warming on the regional climate of California and its coastal ocean.
The results from this research will also be relevant to climate predictability,
regional response to global warming, water resource usage, and energy usage and
marine ecosystem response to climate variability. A graduate student will be
trained in coupled ocean-atmosphere modeling. Both investigators will continue
their outreach activities. Dr. Norris is a lead instructor in a UCSD program
that provides a month-long hands-on science learning experience to high school
students to encourage them to major in engineering or science, and the results
of this project will be incorporated into his instruction. Dr. Miller volunteers
as a Science Olympiad coach at a local high school.