* 0960904
* CEDAR:    Statistical Inference of Solar Cycle Signatures and Long Term Trends in Mesospheric Temperature Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/06/2009,02/28/2010
* Syed Azeem, Orion Space Solutions (OSS), LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Farzad Kamalabadi
* 02/28/2010
* USD 54,669.00

This is a three-year data analysis effort investigating solar cycle and long-
term variations of mesospheric temperatures and tidal perturbations. The
investigation will utilize data taken by Michelson Interferometers (MI) over the
last 12.5 years at Eureka (80 degrees North, 85.9 degrees West), Canada;
Resolute Bay (75 degrees North, 95 degrees West), Canada; and South Pole (90
degrees South), Antarctica; and since 1986 at Sondre Stromfjord (67.0 degrees
North, 51 degrees West), Greenland. The MIs have been making observations of
temperature and airglow emissions for over a decade during six months of polar
winter night each year. These continuous measurements provide a unique resource
to investigate the effects of solar-terrestrial disturbances on Arctic and
Antarctic mesospheric thermodynamics. The observational dataset spans a complete
solar cycle, making it well suited for correlating solar variability with
temperatures and tidal amplitudes in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere
(MLT). Well-proven Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) techniques will be employed
to elucidate solar cycle and long-term trend terms in the MI temperature time
series data. An improved knowledge of the influence of solar radiation on
mesospheric composition and temperature is critical for space environmental
science and climate studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational impacts of
this project are substantial. It will give graduate and undergraduate students
the opportunity to participate in modern research and software development,
acquire teamwork and a broad range of research skills and will inspire them to
continue with graduate school and choose research careers. The project also will
establish collaboration between the PI and high school teachers, nationwide, via
Embry-Riddle University's (ERAU) TeachSpace Program. The PI will partner with
researchers at National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) to train teachers
(through the TeachSpace program) to incorporate an advanced atmospheric model
into the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) curricula of
their schools, and to excite and motivate talented students to learn about space
science and to remain active in physics, science, engineering and math.