* 0960331
* MRI-R2: Nano Photonic Imaging System
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Elisabeth Gwinn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 464,703.00

0960331&lt;br/&gt;Bouwmeester&lt;br/&gt;U. of California-Santa
Barbara&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;A rapidly expanding field of research concerns the development of new
techniques for optical imaging of nanometer to micron scale structures, such as
biological molecules with integrated functional elements, semiconductor
optoelectronic devices and cells. The investigator team proposes to develop an
unconventional optical instrument capable of resolving structures on the scale
of a few tens of nanometers, by using special correlated states of light (such
as entangled two-photon states) in combination with an ultra stable optical
platform with nanometer resolution scanning capabilities and recently-developed
signal processing algorithms. In order to probe the special light-matter
interactions that occur when phonon-induced dephasing is minimal, the system is
designed to operate at cryogenic as well as ambient temperatures. The wide
wavelength range of this nano-photonics imaging system would enable
investigation of structures ranging from semiconductor nanodevices to DNA
scaffolds to living cells. The research team consists of experts in the key
technological aspects: quantum optics, high resolution optical imaging and high
speed image processing, ultra-low vibration and low-temperature operation, and
biological system design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LAYMAN ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finding ways to use light to probe smaller and
smaller structures, down to the tens of nanometer (nm) sizes of emerging
synthetic DNA structures and the molecular machines within cells, is of enormous
importance for current and future developments in science, technology, and
medicine. Because traditional light microscopes can't see structures smaller
than a few hundreds of nm, most of today's sub-micron imaging is done using non-
optical, atomic force and electron microscopes, which can damage or obscure
delicate structures within cells and nanodevices. To achieve high resolution
together with the gentle, non-invasive imaging provided by light, the scientific
team proposes to build a new type of optical instrument. The features that offer
greatly improved resolution, of just a few tens of nm, are use of very special
quantum-correlated states of light combined with high stability scanning methods
and advanced data processing algorithms. To enable imaging of a wide range of
nanoscale systems, the instrument will operate over a large range of light
wavelengths, both at room temperature and at the much colder temperatures needed
to prevent thermal agitation from degrading special quantum effects of the light
on the tiniest, molecular-scale structures. The research team has the
appropriate expertise in spectroscopic techniques, quantum optics and cryogenics
techniques to be successful in developing this advanced nano-photonic, variable-
temperature imaging instrument.