* 0960306
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Hybrid CPU/GPU and Visualization Cluster for Multidisciplinary Studies in Transport Physics with Uncertainty Quantification
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Eric Darve, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2013
* USD 4,029,600.00

0960306&lt;br/&gt;Shaqfeh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for the acquisition of a high
performance, Hybrid CPU/GPU and Visualization Cluster (HPVC) that is designed to
serve the needs of 7 working groups where each is involved in HPC research to
solve problems of large global and national impact. The unique aspects of the
HPVC cluster lies, in the combination of state-of-the art computer
visualization, enhanced performance with large datasets via GPU architecture,
and the development of computational uncertainty quantification (UQ). These
elements, , will be employed in the solution of interdisciplinary, multiphysics
transport problems including (a) engineering Nutrient Transport in Oceanographic
Coral Reef Flows (to protect our environment and save the reefs), (b) the
Development of Trauma and Nanoparticle Cancer Therapies including understanding
hemostasis in the microcirculation (impacting human health), (c) Modeling the
Dispersion of Biological Agents in Urban Environments (for Homeland Security),
(d) using Quantum Chemistry to Design Catalysts for Fuel Cells (toward
sustainable energy development), (e) simulating the Molecular Dynamics of
Proteins and the Ribosome (for understanding the basic processes of life), (f)
developing a fundamental understanding of Jet Noise Creation (to develop
effective noise mitigation strategies for jets, fans, etc.), and finally, (g) to
create algorithms for Design Optimization for Sustainable Building Development
(as a contribution toward the larger issue of sustainability). The HPVC will
play a key role in education, via bringing CPU with GPU enhanced acceleration to
the classroom in a spectrum of Stanford courses as well as new workshops on GPU
computing. The concept of Uncertainty Quantification as applied to large scale
HPC problems will be introduced via a new UQ pipeline as a novel software
deliverable within the HPVC research program.