* 0960232
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of an Advanced Atomic Force Microscope at the University of Wisconsin-Platteville
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Yan Wu, University of Wisconsin-Platteville
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 454,282.00

0960232&lt;br/&gt;Wu&lt;br/&gt;U. of Wisconsin-
Platteville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding to acquire an advanced
atomic force microscope (AFM) for the University of Wisconsin-Platteville (UWP).
The multifunctional capacity provided by an advanced AFM with an integrated
inverted light microscope will enable researchers and students to perform
material imaging, manipulation, and property measurements with optical,
electrical and thermal stimuli in both ambient air and liquid environments.
Specific research projects include: (1) Electrical double layer interactions of
bio-synthetic membranes at the material/water interface, 2) Nano-scale mapping
of the mobility of charge carriers in heterojunction organic solar cells, 3)
Study of nanoscopic, cholesterol-rich membrane domains, 4) Nanowire electro-
deposition using liquid phase AFM, and 5) Characterization of solution cast
transparent graphene conductive electrodes for photovoltaics, electrodes and
ultracapacitors. The AFM will be a key resource within the UWP Microsystems and
Nanotechnology Minor (and anticipated future four-year degree program), which
provides in-depth training and experience for undergraduate students in a
variety of nanoscale characterization techniques and in nanoscience topics. As a
shared instrument between several departments across two Colleges, the AFM will
promote interactions and catalyze interdisciplinary research and teaching at the
university. The instrument will also be incorporated into existing summer
outreach programs, and faculty members will attempt to address diversity issues
in science and engineering through outreach activities which involve this
equipment. Finally, the instrument will also find use by local business at the
tri-state area of Wisconsin, Iowa, and Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent and
future advances in diverse fields such as electronics, solar energy, and cancer
studies depend on understanding the properties of materials at the "nanoscale;"
that is, measuring features with dimensions a million times smaller than the
width of a human hair. A remarkable aspect of this convergence in size is that
one instrument, an atomic force microscope (AFM), is a key tool for these
seemingly unrelated fields. The AFM requested in this proposal will enable a
variety of research for students and faculty at the University of Wisconsin-
Platteville (UWP), plus hands-on student training in nanoscale measurement and
fabrication techniques. One example includes using AFM to study the structure,
composition, and function of biological membranes while in their natural
environment: underwater. This basic research will have future implications in
drug research, cancer treatment, and materials development. Further, the
requested AFM can also perform nanoscale electrical measurements, which not only
enable exploration of the motion of electric current in "next generation"
plastic solar cells at the smallest scales, but also enable research into the
fabrication of nanoscale wires, which have potential future uses in solar cells,
sensors, and computing. Finally, the AFM will be an important tool in the
continued development of a novel, patent-pending technique developed at UWP, in
which graphene (one-atom-thick sheets of carbon) can be made into transparent,
electrically conducting films at very low cost. The AFM will help optimize their
fabrication, and will also characterize their electrical properties - thus
laying the groundwork for their application in solar cells and electronics. All
insights gained in this wide range of research will be shared with the larger
scientific community; most importantly, though, acquiring this state-of-the-art
AFM will help prepare UWP's science and engineering students for jobs and
research opportunities after they graduate.