* 0960177
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of Raman and Infrared Microscopes for Interdisciplinary Research
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2013
* Julie Holt, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Sean Jones
* 01/31/2013
* USD 572,417.00

0960177&lt;br/&gt;Holt&lt;br/&gt;Southern Illinois U. at
Edwardsville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI-R2: Acquisition of Raman and Infrared
Microscopes for Interdisciplinary Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-
art physical methods offer as much to an anthropologist as they do to a chemist
or biologist. Specifically, Raman and infrared (IR) microscopy will redefine our
relationship to our research samples. Working together, these tools will enable
new kinds of analyses that will significantly advance our research. For
archaeological and museum research, Raman and infrared microscopy will add
quantifiable dimensions to complement traditional methods of analysis. This
precision will enable anthropologists to identify the provenience of many Native
American artifacts that are scattered around the world in museums and private
collections. Quantitative comparison of their fingerprint spectra will
demonstrate with precision and objectivity whether archaeological pottery
samples were manufactured at the same locale or not. Raman and IR microscopy are
non-destructive, unlike many other techniques with similar goals. This feature
is critical because each artifact is unique; when one is destroyed, the research
cannot be repeated. In the biological and chemical sciences, IR and Raman
analysis will enable innovative studies with significant impact on human health
and the environment. These instruments are singularly well suited to the study
of toxins and contaminants in complex substances such as animal tissues, as well
as in naturally occurring soil-water environments. The identification and
characterization of short-lived HNO complexes will further our understanding of
the physiological role of the elusive HNO molecule. The Raman and IR microscopes
will be housed and cared for by the Department of Chemistry at Southern Illinois
University Edwardsville, which is a primarily undergraduate institution serving
both urban and rural communities. Acquisition of these instruments will enable
our students to realize broader research and career potential in these diverse
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the art microscopic techniques are
increasingly important to anthropologists, as they always have been to the
chemist or biologist. Raman and infrared (IR) microscopes will enable us to
determine with unparalleled precision the origins and chemical makeup of the
samples that are the focus of our research. Specifically, these microscopic
techniques will enable anthropologists at SIUE, and our colleagues at other
institutions, to determine where and/or when Native American artifacts were
made, and from what materials they were made. Our samples include archaeological
pottery and stone tools, as well as more recent Native American artifacts. These
can be compared with Native American materials held in museums and private
collections around the world to determine trade patterns as well as migration
routes. It is important to note that Raman and IR analysis, unlike many similar
types of analysis, are not destructive to the artifacts or other materials being
studied. Biologists and chemists in our group will use the microscopes to
analyze samples including bones and soils to look for the presence of poisons
and other contaminants. The results of their work will provide information about
past human health, and will also provide timely information about the potential
impact of environmental contaminants on the health of living humans. The Raman
and IR microscopes will be housed and cared for by the Department of Chemistry
at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, which is a primarily undergraduate
institution serving both urban and rural communities. Using these microscopes
will enable our students to realize broader research and career opportunities in
anthropology, archaeology, biology, chemistry, and environmental sciences. This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5).