* 0960425
* The Mechanism and Function of SDG2 in Regulating Chromatin Structure and Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2015
* Xiaoyu Zhang, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2015
* USD 476,647.00

Intellectual Merit: In eukaryotic cells, DNA is packaged into chromatin by
wrapping around histone octamers. Many molecular processes that take place at
the chromatin level are profoundly affected by the structural properties of the
chromatin. A large body of work in recent years has established the importance
of post-translational modifications of histones, such as methylation of lysine
residues, in modulating chromatin structure and gene expression. The SDG2
protein in Arabidopsis thaliana is a member of a previously uncharacterized and
highly conserved lineage of putative lysine methyltransferases. Loss-of-function
sdg2 mutant plants exhibit numerous developmental abnormalities and the mis-
regulation of hundreds of genes, as well as histone methylation defects at
specific loci. These results indicate that SDG2 is critically important in
regulating gene expression and plant development. This project is directed to
elucidate the mechanism of action and function of SDG2. The first aim is to
understand the function of SDG2 by genome-wide identification of the genes that
are directly regulated by SDG2 and the histone methylation defects caused by the
loss of SDG2. The second aim is to understand the mechanism by which SDG2
modifies histones by determining its enzymatic and substrate specificities. The
third aim is to understand how SDG2 is targeted to specific genes during
development by isolating proteins that interact with SDG2. These studies are
expected to reveal significant insights into the mechanisms and functions of
SDG2. In addition, considering the complex and intimate interactions among
different histone modification pathways, the results from this project are also
expected to assist in the broader understanding of the mechanisms and functions
of histone modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader
impacts of this project are several fold. The research is multi-disciplinary in
nature and therefore ideally suited for training future scientists, including
undergraduate research assistants, a graduate student and a postdoctoral
research associate. This project will also have an immediate and positive impact
on teaching. The PI teaches a lecture series on plant genetics and molecular
biology, with emphasis on the use of genomic approaches to study complex
biological processes. This course should benefit tremendously from the ideas
conceived and the knowledge gained from this project. In addition, the PI will
be actively engaged in two programs designed to promote K-12 science education
by enhancing the classroom and hands-on training of current and future middle
school science teachers. The PI will develop an undergraduate course for future
middle school science teachers (current education major students) with a
particular emphasis on injecting enthusiasms into and stimulating the
curiosities of science teachers, which will be relayed to middle school students
in the future. Also, the PI will participate in the Georgia Intern-Fellowships
for Teachers (GIFT) by sponsoring current teachers for summer research. This
program is expected to improve the critical thinking and problem solving
abilities of the teachers, and to help them connect real-world scientific
research and application with the "textbook science" that they teach in the
classroom.