* 0960061
* MRI-R2: Development of Common Platform for Unifying Humanoids Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Stefan Schaal, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2015
* USD 5,999,997.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." Proposal #: 09-60061 PI(s): Kim, Youngmoo E., Gogotsi,
Yury, Hong, Dennis H., Regli, William C., Schaal, Stefan Institution: Drexel
University Title: Development of Common Platform for Unifying Humanoids Research
Project Proposed: This project, developing and disseminating HUBO+, a new common
humanoid research platform instrument, enables novel and previously infeasible
capabilities for future research efforts while working with a common instrument.
HUBO will be the first homogeneous, full-sized humanoid to be used as a common
research and education platform. Eight universities (Drexel, CMU, MIT, Ohio
State, Penn, Purdue, Southern California, and VaTech), representing a critical
mass of humanoids research within US, participate in this development of the
world's first homogeneous full-sized humanoid team. Building upon unique
expertise, the work extends current capabilities, resulting in six identical
units, facilitating the following potentially transformative advances in
robotics: - A state-of-the-art, standardized humanoid platform instrument with
embedded capabilities for sensing, manipulation, and rapid locomotion, ideal for
a broad range of future humanoids research - The ability, for the first time, to
directly compare and across validate algorithms and methodologies and
consistently benchmark results across research teams - Novel energy storage
technology for mobile robotics incorporating supercapacitors for operations
requiring high power density, far exceeding the capabilities of traditional
battery-only power sources - A widely distributed platform that motivates,
recruits, and trains a broad range of students spanning multiple disciplines,
including artificial intelligence, digital, signal processing, mechanics, and
control Humanoids, robots engineered to mimic human form and motion, open broad
avenues of cross disciplinary research spanning multiple fields, such as
mechanical control, artificial intelligence, and power systems. Common humanoids
are rarely autonomous and are not-ready for unconstrained interaction with
humans. The most compelling demonstrations are meticulously pre-programmed and
painstakingly choreographed. A few common platforms have already advanced some
research. Hence, having a consistent platform should facilitate rapid progress
in areas needed for autonomy and natural interaction, including mobility,
manipulation, robot vision, speech communication, and cognition and learning.
However, although currently Japan and Korea are considered world leaders in
design and construction of humanoids, best practices have not been developed for
constructing multiple, identical humanoids. These conditions call for the making
of an urgently needed benchmark providing evaluations and cross-validation of
results. With this development and the servicing of 6 humanoids, this project
aims to create knowledge and best practices contributing to robotics research,
possibly leading to the standardization needed for ubiquity. Broader Impacts:
The instrument enables US researchers to develop expertise in the design and
construction of humanoids, while the distribution of the work activities ensures
the broad dissemination of the knowledge. Humanoids research, inherently
interdisciplinary and integrative, inspires young students. The graduate and
undergraduates students participating are likely to receive a world-class
training in robotics. Outreach partners, including several high-profile museums
will introduce people of all ages to the exciting technologies of robotics,
particularly useful in recruiting K-12 students into science, engineering,
mathematics, etc. A partnership with the Science Leadership Academy (SLA), a
magnet school with more than 63% underrepresented students, assures their
involvement. With SLA, the project initiates an annual program modeled on a
NASA-style experiment design competition, in which students use simulation tools
to propose humanoids projects and activities. Selected winner(s) will have their
proposed projects implemented on HUBO.