* 0960211
* MRI-R2: Development of a Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Optical Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Mark Lonergan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2013
* USD 515,000.00

0960211 Lonergan U. of Oregon Eugene

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The ability for spectroscopic characterization with nanoscale spatial resolution
is crucial for the development of novel technologies based on nanoscale and
molecular materials. However, currently available techniques are often limited
by such factors as low spatial resolution (optical spectroscopies), lack of
chemical specificity/spectral resolution (current-voltage spectroscopies), and
lack of control over the local nanoscale environment of the experiment. This
proposal aims to develop a Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM) capable of a
range of novel STM-based optical spectroscopies with spatial resolution down to
the atomic scale. The design of the new STM instrument uniquely combines the
atomic-scale stability and cleanliness of a cryogenic Ultra-High Vacuum STM,
with high collection efficiency (up to 35%) of photons emitted from the STM
junction. The new STM will allow atomic-scale investigations of a wide range of
fundamental problems associated with charge and energy transfer in molecular,
polymer and ionomer systems; charge transport through nanostructures; optical
properties of nanostructures; and catalysis. The instrument will be housed in
the Center for Advanced Materials Characterization in Oregon, a shared user
facility that serves the research community in Oregon and the Pacific Northwest.
The wide availability of the instrument will enhance research and educational
opportunities in physics, chemistry and materials science throughout Oregon. The
visually compelling and illustrative nature of the data obtained by the new STM
will make it a highly effective tool for classroom instruction as well as
student recruitment and outreach activities. NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).

Scanning Probe Microscopy is a diverse family of imaging techniques that have
proven to be invaluable in investigations of fundamental properties of nanoscale
materials. A Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM) is one such example, an
instrument capable of imaging with atomic resolution. However, conventional STM
techniques provide only limited information about the local chemical structure
and optical properties of the sample. The present proposal aims to develop an
STM instrument with unique analytical capabilities enabled by a range of novel
STM-based optical spectroscopic techniques that will be able to provide detailed
information about the local chemical and electronic structures of the sample.
These new optical spectroscopic techniques are made possible by a novel STM
design that affords high light collection efficiency. In addition to the high-
resolution spectroscopic characterization of new materials, the new STM will
allow investigations of a wide range of fundamentally important processes
associated with charge and energy transfer in molecular, polymer and nanoscale
systems; as wells as formation of bonds in chemical reactions and catalysis. The
instrument will be housed in the Center for Advanced Materials Characterization
in Oregon, a shared user facility that serves the research community in Oregon
and the Pacific Northwest. The wide availability of the instrument will enhance
research and educational opportunities in physics, chemistry and materials
science throughout Oregon. The visually compelling and illustrative nature of
the data obtained by the new STM will make it a highly effective tool for
classroom instruction as well as student recruitment and outreach activities.