* 0960342
* MRI-R2 Consortium: Development of a National Geoelectromagnetic Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Adam Schultz, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 300,001.00

Schultz&lt;br/&gt;0960342&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI R2 award will provide NSF funding over 24
months to develop a instrumentation to support a National Geoelectromagnetic
Facility (NGF). The facility will allow researchers to image Earth?s near-
surface, crust and mantle electrical properties in three dimensions and at high-
resolution. Rock and mineral electrical properties are defined by the presence
and chemistry of magmatic and aqueous fluids, bulk chemical and mineral
composition, formation temperature, and hydrogen and other volatiles content.
The NGF will consist of 27 founding member institutions and 54 participating
PIs. The facility will incorporate a national pool of geoelectromagnetic
equipment. The equipment will be developed and fabricated by the OSU and the
Zonge Engineering and Research Organization and maintained for checkout by
research PIs. The instruments will be modular and low-power. They will be able
to measure geoelectromagnetic variations over a micro-hertz to kilo-hertz range,
imaging natural and artificial fields. NGF instruments will be critical for
opening new research avenues and supporting ongoing studies in water, mineral
and hydrocarbon exploration, CO2 sequestration, hydrologic and geothermal
research, geomicrobiolgy, climate change studies, contaminant and reservoir
monitoring, volcanic hazards studies, and geotechnics. This effort will
establish a capability currently unavailable in the US. A pooled-instrument
model will allow access to EM equipment and data products. The instrument pool
will support a broad spectrum of research including seismology, glaciology,
hydrology, exploration, climate change, hazards and geomicrobiology. It will
support numerous investigators at multiple institutions. In so doing, associated
graduate and undergraduate students will gain instrument access and EM
experience. An existing outreach program (Summer of Applied Geophysical
Experience) will be supported. A reference design for the new instrumentation
has already been developed. Interface development and further benchmarking will
ensue after release of the acquisition protocol to the community. Successful
testing and validation will lead to design turnover and subsequent manufacture
by the commercial partner.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;