* 0960390
* Algorithm and Web Server for Low-homology Protein Threading
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Jinbo Xu, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2013
* USD 408,305.00

The Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago is awarded a grant to develop a
long-term sustainable web server for low-homology protein threading by making
use of the NSF-sponsored cyberinfrastructure Open Science Grid (OSG). The OSG
has been proved to be very useful in many research areas including protein
folding, protein docking, geoscience and particle physics . The specific goals
of this research are: (1) To develop a public protein threading web server that
can thread a single protein sequence to the whole template database within
minutes and thus, provide service to a large number of users. The server will
use OSG, which can easily distribute millions of jobs to the supercomputers
around USA, as the back-end computing engine so that our server can run jobs on
thousands of CPUs free of charge and we can also easily maintain the server in
the very long term beyond the funding period of this project at almost no cost.
(2) To customize the web server specifically for low-homology protein threading
by incorporating a profile-entropy dependent scoring function into the server.
The server will significantly improve modeling capability of low-homology
proteins, for which existing protein modeling programs cannot generate good
models. The server developed by this project will help both individual
biologists and experienced bioinformatics teams analyze the structure and
function of proteins without solved structures, especially those low-homology
proteins from metagenomic data. This protein modeling web service will
ultimately benefit the public by providing a necessary infrastructure for
applied areas of study such as alternative energy sources and new medicines.

By developing a long-term sustainable web server empowered by the OSG, this
project will promote the application of the NSF-sponsored cyberinfrastructure to
scientific research. The development, implementation, and evaluation of the
whole project will also promote the timely and effective knowledge dissemination
related to structure bioinformatics and distributed/grid computing and will
train students in both basic biological sciences and advanced computing
techniques.