* 0960763
* U.S. Participation in the Development of a Transnational Database: The Luxembourg Income Study, 2010-2014
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Janet Gornick, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2014
* USD 607,500.00

SES-0960763 Janet Gornick CUNY Graduate School

Founded in 1983, the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) is a unique, cross-national
data archive and research center which fosters primary research by providing
access to household microdata. LIS operates as a consortium of countries,
governed by an international board, and serving an international community of
researchers. LIS has four, longstanding goals: 1) harmonize microdatasets, from
multiple countries, which include data on income, wealth, employment and
demography; 2) provide a secure method that allows access to data with privacy
restrictions; 3) create a remote-access system to enable research conducted from
off-site locations; and 4) promote the use of microdata in comparative research
on social and economic wellbeing on a global level, conduct research onsite, and
sponsor and host scholars using the LIS data. A new goal: include datasets from
geographically and economically diverse countries in order to broaden the basis
for intellectual inquiry using household microdata.

LIS houses two databases: the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) Database and the
Luxembourg Wealth Study (LWS) Database. LIS personnel acquire, harmonize and
document diverse datasets from countries around the globe. The LIS datasets
include income, employment, and demographic variables at the person- and
household-level. The LIS database now includes microdata from 36 countries and
contains nearly 200 datasets spanning the years 1968 to 2006. The newer LWS
database (launched December 2007) contains 15 wealth datasets from 10 countries
and covers the period 1994 to 2004. New datasets for LIS and LWS are added
regularly. LIS prepares two sets of standardized national indicators: one on
household inequality and poverty and one on women?s economic outcomes; both are
publicly available on the LIS website, www.lisproject.org. In addition, a new
online table-maker (the WebTab) makes the LIS data available to a large, less
technically oriented population of users. Extensive documentation is available
on the underlying surveys, the harmonization process, and the country-specific
institutions that shape income and wealth levels and distributions. LIS provides
online instructional materials, extensive user support, and annual training
workshops. LIS is a venue for researchers to exchange ideas, results, and
methods; these exchanges take place through the Working Paper series, the
Visiting Scholar program, and the many conferences that are regularly sponsored
by LIS. To promote excellence in scholarship, LIS hosts two research awards.

LIS maintains the only data archive in existence that includes income, wealth
and labor market microdata, spanning decades and from diverse geographic
regions. The LIS datasets foster research on economic and social policies and
their effects on outcomes including poverty, income inequality, employment
status, wage patterns, gender inequality, and family structure. The LWS datasets
enable research on wealth portfolios, asset levels, and the interplay between
household income and wealth. LIS? data users cross-cut several disciplines
(e.g., economics, sociology, political science, policy studies) and employ a
wide range of statistical approaches and methods. LIS anticipates increased
interest in and broader applications of LIS as its geographic and economic
expansion unfolds.

Broader impact

Since LIS' inception, thousands of researchers have accessed the microdata;
produced Working Papers, government reports, journal articles and books;
attended workshops; participated as Visiting Scholars; contributed to research
conferences; and provided invaluable intellectual guidance regarding LIS?
activities and products. There are hundreds of active registered LIS users
worldwide; Americans make up about one-third of users and generate approximately
one-third of statistical queries to the archive. LIS has embarked on a
substantial expansion that will influence potential research initiatives and
affect almost every aspect of the organization: LIS plans to acquire and
harmonize, into LIS, datasets from 15-20 new middle-income countries over the
next 3-5 years, double the number of countries participating in LWS, expand its
research capacity, further its collaborations, and broaden its public profile
internationally.