* 0960993
* Collaborative Research: Choosing a Portfolio of Technology Policies in an Uncertain World
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Erin Baker, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 395,149.00

Addressing climate change without damaging the economy will require substantial
improvements to energy technologies. These improvements depend on investments
in, and the production of, new knowledge -- both in the laboratory and in
commercial use. Because knowledge, due to its special nature, is notoriously
difficult for private firms to control and profit from exclusively, it is argued
that government support is required to assure that opportunities are not
squandered. The literature is clear that the presence of multiple market
failures and multiple technical options means that good government policy needs
to have a portfolio of policies addressing a portfolio of technologies. However,
there are many possible diversified portfolios. This research applies science to
science and innovation policy in order to estimate the consequences of
combinations of technology policy instruments on the climate and on the
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project aims to provide a
framework for designing a portfolio of technology policies to address climate
change. The researchers model the effects of combinations of policy instruments
on a portfolio of technologies, when both the outcomes of the technology
policies and the effects of climate change are uncertain. The project evaluates
combinations of three policy instruments: government funded R&amp;D; subsidies
for demand; and carbon prices. It focuses on two important technologies: solar
PV and Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS), while developing a framework amenable
to the consideration of a larger set of technologies. Some of the key questions
the project addresses are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What factors are most
important in choosing the best the mix of R&amp;D and Subsidies? How does this
mix change with increasing uncertainty in climate damages?&lt;br/&gt;- What
drives the optimal mix of a two-technology portfolio?&lt;br/&gt;- To what extent
do R&amp;D and subsidies affect the optimal level of emissions
abatement?&lt;br/&gt;- How large is the hedging value that subsidies provide?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The researchers collect and use expert elicitations to
estimate the probability of R&amp;D investment producing technical improvements
in CCS. Simultaneously and iteratively, they develop a bottom-up cost model to
estimate the cost reductions expected from both economies of scale and learning-
by-doing as deployment of CCS technology expands. They implement this
model?along with an earlier model of solar PV?into an Integrated Assessment
Model, allowing for the optimization of portfolios of policy instruments
designed to reduce the cost of climate change mitigation. This configuration
allows cost benefit optimization of policy choices under varying probability
distributions over damages and technical outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Improved models that help improve the allocation of public funds could
have an important fiscal impact. In addition, the research will inform the
development of classes and train students in public policy model building.