* 0960121
* The Development of a Low-Cost and High-Throughput Dating System for Prehistoric Ceramics
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Hector Neff, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2013
* USD 310,092.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

Researchers at the Institute for Integrated Research in Materials, Environments,
and Societies (IIRMES), California State University - Long Beach (CSULB) will
use NSF Major Research Instrumentation funding to develop a new instrument for
dating prehistoric ceramics. Results obtained by materials scientists indicate
that low-fired ceramics, such as bricks, tiles, and pottery, gain weight and
expand by a process of water absorption that is highly regular on time scales
from weeks to millennia. The age of a low-fired ceramic can thus be obtained via
highly precise measurement of initial weight, followed by dehydroxylation
(firing above 500oC), followed by precise monitoring of weight gain over five to
ten days in order to establish the rate of rehydroxylation. The proposed new
instrument will automate these steps within a controlled environment to enable
large numbers of ceramics to be dated at low cost. In archaeology, determination
of the age of artifacts is central to the success of the discipline. Over the
years, archaeologists have made use of a wide array of dating techniques:
radiocarbon dating, luminescence dating, tree-ring dating, obsidian hydration,
electron spin resonance, uranium/thorium series dating and so on. Each technique
is best for particular materials and particular time ranges. Ceramic technology
was invented independently in multiple world regions during the past 10,000
years, and, since ceramics are durable, archaeologists routinely find broken
pieces of pottery, tiles, bricks, and figurines by the thousands (or more) on
archaeological sites in many regions of the world. Effective techniques for
dating ceramics are thus particularly valuable for the discipline.
Unfortunately, however, luminescence, the main technique currently used for
dating ceramics, is relatively difficult and expensive. Initial experiments have
shown that the rehydroxylation method promises very high precision with
relatively simple measurements and instruments. Configured for large numbers of
simultaneous measurements, rehydroxylation has the potential to reduce per
sample cost dramatically, thus dramatically increasing the number of dates that
can be run on any given archaeological project. Moreover, the relative
simplicity of the instrumentation means that it could be disseminated to a wide
range of laboratory settings. The NSF-supported project being undertaken at
IIRMES-CSULB seeks to develop instrumentation and protocols that are optimized
for efficient production of rehydroxylation measurements on ceramics. The
automated instrument system will retain the precision of the rehydroxylation
dating method while dramatically increasing the rate of sample throughput. The
project directors anticipate that the new instrumentation will have important,
even revolutionary, impacts on archaeological research.