* 0960759
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Getting Divorced in the Countryside:  Marital Grievances, Dispute Resolutions, and Gender Inequalities.
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2010,08/31/2011
* Ke Li, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

By studying rural women seeking divorce, this project will explore the disputing
behavior of two enormous segments of the contemporary Chinese population: rural
residents and women. In post-Mao rural China, how have rapid social changes
affected marriage and family life? To what extent and by what means do rural
residents mobilize law to address marital disputes? In what ways does a
grassroots legal system redress inequities and injustices and in what ways does
it reproduce and reinforce them? In China, women are far more likely than men to
initiate divorce litigation; in recent years, this gender disparity in divorce
lawsuits has become ever more pronounced in the countryside. However, to date no
research has explored Chinese women's litigiousness. In highlighting rural
women's experiences of divorce litigation, this project will present a study of
legal mobilization and dispute resolution in the rapidly changing social world
of China. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the aforementioned issues
through an ethnographic study of divorce litigation in rural Sichuan Province in
southwest China. The research will include semi-structured interviews with
divorce litigants, legal workers, judges, and court clerks; participant
observation in the courts and surrounding communities; and legal document
analysis. By situating research inquiries in contemporary rural China, this
project aims to produce highly contextualized knowledge about law, politics, and
gender. Meanwhile, this project also seeks to cast new light on: (1) the
processes and mechanisms whereby legal mobilization and dispute resolution
reflect, create, and destroy inequalities and injustices, (2) the extent to
which the rise of the rule of law in formerly authoritarian societies has
transformed preexisting power structures, and (3) the social forces that are
reshaping marriage, family life, and gender relationships in transitional
societies.