* 0960120
* MRI-R2: Development of Instrumentation for Nanoscale Spatial and Time Resolved Microwave Studies at Variable Temperatures and Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Chang Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 548,834.00

0960120&lt;br/&gt;Chandrasekhar&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is for the development of a facility to
enable low-temperature, time-, frequency- and spatially-resolved radiofrequency
and microwave measurements for a wide variety of experiments in condensed matter
and materials physics at Northwestern University. Four sets of experiments will
be attempted during the project period: investigation of cross-correlation noise
in mesoscopic devices; magnetization dynamics of nanoscale ferromagnets; time-
of-flight measurements in Luttinger liquids in semiconductor devices; and
persistent currents in normal metals. However, the usefulness of this new
facility will extend far beyond these initial experiments, involving other
groups at Northwestern, and enabling research groups at Northwestern to actively
incorporate high-frequency techniques in their future experimental research
plans. It will also allow undergraduate and graduate students and post-docs at
Northwestern to gain familiarity with radio and microwave frequency techniques,
a skill that is becoming increasing important in both academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing miniaturization of electronic
circuitry that allows the development of fast computers and slim cell phones is
also accompanied by a desire to make these devices work even smaller and faster.
Reducing the size of device elements to the scale of nanometers--one billionth
the size of a meter--presents new experimental challenges in trying to study
their behavior at time scales of a nanosecond or shorter, time scales that are
increasingly important for cutting-edge electronic devices. This project is
devoted to developing instrumentation to study the behavior of nanoscale
materials at frequencies starting at a few gigahertz, the frequencies at which
the current fastest desktop computers operate, to a few tens of gigahertz. In
addition to providing insight into better ways to make the next generation of
nanoscale, high-frequency devices, the instrumentation that will be developed
will enable experiments exploring fundamental quantum phenomena at high
frequency, and in the process train the next generation of scientists and
engineers in these essential techniques.