* 0960847
* RAPID: Phase Shift to Algal Dominated Mesophotic Reef Communities in Response to Lionfish Invasion
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2011
* Michael Lesser, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2011
* USD 242,922.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Shallow coral reefs in the
Caribbean basin have been severely degraded due to regional impacts from global
climate change, and local effects of overfishing and pollution. This decline in
coral reef health has promoted interest in mesophotic coral reefs (reefs at
depths of 30 to 150 m) because they are often physically and biologically
connected to their shallow water counterparts, and thus may serve as potential
refugia for shallow reef taxa and a source of larvae that could promote the
resiliency of shallow water reefs. The recent invasion of the red lionfish
(Pterois volitans), a native of the sub-tropical and tropical Indo-Pacific ocean
basin, onto shallow reefs of the Caribbean and Bahamas has had a profound effect
on endemic coral reef fish populations. The investigators propose that the
impacts of these lionfish have extended to mesophotic reef depths throughout the
Bahamas. The PIs will examine the effects of lionfish on mesophotic reefs using
a comparative approach for reefs within a region and reefs between regions
(Bahamas versus Little Cayman). In the Bahamas these predators have had a
significant negative effect on five distinct guilds of mesophotic reef fishes,
and the ensuing trophic cascade has facilitated a phase shift towards an algal
dominated (&gt;50% cover) community to depths of 60 m, or greater, due to
reduced grazing pressure. This has further resulted in a significant decline in
the percent cover of corals and sponges. The direct and indirect effects of this
invasive species to mesophotic reefs exceeds other natural and anthropogenic
stressors, and casts doubt on whether these important deep reef communities can
actually stimulate the recovery of shallow Caribbean reefs where lionfish now
reside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Mesophotic coral reefs are greatly
understudied and represent unique habitats compared to their shallow water
counterparts. The studies that have been done suggest that mesophotic reefs
could be a refuge from anthropogenic change or a supplier of propagules to
shallow reefs for certain coral reef taxa. The insights provided by work on the
effects of the recent lionfish invasion to mesophotic depths suggest that quick
response to this novel threat to mesophotic reefs is warranted to understand the
extent of change on reefs with and without lionfish. This research will
complement work already funded in the shallow reefs of the same system, and
nowhere else is a combined shallow and mesophotic reef approach to the lionfish
invasion being carried out. Broader Impacts will provide unique educational and
outreach opportunities at high schools through the participation of the
principal investiagtors in regional Junior Science and Humanities Symposia and
UNH's Science and Mathematics Achievement Through Research program (SMART) by
providing mentorship and lectures about the ecology, biology, and value of coral
reefs. Data, graphics, and publications will be made available to both the
oceanographic and marine ecology communities through the "Mesophotic Coral
Ecosystems" web site.