* 0960178
* MRI - R2:   Acquisition of a Digital Steromicroscopy System for Research, Research Training and the Intergration of Research and Education at Mesa State College
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Aparna Palmer, Colorado Mesa University
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 04/30/2011
* USD 23,055.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation-Recovery and
Reinvestment (MRI-R2) award funds the acquisition of a stereomicroscopy system
for use at Mesa State College. The primary users of the requested equipment are
members of the Biology Department at Mesa State College. The Biology Department
is one of the largest on campus, and has a solid record of scholarly activity
and undergraduate research. The Microscopy Center at Mesa State supports
projects conducted by investigators at the college and in the region. Research
projects that will be aided immediately by this equipment include studies into
cellular signaling mechanisms in social amoebae, the evolution of polychaetous
annelids and the mechanism of action of rattlesnake toxins. These projects have
regional, national and international impacts. Mesa State College is a primarily
baccalaureate-granting, comprehensive liberal arts college that serves a large
area of the western slope of Colorado, one of the fastest growing regions of the
western United States. Enrollment at Mesa State has grown dramatically in recent
years and nearly 7000 students currently attend; 20% of these students come from
minority groups, 60% are women and 25% are first-generation college students. An
important goal of research at Mesa State College is to augment undergraduate
education, and all of the research projects described here involve undergraduate
students, with most being driven by student researchers. The new
stereomicroscope will also enhance instruction in the teaching laboratory, where
it will be used to demonstrate important topics in biology and to introduce
modern techniques in biological research. Data from the studies that utilize the
new microscope will be disseminated through student and faculty presentations at
regional and national meetings, and through publication in peer-reviewed
journals.