* 0960529
* Iterative Models in Figure-Ground Perception: Tests and Challenges
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Mary Peterson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 05/31/2014
* USD 444,193.00

Visual perception seems trivially easy. Nevertheless, it has long withstood the
attempts of both computer scientists and vision scientists to crack its code,
most likely because past theories were based predominantly on conscious vision.
In order for perceivers to experience a coherent visual world, perceptual input
must be organized into separate objects, or "figures." As part of this process,
the brain decides where a figure lies with respect to every border between two
contiguous regions of space. Consider a vertical border, for instance. The brain
decides whether that border is a boundary for a figure lying on the left or the
right. When the border is perceived as a boundary of a figure lying on the left,
the region on the right seems simply to continue behind the figure at the
border; no shape is perceived there. These "figure-ground" decisions are made
outside of conscious awareness. Because of this, it is extremely difficult to
investigate the mechanisms that produce figure-ground perception. An important,
unanswered, question is whether figure-ground perception is accomplished via
fast, feed-forward mechanisms or whether iterative mechanisms involving feedback
from higher processing levels are involved. In feed-forward models, the input is
processed in successive stages until a coherent percept emerges. In iterative
models, feed-forward processing is not sufficient; feedback from higher to lower
levels is necessary to create the percept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mary Peterson
and her colleagues at the University of Arizona have designed visual displays
that allow them to investigate this question. One display type is a small
symmetric, bounded silhouette lying on a larger ground. Portions of familiar
shapes are hidden along the groundside of the silhouette's border; these shapes
are not perceived consciously, only the shape of the enclosed silhouette is
perceived consciously. (The classic "face-vase illusion" is an example of this.)
Previous experiments have shown that the shape of the hidden object is
suppressed when it is not perceived, supporting the view that figure-ground
perception results from inhibitory competition between shapes that might be seen
on opposite sides of a border; the winner is perceived as the shaped figure,
whereas the loser is suppressed and the portion of space where it might have
been seen is perceived as a shapeless ground. These displays are designed to
isolate competition at the shape processing stage. Dr. Peterson and colleagues
will also conduct a series of experiments which test whether suppression can be
observed at lower levels where individual parts are represented and at higher
levels where shape descriptions ("semantics") are represented. According to a
feed-forward account, suppression of the losing shape would prevent access to
its semantics; hence, no effects should be evident at higher levels. Without
feedback, no effects should be evident at lower, part-processing, levels either.
An iterative view could account for suppression at lower and/or higher levels by
assuming that the outcome of the between-shape competition was relayed to higher
and lower levels. Thus the proposed experiments will adjudicate between these
competing views of how perception occurs. The researchers will also attempt to
identify the processes involved in segregating figures from grounds in crowded
real-world scenes. The perception of these more complex displays constitutes a
challenge to current iterative models of figure-ground perception. The planned
research will provide a foundation for neurophysiological experiments and formal
computational models of vision and will contribute to our understanding of the
temporal and spatial dynamics of shape perception.