* 0960100
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Highly Charged Ion Beamline for Interdisciplinary Materials Research and Education at Clemson University
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Jian Luo, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,648,901.00

0960100&lt;br/&gt;Sosolik&lt;br/&gt;Clemson U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose
the acquisition of a highly charged ion (HCI) beamline dedicated to the
exploration of HCI-materials interactions. The intrinsic high energy density
present in an HCI-solid impact, where a reproducible quantum mechanical state of
a highly ionized atom transfers energy into a solid at atomic length scales,
gives irradiance values (~1014 W/cm2) that rival those achievable with petawatt
lasers (~7x1011 W/cm2) and that can be obtained and maintained more easily than
a laser. Understanding the physical mechanisms that control how an HCI can
deliver this energy to a target is the primary and open question of materials
research that will be addressed. With this instrumentation we will be able to
create HCIs of a selected charge state and impact them onto well-defined targets
where secondary electron, X-ray, and mass loss sensing will be used for real-
time analysis and precisely timed clocking (via X-ray deexcitation) of impact
events. In doing so, we will probe the complex interplay between fundamental
atomic physics (X-ray emissions, Rydberg atom formation, etc.) and energy
dissipation that is the defining characteristic of HCI-materials interactions.
Results obtained with this beamline will be directly applied to the use of HCIs
in electronic device processing as well as the evaluation of candidate materials
for fusion reactor walls, the role of HCIs in astrophysically relevant ion-
target impact conditions, and the accelerated spaceflight-readiness testing of
electronics devices and materials. This instrumentation will be housed on the
central campus of Clemson University, will be operated by a trained staff
technician, and will be maintained through the committed and combined support of
the College of Engineering and Science and the university. The core
investigators and management team will utilize this acquisition to enhance our
outreach programs to women and minorities through established programs on campus
and through our existing connection with South Carolina State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose the
acquisition of a highly charged ion (HCI) beamline for interdisciplinary
materials research and education at Clemson University. Highly charged ions,
which are atoms stripped of a large fraction of their electrons, are unique as
they possess a high energy density that can lead to novel HCI-solid interactions
not typically encountered in a materials laboratory environment. Our goals with
this acquisition are to explore the physical mechanisms that control how a HCI
can deliver energy to a target and apply that knowledge to the development of
HCIs as a processing tool for electronic materials fabrication. In addition, the
inherent presence of HCIs in fusion reactors, a candidate technology for clean
energy production, as well as in the space environment makes this acquisition a
prime tool for reproducing these conditions in a laboratory setting. Operating
as a research laboratory and user facility for the study of HCI interactions
with materials, this beamline will open new doors to a multitude of researchers
and encourage their explorations into this unique form of matter. The
incorporation of cryogen-free technologies for the production of HCIs into this
proposed acquisition ensures that it will function as a low cost, single-
operator beamline that has a low threshold for user and collaborator
participation. This instrumentation will be housed on the central campus of
Clemson University, will be operated by a trained staff technician, and will be
maintained through the committed and combined support of the College of
Engineering and Science and the university. The core investigators and
management team will utilize this acquisition to enhance our outreach programs
to women and minorities through established programs on campus and through our
existing connection with South Carolina State University.