* 0960275
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Semi-Continental Scale Atmospheric Acoustic Transportable Array
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Michael Hedlin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 02/28/2013
* USD 807,971.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation-Recovery and
Reinvestment project will create a real-time infrasound array whose sensing
elements are co-located with the 400 seismic stations in the USArray
Transportable Array component of the NSF EarthScope program. This continuously
sampled array, of an unprecedented scale, will provide opportunities for
groundbreaking and interdisciplinary research in atmospheric acoustics,
atmospheric science, and seismology. The array will sample mean values and
fluctuations of the surface air pressure with nominal 70 kilometer station
spacing, with a dynamic range of about 7 orders of magnitude, and with a
sampling frequency of up to 40 Hz. This dense network of infrasound sensors will
permit study of the nature of long-range infrasound propagation from regional to
continental distances, and study of the sources of infrasound signals, using
actual acoustic data, free of concerns about seismic-to-acoustic coupling. The
array will not only record signals from a range of sources, it will permit study
of propagation from these sources under widely varying atmospheric conditions.
These data will be used to test atmospheric models and improve understanding of
regional to long range infrasound propagation physics. Continuous monitoring of
signals from repeating distant sources provides opportunities to probe high
altitude winds, yielding valuable information to validate, tune, and improve
global whole-atmosphere numerical weather and climate models. Recording actual
pressure variations will aid studies of thermospheric attenuation, assess the
utility of algorithms for correcting recorded signal amplitudes for wind effects
and provide more data for full-waveform analyses. Atmospheric phenomena that can
be studied with unprecedented spatio-temporal coverage include solar and lunar
atmospheric tides, upper-level and lower-level jet streams, weather fronts,
boundary-layer convection, tornadoes, nocturnal drainage flows, and gravity
waves. Simultaneous and continuous observations of atmospheric and seismic noise
will facilitate adaptive seismometry, a process analogous to adaptive optics in
which the effects of atmospheric loading at the Earth's surface are accounted
for in seismic channels to reduce noise at long periods. There also will be
serendipitous avenues for research that will not be discovered until the data
begin to flow. Real time data delivery capabilities will be utilized to allow
open and free data distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This observatory will provide data for research in
atmospheric acoustics, seismology and atmospheric science. As papers result from
this dataset, it will be easier for institutions to attract researchers and
students interested in conducting research in these areas. This network, and the
data it will provide, will broaden the participation in science. It will provide
many opportunities for training in data analysis, as well as validating models
used in atmospheric science and atmospheric acoustics. It will provide
opportunities for increasing the quality of very long-period seismic data for
studies of the solid earth, and possibly reducing horizontal noise on seismic
records by applying corrections derived from long period barometric data. The
managing laboratory has a commitment to supporting the integration of research
and education at every academic level. The data from the infrasound array will
be made freely available in near real time, without restriction, through an on-
line data management system, to everyone inside and outside the scientific
community. Science teachers will be able to access data they are interested in
and incorporate it into their science curricula. Project scientists will work
with "Perspectives on Ocean Science," which is an earth and ocean science
speaker series hosted by Birch Aquarium at Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
to provide the public with direct access to up-to-date science in a presentation
that is specifically designed for a lay audience. "Perspectives on Ocean
Science" reaches an audience of almost 15 million viewers.