* 0960820
* Collaborative Research: Impact of Bottom Boundary Layer Drag and Topographic Wave Drag on the Eddying General Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Brian Arbic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2014
* USD 703,059.00

In recent years the quantification of oceanic energy sources and sinks has
generated much interest, due to arguments that mixing driven by energy
dissipation exerts a strong control on meridional heat and carbon transport.
This project examines the hypothesis that both quadratic bottom boundary layer
drag and topographic internal wave drag contribute significantly to the energy
budget of the oceanic general circulation, and have a major impact on the
dynamics and statistics of mesoscale eddies. The hypothesis will be tested by
employing bottom drag coefficients of various strengths in both idealized models
and realistic eddying global ocean general circulation models, and by employing
wave drag in the realistic models. Horizontal length scales and energy levels of
ocean surface eddy kinetic energy in the models will be compared to satellite
altimeter observations, and the vertical structure of modeled eddy kinetic
energy will be compared to a database of subsurface current meter observations.
Based on previous work by the investigators with idealized two-layer quasi-
geostrophic models, it is expected that eddies will compare most closely to
observations when the bottom drag is moderately strong. It is also hypothesized
that bottom boundary layer drag and wave drag both contribute significantly to
the energy budget of the general circulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: Bottom drag sensitivity will be investigated in models which remedy
several deficiencies of the two-layer quasi-geostrophic models previously
employed by the PIs; the truncation of oceanic stratification to two layers, the
missing surface boundary effects, the flat bottom, and the horizontally
homogeneous mean flows. The project will utilize a new idealized model which
simultaneously resolves multiple interior quasi-geostrophic modes and the
surface mode, as well as realistic eddying general circulation models with high
vertical resolution, inhomogeneous forcing, and rough
topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will build upon their
previous experience inserting topographic internal wave drag into ocean tide
models, to insert wave drag into ocean general circulation models. The
investigators have on hand a wave drag scheme which is appropriate for the low-
frequency flows of interest here. The scheme comes from a collaborator in the
atmospheric community, which has been employing schemes for wave drag on low-
frequency flows in general circulation models for over twenty years. The wave
drag calculation also builds upon collaborations with marine geophysicists,
which have resulted in the construction of synthetic datasets of small-scale (on
order 1-10 km) topographic roughness. Small-scale roughness is insufficiently
represented in state-of-the-art global bathymetric datasets, yet, according to
theory, is responsible for the generation of internal waves by low-frequency
flows over rough topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The work
proposed here will contribute to the discussion of oceanic energy dissipation,
through investigations of two plausible energy sinks and their impacts on the
dynamics of the eddying circulation. The work proposed here should also lead to
improvements in eddying ocean models, which are sensitive to the damping
coefficients they employ. As computer power continues to increase, the ocean
models used in climate simulations will soon become eddy-resolving. Thus it is
important for climate studies as well as other applications for eddy-resolving
ocean models to be improved and tested. The work proposed here will contribute
to that goal. The project will support a post-doctoral scientist and a graduate
student. The post-doc will work with the realistic models, and a graduate
student will work with the idealized models. The project also provides funding
for the lead PI to continue working with high school student and undergraduate
summer interns, as he has every summer starting in 2006. Finally, the project
provides travel funds for the lead investigator, Dr. Arbic, to continue to
participate in the pre-departure meetings Dr. Jurgen Theiss will hold every year
to prepare students for their involvement in the NSF-funded Zanzibar Channel
Project.