* 0960090
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of instruments to facilitate and enhance education and research on marine ecosystems at TAMUG
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Peter Santschi, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 01/31/2011
* USD 383,127.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identification of key environmental
parameters that affect the survival and/or production of marine organisms is
needed to maintain biodiversity and ensure the preservation of marine
ecosystems. The links between ecological and biogeochemical processes are
increasingly implicated as being critically important but are rarely included in
ecological studies, compromising our ability to effectively assess and monitor
the health of marine ecosystems. An improved understanding of such relationships
will provide important insights into ecosystem stability and the potential
consequences of future habitat alteration due to human activity and global
climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s request funding to acquire a
Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (LA-ICP-MS) and a
Total Mercury Analyzer. The equipment will significantly enhance the analytical
capacity at TAMUG and will be used by faculty at this institution as well as
faculty in the new Interdisciplinary Degree Program (IDP) in Marine Biology
(Program comprised of faculty from six departments and three campuses in the
Texas A&amp;M University System) to continue to investigate novel lines of
ecological research that include the biogeochemistry of land-ocean interactions,
ecological impacts of engineered nanoparticles, and population connectivity of
marine organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new instruments will provide a link between education and research through
undergraduate classes and training. The faculty would benefit because the
proposed LA-ICP-MS would be the first one on the TAMUG campus. This instrument
is the workhorse of elemental analysis and every research institution should
have at least one. This instrument would elevate the research of the PIs and
also provide basic analytical capabilities for a broad range of scientists at
TAMUG whom could use the instrument on a pay-per-use basis. The University
supports public outreach but there was no direct plan for public outreach by
this group.