* 0960423
* Mobile Money, Mobile Regulation: What the "Savings Challenge" Means for Mobile Communications and Banking
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* William Maurer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 05/31/2014
* USD 218,685.00

Mobile Money, Mobile Regulation: What the "Savings Challenge" Means for Mobile
Communications and Banking&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
Kenya, over 6 million people subscribe to a service called M-PESA to send money
to their friends and relatives cheaply and securely over their mobile phones. In
the Philippines, people can remit money to family members on remote islands
through a similar service called Globe GCASH, now used by 2 million people.
Around the world, mobile phone-enabled money services like these are taking off.
Given the rapidity of its emergence, "mobile money" is often being deployed in
advance of regulatory guidelines. When telecommunications companies get into the
business of money transfer and banking, there is the potential for a clash of
cultures as well as risks to consumers, banks and the financial system itself.
Who holds the deposits, and what do they do with them while they sit in people's
accounts? If you lose your phone, do your savings go with it?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project relies on interviews with regulatory and
industry participants; archival data collection and analysis; and ethnography in
industry and regulatory sites to understand the debates and knowledge transfers
around emerging regulations for mobile money. It asks where regulatory
innovations come from; how regulators triangulate among industry and nonprofit
actors; whether regulatory knowledge transfers between developing world
countries have become more important than from the developed to the developing
world; and whether the regulation of mobile money can be seen as an instance of
regulatory convergence or capture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
enhance understanding of regulatory change under conditions of rapid
technological and economic transformation. It has the potential to influence
regulatory frameworks for mobile money. It will also contribute to refocusing
development strategies from microfinance to microsavings. If various regulatory
barriers can be overcome in a prudent manner that attends to risk, security and
consumer protection, then mobile money for savings has the potential to
transform the lives of the very poor, for whom the entry barriers and costs of
savings are too high.