* 0960646
* Spatial Analysis of Historical Fire Regimes and Landscape Structure in Sagebrush Ecosystems of the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* William Baker, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2013
* USD 130,126.00

Reconstructing evidence of historical fires is difficult at the large spatial
extent required to understand whether recent large wildfires like the 652,358
acre Murphy Complex fires of 2007 in Idaho and Nevada sagebrush, are
unprecedented or also occurred historically, prior to widespread EuroAmerican
land uses. This limitation is particularly problematic in sagebrush ecosystems,
which cover about 47 million ha of the western United States, as tree-ring
evidence of historical fires is limited to forests and woodlands on the margin
of these ecosystems. As a consequence, little is known about the structure of
historical sagebrush landscapes or the rates and patterns of historical
wildfires in these landscapes.

Professor William Baker at the University of Wyoming will reconstruct historical
fire regimes and landscape structure in sagebrush ecosystems in the United
States using the General Land Office Surveys of the late 1800s. Surveyors
recorded the location of wildfires and early-successional postfire vegetation as
they laid out section lines. Section-line information can be computerized and
converted into maps of historical vegetation to allow spatial analysis of
historical fires and landscape structure. The study will acquire, process, and
analyze survey records for sample sagebrush landscapes of about 2,223,900 acres
in each of four major floristic provinces spanning the range of sagebrush in the
United States, and use these records to reconstruct historical fires and
landscape structure. The research will address nine specific hypotheses about
historical fire regimes and landscape structure in sagebrush. These hypotheses
center on (1) historical fire-size distributions, (2) the patchiness of
historical fires, (3) the frequency at which fire historically burned across
landscapes, (4) the structure and size of historical landscapes, and (5)
geographical variation in historical fire regimes and landscape structure.

Sagebrush is the sole habitat for a host of sagebrush-obligate species, some
that are declining or are already listed as threatened or endangered, for
example Sage Grouse. Sagebrush is also key forage for major populations of
native ungulates, such as deer and elk, on their winter ranges. This study will
substantially enhance basic understanding of spatial variation in a key natural
wildfire disturbance and its historical influence on the structure of large
landscapes representing a major western ecosystem. Improved information on
historical wildfires will help understand if there is a wildfire contribution to
declining species and how to manage wildfires and sagebrush on key winter
ranges.