* 0960612
* ABI: A Toolbox for Large-Scale Analysis of Structural Molecular Data
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2016
* Yousif Shamoo, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2016
* USD 765,686.00

A Toolbox for Large-Scale Analysis of Structural Molecular Data

William Marsh Rice University is awarded a grant to design and implement an
extensible and computationally efficient toolbox that integrates sequence
information and existing molecular metadata with structural analysis of
proteins. One of the most challenging tasks in modern biology is the
interpretation of the massive amounts of data becoming available through recent
genomics, proteomics and related advances. Proteins are the cell's worker
molecules, so there is a tremendous interest to understand how they behave,
relate to each other, and how they regulate physiological processes. At the core
of the toolbox is a fast and scalable substructure matching method that finds
correspondences of a three-dimensional set of atoms (a motif) to a set of
protein structures. The goal is to provide biologists with a versatile 'Swiss
army knife' for probing the relationship between protein structure and function.
The toolbox will be built in a way that it will automatically draw metadata
information from relevant online databases in order to be continuously up-to-
date. The output will not only report and visualize the results but link to
online sources for further evaluation and analysis.

The broader impacts of this project will strengthen biological infrastructure by
providing a versatile computational toolbox for the analysis of protein
structure and function. The toolbox will be widely disseminated (1) as a web
service, (2) as a downloadable package with a command line and Python module
interface, and (3) as a plug-in for Chimera, a popular, free molecular modeling
program. Besides working with their collaborators, the PIs will reach out to
interest groups and related conferences for building a community of users for
the proposed tool and encourage the contribution of novel workflows by the
scientific community. Students involved in the project will be trained as part
of a highly interdisciplinary team, and educational and research activities
(through CRA-W, the Computer Research Association's Committee on the Status of
Women in Computing Research) for undergraduate students are planned.