* 0960348
* Collaborative Research: MRI-R2--Acquisition of a Mobile Atmospheric Profiling System for Multi-Campus Research and Education (CSU-MAPS)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2010,10/31/2012
* John Monteverdi, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 10/31/2012
* USD 418,485.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Experimental research in boundary layer meteorology requires information both on
direct surface-atmosphere exchanges of energy and moisture as well as profiles
of meteorological parameters extending into the lower part of the atmosphere. By
combining experimental and educational goals of multiple projects involving five
departments at three California State University (CSU) campuses, this effort
supported through NSF's Major Research Instrumentation (MRI-R2) program will
allow procurement and integration of a highly agile mobile atmospheric profiling
system (CSU-MAPS). This system includes micro-meteorological instruments mounted
on a telescopic 30-meter tall tower, as well as two vertically pointing remote
sensing systems (viz. a microwave profiler and wind LIDAR), all to be designed
for rapid deployment via a trailer-mounted arrangement. Together these
instruments will profile temperature and water vapor at two heights near 10 km
above ground level. A combination of low-level in-situ and remotely sensed
measurements extending to heights near 10 km will be supplemented by a more
standard rawinsonde system providing occasional balloon-based profiles to even
higher levels.

The intellectual merit of this effort centers on support for fields as diverse
as wildfire science and renewable energy exploration and by allowing exceedingly
rapid deployment of high-quality measurement systems in response to rapidly
evolving weather and wildfire conditions. Research supported by collaborating
faculty will extend to topics including (though not limited to) urban
meteorology, wetland micrometeorology, associated carbon fluxes, wind-energy
prospecting, marine-atmosphere interactions along coastal zones, and controls on
development of severe thunderstorms.

Broader impacts will come through improved understanding of geophysical
phenomena in regions of complex terrain and coastlines, by providing students
with hands-on student experience in planning and conducting field measurements,
and through a range of associated practical skills. CSU-MAPS and the
observations it collects will provide the foundation for three separate
University courses on meteorological instrumentation and measurements. Through
these involvements, more than 500 students across three campuses will benefit
during each year of its operation. Outreach to K-12 students is also planned.
More than half of the involved students will be drawn from underrepresented
groups.