* 0960897
* ABI:   Systems Bioinformatics Approaches to Modeling and Deciphering Plant Transcriptional Regulatory Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Patrick Xuechun Zhao, Noble Research Institute, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,183,305.00

ABI: Systems Bioinformatics Approaches to Modeling and Deciphering Plant
Transcriptional Regulatory Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Samuel Roberts
Noble Foundation is awarded a grant to investigate how genome scale
transcriptional regulatory networks control gene expression. The project will
address diversity and complexity of gene regulation in plant systems and key
regulatory elements, including transcription factors, microRNAs (miRNAs), trans-
acting small interfering RNAs (ta-siRNAs), and emergent regulatory elements.
Using systems bioinformatics approaches to decipher plant transcriptional
regulatory networks, specific aims include: 1) developing graphical models to
model and simulate plant transcriptional regulatory networks; 2) developing
novel computational algorithms to infer large-scale gene regulatory networks
(GRNs) from high throughput functional genomics data in model plants; 3)
constructing Arabidopsis Gene Regulation Networks (AGRN) focusing on hormone-
related regulatory networks; 4) constructing legume gene regulatory networks
(LGRN) involved in regulation of nodulation in three model legumes: Medicago
truncatula, Lotus japonicus, and Glycine max; and 5) developing integrated web
systems to host AGRN and LGRN along with supportive genome-scale data, and
network discovery, search and curation tools as plug-ins of popular Cytoscape-
based open-source network visualization software linked to AGRN and LGRN web
services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating these systems will not only fulfill
the needs of the plant biology research community and plant breeders, but will
ultimately lead to the development of better engineered economically important
crops, e.g. forage legumes. The proposed work is trans-disciplinary and requires
the application of genomics, computational biology, and bioinformatics to the
classical disciplines of genetics, molecular and cell biology, and plant
physiology. By providing a single training ground at the Noble Foundation, this
project will empower postdoctoral fellows, visiting scientists, students, and
technical staff to acquire many of the research skills that are essential for
cutting-edge biological research. A strong student outreach program will be
harnessed to maximize teaching and learning outcomes for this project.