* 0960857
* EC-US Plant Biotechnology Workshop on Plant Bioinformatics and Databases to be held December 7 - 8, 2009 at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton (UK)
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Doreen Ware, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 11/30/2012
* USD 47,922.00

Biology has become an information science. Common to all of the areas of
biology, including plant biology, is the need to collect, store, integrate,
analyze, retrieve and disseminate information. To meet this need in the last 30
years, bioinformatics has emerged as a field of research that includes but is
not limited to the development of databases, computational analysis, algorithm
development, standards, and visualization tools to store, handle and visualize
biological data sets. Many of these resources to date have focused on sequence-
based data sets which make up the bulk of the available high-throughput
analyses, but this landscape is rapidly changing. With advances in technology
and the need for translational research, the types and magnitude of the data
sets are changing and scaling will require new development, increased
collaboration and investment of resources.

Understanding this requirement, cyberinfrastructure has been identified as an
area for future investment in several reports including the NSF
Cyberinfrastructure Vision for 21st Century Discovery
(http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf0728/index.jsp), National Research Council
Report on the "Achievements of the National Plant Genome Initiative and New
Horizons in Plant Biology" (http://dels.nas.edu/plant_genome/report.shtml), the
National Plant Genome Initiative (NPGI) 5-year plan
(http://www.nsf.gov/bio/pubs/reports/npgi_five_year_plan_2009_2013.pdf) and the
EC-US Plant Biotechnology Research 2008. The EC-US Plant Biotechnology Research
Working Group identified "building translational pipelines for plant
biotechnology" encompassing food, feed and renewable resources as an area for US
and EC collaboration. Within this larger objective, the Working Group identified
"Cyberinfrastructure" as a key area for collaboration.

In an effort to address EC-US Working Group recommendations, a small workshop
will bring together an interdisciplinary group of scientists to discuss existing
and future challenges in bioinformatics related to the support of plant
biotechnology. The workshop will produce a whitepaper with recommendations for
priority areas of joint collaboration in plant bioinformatics research to be
disseminated to the broader scientific community.