* 0960274
* MRI-R2: Development of a high average power table-top extreme ultraviolet/soft x-ray laser beam line for science at the nanoscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Kristen Buchanan, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,500,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop an extreme ultraviolet/soft x-ray laser for the table-top
generation of high brightness coherent short wavelength light. The high average
power and pulse energy produced by this light source will enable new nano-scale
science and technology applications of high intensity soft x-ray light in a
small laboratory setting. The approach combines recent advances in the
amplification of soft x-ray light in dense plasmas with a high energy, high
repetition rate, optical laser specifically designed to drive soft x-ray lasers.
&lt;br/&gt;This bright table-top short wavelength laser will make possible the
implementation of powerful microscopes that will visualize phenomena in
materials, devices, and biological specimens with nanometer spatial resolution
and picosecond temporal resolution; modify and characterize materials at the
nanoscale, and investigate extreme states of matter that are beyond the reach of
optical probes. &lt;br/&gt;Since lasers and imaging of the nano-world are
subjects that resonate with the intellectual curiosity and interest amongst a
broad group of students, the new light source will offer the opportunity to
involve in research students ranging from K-12 to graduate school. In addition
to exciting multi-disciplinary, cutting?edge thesis projects for graduate
students, the proposed soft x-ray laser beam line will create new opportunities
to engage undergraduates, high school students, and middle school teachers in
scientific research and systems engineering. Diverse participation in the
development and use of the proposed laser source will be facilitated by the
collaboration with partner institutions serving populations that are
underrepresented in science and engineering.