* 0960391
* EAGER:  Adolescent Computer and Electronic Game Use
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jennifer Epstein, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 98,112.00

Computer-based technologies have become pervasive in our society. Children, and
even more so adolescents, have grown to think of the Internet, along with the
computers used to surf it and the many platforms meant for game playing, as
toys. Supporters of the new technologies point to their potential to educate and
to impart skills that will be useful later on in life. Others view the overuse
of the Internet and gaming as a harmful addiction. The truth most likely falls
in between these two viewpoints. Yet with the exception of investigations into
the negative impact of violence (whether on television or in video games), there
has been scant research into the positive and negative effects of technology and
computers on our nation's youth. In this exploratory project, the PI will seek
to determine which factors are responsible for making technology helpful to
adolescents and which are detrimental. To this end, adolescents will be asked to
participate in a couple of anonymous Internet surveys. One of these surveys will
seek to establish the relationship between frequency of use and content of use
(gaming, e-mail, educational games, etc.) with a variety of factors such as
interest in science, grades, individual psychological characteristics (risk-
taking, social influences from friends, psychological well-being, self-control,
etc.), engagement in sports or other physical activity, injuries related to
computer use, parental monitoring of and limits on computer use, regular bed
time and how much sleep per night, cigarette use, alcohol use, height, weight,
age, and gender. In a second survey the PI will examine the positive aspects of
social networking websites (e.g., Facebook and MySpace) for adolescents with
disabilities, who are chronically ill, and who are recovering from major surgery
or disabling injury; among other things, participants will be asked what
improvements would better serve their needs on social networking sites. The
adolescent surveys will be supplemented with parental versions for parents of
adolescents.

Broader Impacts: This research will provide much needed insight into how
computers are affecting our nation's youth. Project outcomes will enable
scientists to advise parents and others how to best use technology with
adolescents, and will also inform designers how to create better and more
inclusive systems in the future.