* 0960512
* EAGER:  Developing and Testing Algorithms for Generating Leading Tsunami Waves
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Philip Liu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2011
* USD 50,020.00

During the last forty years, solitary waves have been used as surrogate leading
tsunami waves in laboratory studies. The data taken from the 2004 Indian Ocean
tsunamis, however, show that the length and time scales for the solitary wave
are too small in comparison with those of real tsunamis. This discovery poses a
fundamental challenge for the tsunami research community, who currently
interpret the existing results based on solitary wave theory. More importantly,
this points to the need to investigate the feasibility of generating adequate
long waves in a laboratory facility for laboratory research.

Intellectual Merit: This research will use the newly installed wave makers with
long strokes at Cornell University and the NEES tsunami facility at Oregon State
University to test the hypothesis that the leading tsunami wave does not have
sufficient time and distance to evolve into a solitary form, therefore
challenging the currently used modeling approach for wave runup and other
physical quantities based on the solitary wave. Since both wave makers are new,
investments need to be made to develop algorithms for generating properly scaled
leading tsunami waves. The critical question is to demonstrate if the wave
length and wave period estimated by current solitary wave theory agree with
recent field observations. Therefore, this research is timely and potentially
transformative. The objectives of the research are as follows: (1) investigate
and formulate the shape of characteristic leading tsunami waves, and (2) create
and implement algorithms for generating desirable leading tsunami wave forms in
both the Cornell and Oregon State wave flumes. This research has high risk but
potentially high impact. If the research is successful, it has far-reaching
implications on future tsunami laboratory research directions and community
modeling approaches, including those of the NEES tsunami facility. Most of the
laboratory results obtained in the past and their applications would need to be
reevaluated. One reason that the solitary wave has been used in the past as the
surrogate for the leading tsunami wave in laboratory studies for runup and wave
force is that most existing wave flume facilities cannot generate the very long
waves that represent leading tsunami waves. However, the new wave makers at both
Cornell and the Oregon State tsunami wave facility now have the long stroke
capacity to generate very long waves and test this hypothesis, and these two
facilities complement each other in terms of range of applicable parameters.

Broader Impacts: Successful achievement of the objectives of this research could
lead to the following broader impacts. First, if the hypothesis is proven, then
the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunamis clearly demonstrate that leading tsunami waves
cannot be accurately represented by solitary waves in the laboratory, and new
research directions and laboratory capabilities will be required for the field.
Second, this project will utilize Oregon State University's Tsunami Experiment
Databank and Notebook to capture and make all experimental data publicly
available, as well as archiving all data in the NEES data repository, for reuse
by future researchers. Third, a new piston wave maker was installed in Oregon
State University's NEES Large Wave Flume, acquired through a recent NSF Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) award, and became operational in spring 2009.
This award will expand the capabilities of that wave flume facility through the
algorithm developed to generate very long waves through modification of the
software that drives the hydraulic actuator assembly.