* 0960291
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Compute Cluster for High-Fidelity Simulations of Gravitational Wave Sources -- Facilitating LIGO and Enabling Multi-Messenger Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Lee Lindblom, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 03/31/2013
* USD 1,050,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The award enables the acquisition of a computer cluster to
allow the simulation of groundbreaking models of astronomical systems to yield
high-fidelity, robust, quantitative predictions for multi-messenger astronomy in
the form of gravitational waveforms, neutrino signatures, and electromagnetic
signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational waves (GWs) are ripples in the
structure of spacetime that propagate across the universe at the speed of light.
The NSF-funded Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) is
searching for these waves, which encode otherwise inaccessible details of their
sources. This new information will be enriched and complemented by
electromagnetic and neutrino observations of those sources, making multi-
messenger astronomy a reality. Codes have been developed to take advantage of
the growth in available computing power to allow improved, accurate modeling of
several potential sources of gravitational waves, including double star systems
containing black holes and/or neutron stars and the collapse of massive stars to
yield supernovae. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cluster, to be located at Caltech's
Center for Advanced Computing Research, will consist of approximately 2000 cores
and approximately 100 TeraBytes (TB) of disk to start, with upgrades to
approximately 325 TB by the end of the project. The machine be will be used by
the Caltech/Cornell numerical relativity collaboration and by the Caltech
Computational Astrophysics Group and collaborators at Princeton University, the
University of Maryland and Louisiana State University. The cluster will
concentrate on simulations where rapid turnaround time is required, on the
development/testing of code to be run on (slow-turnaround, but much larger)
TeraGrid/Lab resources, and on analysis/visualization of results obtained on
TeraGrid/Lab machines as well as on the cluster itself. Graduate and
undergraduate students and postdoctoral scholars will participate in the
research and be trained to use the cluster. The cluster will foster extensive
research collaboration across seven institutions and will significantly enhance
the future scientific output of LIGO. The results of simulations performed on
this cluster will be disseminated to scientists in all fields and to the general
public, via web presentations, public lectures, articles, and movies.