* 0960892
* Collaborative Research: Growth of oceanic lower crust: an integrated high-precision geochronologic and trace-element approach
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Samuel Bowring, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2013
* USD 186,609.00

Although oceanic lithosphere covers more than 60% of the earth's surface, models
for its formation at mid-ocean ridges have been hampered by a lack of
geochronological constraints on intrusive rocks that underlie volcanic rocks
erupted on the seafloor. Recent advances in the U-Pb dating of zircons,
refractory minerals that are found in gabbors and other intrusive rocks in ocean
crust, now allow dates of intrusions to be measured. This research pursues this
objective using a combined secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and thermal
ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) approach. Samples of intrusive gabbros from
Hole 735B on the Southwest Indian Ridge from the Ocean Drilling Program will be
analyzed. SIMS, which is a high resolution but large uncertainty technique that
can measure geochemical differences on a micron scale, will be used to determine
the trace element composition of zoning in zircons. High precision isotope
dilution TIMS dating of the zircons will be used to determine the magmatic
evolution of the samples. Uncertainties in the ages measured are expected to be
12,000 years or less. This precision will provide unprecedented insight into how
long it takes for ocean crust to grow at slow spreading ridges. Broader impacts
of the work include postdoctoral training and mentoring. It also fosters inter-
institutional collaboration and will support two PIs, one of whom is from a
gender under-represented in the sciences, from an EPSCoR state. Outreach to high
schools in the Cambridge MA area will be carried out and educational materials
for them will be created on geochronology. Results of the project will be
archived in NSF-funded publicly accessible databases.