* 0960307
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM) at the University of Wyoming
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Carrick Eggleston, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 04/30/2013
* USD 257,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program Professor &lt;br/&gt;Bruce A. Parkinson and
colleagues Carrick M. Eggleston, Susan M. Swapp and Jinke Tang from the
University of Wyoming will acquire a field emission scanning electron microscope
(FESEM) with energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS), e-beam lithography, electron
beam induced current (EBIC), scanning transmission electron (STEM), and a low-
voltage, high-contrast detector. The award is aimed at enhancing research
training and educations at all levels especially research ranging from
microbiological interaction with minerals to nanocomposite or nanoparticles
alloys, solar energy research involving nanostructured films of photocatalytic
oxides and photovoltaic materials, nanoparticle energy storage and conversion
materials as well as research on microbial and biofuel
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a widely used
technique for providing images of surfaces. The FESEM is equipped with a cathode
in the electron gun. The images are obtained from scanning the surface with a
beam of electrons that are accelerated under the influence of a strong
electrical (field) voltage. This important technique enables scientists to see
the ultrastructural details of fabricated systems, molecular arrangements of
man-made nanostructures and the subtle changes associated with friction and wear
in surfaces. The studies described here will impact a number of areas, including
chemistry, materials chemistry, geology, biochemistry and the environment. This
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research.