* 0960285
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of Instrumentation in Support of Terrestrial, Nearshore and Marine Ecosystems Collaborative Research at the University of Alaska Southeast
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Michael Stekoll, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 11/30/2012
* USD 323,023.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;Funds from the NSF MRI-R2 program have been award
to the University of Alaska Southeast (UAS) for the purchase of analytical
equipment that builds capacity for ecological studies. The new equipment
includes a fluorescence spectrophotometer, an ion chromatography system, a mass
spectrometer, a high speed centrifuge, a FIRe chlorophyll analysis system, a
qPCR system, a tissueLyser and a PCR machine. Research supported by the new
instruments includes: contaminant transport and attenuation; organic and
inorganic nutrient cycling and availability; physiological ecology of marine
macrophytes; and crustacean physiology studies. Collectively, the equipment
provides for detailed and integrated assessments of the biological and chemical
processes that drive the ecological diversity of southeastern Alaska. The
science faculty at UAS recognizes that remote and local changes affect southeast
Alaskan ecosystems and these impacts in turn affect the Alaskan economy. The new
instrumentation facilitates cross-discipline studies and cultivates a
transformative research program that contributes to economically diverse,
sustainable and viable Alaskan ecosystems. The UAS faculty is committed to
programs rooted in its unique natural setting as well as the use of technology
in these programs that augment the scope and applicability of the student
experience. Faculty-mentored undergraduate research in biology and environmental
science is been a primary mechanism for fulfilling these commitments. The new
instrumentation further expands scientific research opportunities for
undergraduates at UAS. The acquisition also fosters training on equipment that
has become standard in science-based careers. UAS is ideally situated for
multidisciplinary studies of terrestrial and near-shore ecosystems and in
particular, for investigations of climate change since this contemporary issue
will have its most immediate impacts at higher latitudes. The need for
adequately trained scientists pursuing explorations of the changing natural
processes of these regions is critical. Results from the research enabled by the
new equipment will be published in peer-reviewed journals and disseminated
through student and faculty presentations at regional and national
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;