* 0960334
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of an Imaging Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2010,09/30/2013
* James Anderson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 09/30/2013
* USD 3,267,586.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Peter Williams, Ariel D. Anbar, James R.
Anderson, Richard L. Hervig and Willem F. Vermaas will acquire an imaging
secondary ion mass spectrometer (SIMS) instrument. This novel and powerful
instrument will be used to support an extended group of researchers working on
diverse topics involving both soft (biological) materials and hard materials
(minerals), and at the interface between the two (biosensors, antibiotic clays,
nanoparticle toxicity). The projects have in common the need for chemical, and
in particular isotopic, analysis at length scales below conventional SIMS
instrumentation. The research will impact fundamental research and underpin
applied research widely. It will yield insights in a number of areas including
studies of the early stages of life on earth, and fundamental studies of
metabolism in photosynthetic organisms and biosynthetic pathways for lipid
formation. Studies to improve the efficiency for biofuel production in a process
that recycles waste carbon dioxide from power stations will be investigated. The
chemistry and origins of aerosols will be undertaken and thus contribute to the
understanding of atmospheric chemistry and global warming. The study of volcanic
magma may yield time-resolved information about magma conditions in the hours
and days before eruption, aiding prediction of these cataclysmic
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An Imaging Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer probes
the chemical composition of surfaces and thin films. A surface is bombarded with
ions prepared in an ion source. This dislodges material from the surface which
is analyzed by the mass spectrometer. The ion beam will also scan over the
material giving an image of the surface. This allows researchers to correlate
the chemical composition with the properties of hard materials (e.g. minerals)
and soft (e.g. cells) at the nano scale level. The interdisciplinary studies
that will be carried out using this instrument will have an impact in materials
research, chemistry, biology, geology and atmospheric science. The undergraduate
and graduate students who will use the equipment in their research projects will
be trained in imaging science with state of the art instrumentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;