* 0960991
* Majority Rule and Minority Rights:  A Panel Study of Democratic Values and Attitudes toward the Senate Filibuster Among the American Public
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Steven Smith, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2014
* USD 251,525.00

Majority rule and minority rights are important values in a democracy. The
balance between them, often reflected in the size of the majority required for a
decision, is a central issue in the making of constitutions, motivates the
design of key features of legislative institutions and parliamentary rules, and
regularly figures in cases before courts. Unfortunately, the social sciences
have very limited understanding of how the public weighs majority rule and
minority rights.

This research examines public attitudes about majority rule and minority rights
in the United States. It does so by focusing on public views about prominent
legislative battles involving the Senate filibuster - extended debate intended
to prevent a vote. The Senate's cloture rule provides that a three-fifths
majority of elected senators is required to close debate and move to a vote on a
motion, a rule that allows a large minority to prevent majority action. This
study exploits an existing survey panel to assess the public's views of majority
rule and minority rights both in the abstract and in response to major
legislative episodes. The study examines the effect of abstract views of
majority rule, minority rights, and the filibuster, policy preferences, party
preferences and other factors such as political sophistication and education on
evaluations of legislative outcomes involving the filibuster.

This research engages several students as research assistants, which will create
an opportunity for the students to become more deeply involved in survey
research, attend professional meetings, and collaborate in writing research
reports. The findings will be reflected in on the investigator's textbook on
congressional politics, which is one of the most widely-read textbooks by
undergraduates on the subject. The investigators are frequent speakers before
civic and academic groups, frequent guests on radio and television programs, and
frequent consultants to legislatures, all of which are forums in which the
public's understanding of majority rule, minority rights, and congressional
procedure is frequently an issue. By working with the Weidenbaum Center, the
research findings will be incorporated in non-technical publications and
distributed to a large general audience