* 0960074
* MRI-R2: Development of a Cyber-enabled Third Generation Chirped-Pulse Fourier Transform Microwave (CP-FTMW) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Steven Shipman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,345,087.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
and Instrumentation (MRI) program, Professor Brooks H. Pate of the University of
Virginia, David W. Pratt of the University of Pittsburgh and Steven T. Shipman
of New College of Florida have submitted a proposal in response to the MRI-R2
solicitation to construct a 3rd Generation Chirped-Pulse Fourier Transform
Microwave spectrometer (CP-FTMW) for applications in molecular structure
determination. The proposed instrument will advance microwave spectroscopy for
the analysis of conformational flexible molecules, molecular complexes and
chemically reactive species such as ions and radicals. In addition, powerful new
double-resonance techniques using fully shapeable microwave pulses produced by a
high-speed arbitrary waveform generator will be designed and implemented. These
techniques will make it possible to use the spectrometer's performance gains to
speed the analysis of spectra, not just the acquisition of spectra.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CP-FTMW technique exploits advances in high-speed
digital electronics to achieve excellent speed and sensitivity in obtaining
molecular rotational spectra. Analysis of the spectra provides detailed
structural parameters for the molecules, ions and radicals under investigation.
Structural information is the sine qua non necessary to understand chemical
properties and reactivity. The development of this spectrometer will train
undergraduate and graduate students in the construction and use of modern
instrumentation.