* 0960427
* 2010 Marine Microbe Gordon Research Conference
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* David Kirchman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Intellectual Merit This award will partially support the meeting and travel
expenses for participants in the 2010 Marine Microbe Gordon Research Conference
(GRC). This GRC series was started in 2002 in recognition of the huge importance
of marine microbes in the ecology and biogeochemistry of the biosphere. These
microbes include representatives from all three kingdoms of life and
collectively carry out virtually all forms of metabolisms found on the planet.
Consequently, marine microbes mediate many of the reactions making up global
biogeochemical cycles which govern the flow of energy and material in the
biosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this conference is to integrate the
various scales of investigations now being carried out by microbial
oceanographers, microbial ecologists, and ecosystem ecologists. Integration of
approaches and of scales of investigations, from genes to gyres and from lakes
to the oceans, will be powerful in understanding microbes and their contribution
to the carbon cycle and other biogeochemical processes. The conference should
help to enlarge the community of microbial ecologists, to point to future
research directions, and to inspire students, new and old, in the study of
microbes and microbial processes. The funds provided here are crucial for
ensuring the success of this conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GRC is
highly relevant to the interests of NSF Biological Oceanography because of
&lt;br/&gt;its support of many research projects directly examining marine
microbes, i.e. viruses, bacteria, archaea, phytoplankton, protozoa and other
protists. It is also highly relevant to the Division of Environmental Biology,
specifically the Ecosystem Science Cluster. Several of the invited speakers do
not work primarily in marine systems or with marine microbes. The exchange
between freshwater ecosystem science represented by these speakers and marine
scientists is highly likely to be beneficial to both communities, including both
marine and non-marine LTER site investigators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts This conference will greatly aid the education of graduate students and
postdocs in microbial ecology, microbial oceanography, and ecosystem ecology.
GRC meetings such as this one are excellent opportunities for students and other
young scientists to meet the leaders in the field and to network with them and
with peers in a relaxed atmosphere. Part of the requested funds will directly
cover some of the meeting expenses of students and postdocs beginning in the
field.