* 0960298
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of Airborne Remote Sensing System for Oceanographic, Terrestrial, and Environmental Research
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Daniel Cayan, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/29/2012
* USD 841,848.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The PI?s request funding for the acquisition, integration and testing of the
components of an airborne remote sensing system comprised of a waveform airborne
LIDAR, a hyperspectral camera, a high-resolution video camera, a GPS/inertial
motion unit, data acquisition and post-processing hardware and software, an
existing IR video camera, and the labor and supplies to integrate and test the
system over two years.

Satellite remote sensing has enabled remarkable progress in the ocean, earth,
atmospheric and environmental sciences through its ability to provide global
coverage with ever increasing spatial resolution. However, the temporal coverage
of low earth orbiting satellites is not optimal. This temporal coverage may be
sufficient for mesoscale ocean processes with time scales of a month, but is not
sufficient for ocean processes that respond to atmospheric forcing with time
scales of hours to days and other submesoscale ocean processes, especially
coastal processes, both physical and biological, and air-sea-land interactions
in the coastal zone. In the hydrological sciences the time scales can range from
hours for flash floods, to days for snowfall on mountain ranges, to months for
the snowmelt into the river systems. On an even smaller scale, remote sensing of
the built environment catalyzes research into more resource-efficient and
sustainable cities but requires building-resolving thermal resolution of a few
meters. For this range of phenomena, satellite data are very useful but not
optimal, and need to be supplemented with higher resolution airborne data that
are not tied to the strict schedule of a satellite orbit. This proposal
addresses these needs, in research and training in these areas of science and
engineering.

Broader Impacts

The data provided by the system should well support the stated research areas of
coastal process and oceanography, bio, hydrology, and built areas. These are all
relevant to California and to larger issues in climate and environmental change.
The combination of LIDAR, a visual camera, and hyperspectral imaging is
important to really get the whole story. Aside from the science that this system
will enable, the data sets will be of huge interest to machine learning and
robotics researchers as well. Outreach and education efforts benefit from
programs in place, and seem strong. Students will love the flyovers of their
schools and neighborhoods - this simple demo should be a high priority. The
proposed collaboration with COSEE CA should prove fruitful and will provide the
opportunity to excite a new generation of young scientists.