* 0960487
* US-India Networking and e-Science Workshop, Bangalore, March, 2010.
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Heather Boyles, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2012
* USD 80,000.00

0960487&lt;br/&gt;Williams &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indiana University and
Internet2 will hold a US-India Networking and e-Science Workshop in Bangalore
jointly hosted by Indiana University, Internet2, the Indian Education and
Research Network (ERnet), and the Indian Department of Information Technology
(DIT). The workshop will be convened at the Indian Institute of Sciences (IISc),
Bangalore in early March 2010 and will bring together key research and education
network service providers and a group of leading researchers from both
countries. They will discuss network developments, collaborative research
activities, and how both countries can ensure that network cyberinfrastructure
will be available to support and foster scientific
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will engage the Indian network cyberinfrastructure community, which has been
long absent from the global research and education networking community. This,
in turn, has meant that the Indian science community has not been well-connected
with their colleagues or with the scientific instruments and data increasingly
located around the world that are necessary for them to be part of the global
science community. This workshop will begin to bridge those gaps for the Indian
science and network cyberinfrastructure communities, benefiting not only the
Indian community but also those in the U.S. who wish to pursue scientific
challenges with Indian counterparts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include bringing together network cyberinfrastructure
practitioners&lt;br/&gt;with key science communities dependent on that
infrastructure in a way that we believe will lead to ongoing, sustainable
interactions between the two communities. Much as the astronomy and climate
change communities are learning from the high energy physics? communities
decades-long planning of data models and bandwidth needs for the Large Hadron
Collider experiment, we expect that a number of the planning and application
methods here will be transferable to other science communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;