* 0960480
* RUI:  New Tools for Characterizing Protein Dynamics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Michael Colvin, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 647,841.00

The University of California at Merced has been awarded a grant to develop new
tools and protocols for characterizing protein dynamics. While the focus of
protein biophysics has traditionally been on the structure and interactions of
the natively folded protein, there is now rapidly growing interest in the
properties of denatured protein structures as related to the mechanisms of
protein folding and in the function of so-called intrinsically disordered
proteins. Molecular simulations have great promise in helping to understand
disordered proteins; however, new tools are needed to characterize the defining
property of these constantly changing systems--their dynamics. The long-term
goal of this research is to develop new tools and protocols for determining the
two most fundamental descriptors of protein dynamics, the effective
dimensionality of the motion and the volume of structural space sampled by the
protein. The tools will help answer the many fundamental, unresolved questions
about the denatured or disordered states of proteins that are central to
understanding protein function and folding. Specifically, these tools will
determine to what extent denatured or intrinsically disordered proteins behave
as random polymers or have motions constrained to lower dimensional dynamics.
Additionally these tools will elucidate whether there are differences between
the dynamics of intrinsically disordered proteins and natively folded proteins
in the early stages of folding. Finally, these tools will help in determining
the efficiency of different molecular simulations in sampling the denatured or
disordered states of proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be an
ideal multidisciplinary training experience for the students involved since it
brings together three scientific disciplines: machine learning, molecular
simulation, and polymer biophysics. The tools developed in this project will be
used by graduate and undergraduate students in both molecular simulation and
computer sciences courses at UC Merced and by students in summer research
projects. The molecular dynamics community has a well established tradition of
software tools that are developed and maintained by individual research groups
and freely distributed to very large user bases. These established channels will
be used to freely distribute all of the software tools developed in this project
in source code format along with documentation and test data sets. More
information can be found at the project website:
http://vision.ucmerced.edu/projects/protein.&lt;br/&gt;