* 0960180
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a Laboratory for Innovations in Microwave Applications for Damage Prevention, Condition Assessment and Rehabilitation of Buried Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2010
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 12/31/2010
* USD 384,960.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI-R2) award is to acquire an anechoic chamber for the purpose
of testing devices/antennas mounted on full-scale components of construction
equipment. An anechoic chamber is a specialized shielded room designed to
attenuate electromagnetic energy, providing a shielded environment for
characterizing the transmission patterns of antennas within the radio frequency
(RF) spectrum. This unique research facility will support innovations in
locating, characterizing and health monitoring of buried pipes and structures.
Sample applications include the development of: a) miniature sensory systems
mounted excavation equipment that will notify operators of the presence of
nearby utilities, preventing inadvertent utility strikes; b) a rugged antenna
array mounted on a robotic platform capable of detecting the presence of
sinkholes under roadways and sidewalks; c) a new generation of health monitoring
sensors for monitoring the structural condition of transportation tunnels. With
the capability to test entire assemblies in a highly controlled laboratory
environment, advancements are expected in areas such as rugged antenna design,
the utilization of metamaterials to miniaturize an antenna's structure as well
as to gain a more rigorous understanding of the propagation of electromagnetic
waves in complex machine-soil-pipe environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once
acquired, the scientific discoveries made and new technologies developed in this
facility will provide America's cities with new tools to address the increasing
rate of pipelines failures associated with aging of their underground utility
infrastructure, as well as the growing demands to accommodate new services in an
already congested underground space. The facility will facilitate truly
interdisciplinary research involving graduate and undergraduate students in the
areas of civil, electrical and mechanical engineering and applied physics.