* 0960594
* Understanding Atmospheric Sulfur Cycle using Triple Isotopes of Oxygen and Sulfur (ASCTIOS)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Robina Shaheen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2013
* USD 368,000.00

Sulfate is a significant chemical component of atmospheric aerosols; however,
the chemistry governing its formation over a large portion of the globe,
particularly the high latitudes and southern hemisphere remains unconstrained.
At present there are sparse measurements of sulfur dioxide fluxes from
anthropogenic and natural sources, particularly in the southern hemisphere.
Sulfate aerosols interact strongly with incoming solar and outgoing terrestrial
radiations by scattering and absorption, therefore size distribution is of high
significance to understand the mode of interaction of sulfate aerosols with
radiation. The primary objective of this study is to develop an isotopic probe
of atmospheric sulfate chemistry in a pristine marine environment at Cape Grim
Baseline Air Pollution Station, Australia to identify the role of sea salt
alkalinity on the oxidation of sulfur. Oxygen and sulfur isotope measurements
will be used to better constrain the sources and chemistry controlling the
formation and transport of sulfate aerosol in the atmosphere. These results will
be used to interpret paleo-sulfate aerosol data obtained from Antarctic ice
cores and to identify the contribution of anthropogenic sulfur to the natural
sulfur cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help to elucidate the
impact of sulfur chemistry on climate in a clean oceanic background at Cape Grim
Station, Australia. This will establish a baseline for evaluating temporal and
spatial variations in sulfate aerosols and will provide a basis for the future
interpretation of ice core data. In view of the inherent problems associated
with global chemistry models used to reproduce the sulfate levels, this new
analytical tool has the potential to improve global chemistry models and in turn
this may enable a better diagnosis of potential changes that result from
anthropogenic sulfate sources. This project also has the broader goal of
furthering the development of human resources in the field by training a
postdoctoral scientist and graduate and undergraduate students.