* 0960313
* MRI-R2:   Acquisition of a Large-Volume Preparative Ultracentrifuge for Use in Research and Research Training at Seattle University
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Daniel Smith, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 11/30/2012
* USD 127,114.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Seattle University (SU) has received an award from the NSF MRI-R2 program to
purchase a large-volume preparative ultracentrifuge to support programs in
undergraduate research and education. The large-volume preparative
ultracentrifuge is initially being used by three different faculty members and
undergraduate student researchers to conduct basic research projects. Dr.
Stenbak and her students use the ultracentrifuge to investigate the molecular
requirements for assembly of foamy viruses (ancient, non-pathogenic
retroviruses). Cell fractionation through ultracentrifugation allows students
working with Dr. Smith (microbiology/biochemistry) to isolate and characterize
bioactive compounds involved in territoriality from Myxococcus sp. Finally,
students working with Dr. Murphy (biological chemistry/molecular pharmacology)
use the centrifuge to prepare eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell lysates for
characterization of Hsp90-based molecular chaperone protein function and
activity. One of SU's foremost pedagogical goals is ensuring its graduates
become independent critical thinkers who develop a lifelong love of learning.
Faculty-mentored undergraduate research experiences play an instrumental role in
realizing this goal. As a result, the biology faculty, the College of Science &
Engineering, and the University are committed to building a culture of research
and maintaining active research programs that fully utilize modern, state-of-
the-art instrumentation, such as the ultracentrifuge. SU celebrates its diverse
student body, and that diversity is reflected in the biology students: last year
42% of biology graduates self-identified as minorities and 70% of graduates were
women. Research projects will be conducted by undergraduates and provide first-
hand experience using modern instrumentation for students who are traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences. Results from studies enabled by the new
centrifuge will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented by students
and faculty at regional and national meetings. The proposed ultracentrifuge is
also used in virology, advanced cell biology, and microbiology courses, all of
which have investigative laboratory components.