* 0960567
* Collaborative Research: Contentious Issues in World Politics: Updating the ICOW Dataset
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Paul Hensel, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2013
* USD 260,330.00

This project provides for additional data collection by the Issue Correlates of
War (ICOW) project, a collaborative project co-directed by Paul R. Hensel
(University of North Texas) and Sara McLaughlin Mitchell (University of Iowa).
The ICOW project collects information on geopolitical conflicts between two or
more countries involving disputed boundaries, including conflicts over land
boundaries (or islands), maritime areas, and cross-border rivers. To date, the
project has coded and made public information on over 450 issue conflicts since
1816 in North, Central, and South America, Western and Eastern Europe, and the
Middle East. Some examples of hotly contested areas already studied by the
project include the Falkland Islands, the Gulf of Fonseca, the Jordan river, and
Alsace-Lorraine. Analysis of this data has already taught us a great deal about
when countries are likely to resort to militarized means to resolve geopolitical
issues, as well as when peaceful conflict management efforts are well positioned
to succeed. The proposed project involves completion of data collection on
border disputes (1816-2001), maritime disputes (1900-2001), and river disputes
(1900-2001) for the remaining regions not currently covered by the ICOW project:
Africa, Asia, and Oceania. The ICOW project records information on the
importance of the claimed issue to each state involved, as well as all peaceful
diplomatic and militarized attempts to resolve the contested issue. Peaceful
attempts include bilateral talks between the disputants, as well as third party
efforts to resolve the contested issue using mediation, arbitration,
adjudication, etc. To date, the project has recorded information on 2005
peaceful and militarized attempts to settle issue claims in the Americas,
Europe, and the Middle East. When the project is complete, we will upload case
chronologies to the website, which will make it easier for policy makers to
access detailed information about each historical and ongoing boundary dispute.

Theoretically, this project expands our understanding of issues by using the new
data to study the process by which new contentious issues arise, the process by
which issues lead to long-term interstate rivalries, and the relative success of
international institutions for managing and settling issues. First, the manner
in which new conflicts emerge is examined. Some pairs of states, such as
Honduras-Nicaragua and France-Germany, have had lots of different geopolitical
issues arise throughout the course of their historical interactions, while other
pairs of states avoid such conflicts altogether. One obvious predictor of these
conflicts involves basic opportunities for them to occur, such as through shared
land borders. Water-based disputes are also more likely to occur in areas where
water is more scarce and in higher demand due to larger population and
industrial needs. This project also focuses on countries? domestic institutions
and participation in international organizations (such as the United Nations).
Do democracies and international organization members have more similar foreign
policy preferences and thus avoid geopolitical conflicts, or do they simply
manage issues that arise more efficiently with peaceful tools? Initial analyses
support the latter explanation, although additional data from Asia, Africa, and
Oceania will ensure the generalizability of these results. Second, a new measure
of rivalry based on geopolitical issues is developed. This includes pairs of
countries with two or more ongoing issue conflicts or two or more militarized
disputes over the same issue. These measures provide a clearer picture of the
process of conflict management differs in issue rivalry and issue non-rivalry
environments. Finally, the principal investigators extend their previous work on
institutions and conflict management. Maritime issues, for example, can be
managed by issue specific organizations like the Law of the Sea Convention
(UNCLOS) or by more general organizations like the European Union and United
Nations. They examine which types of organizations are best suited to helping
states reach successful and long-lasting agreements. Beyond these new research
topics, the newly expanded data will also allow scholars to improve previous
research on factors such as colonial legacies by introducing information about
issue conflicts in regions with richer colonial histories.