* 0960865
* Measuring Risks from Fat Tails, Tail Dependence, and Micro-Correlations
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2010,10/31/2013
* Roger Cooke, Resources For the Future Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2013
* USD 258,877.00

Understanding how risks change under aggregation is critical for many fields,
from financial markets, where assets are securitized, to insurance, where firms
hold a portfolio of many individual policies. When individual risks are
independent and sufficiently thin-tailed, bundling can lower overall risk
levels. This project centers on three characteristics of risks that threaten the
benefits obtained through aggregation: fat tails, tail dependence, and micro-
correlations. This research develops new approaches for detecting, measuring,
and analyzing these phenomena, with the aim of improving catastrophe risk
management across a range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fat tailed
distributions have been well studied since the early 1900s. Statistical
estimators of tail indices, such as the Hill estimator, have been researched
extensively, but have well known limitations, and variations continue to
proliferate. We propose a new approach for measuring tail obesity based on the
self-similarity of random aggregations. This has the benefit of focusing
specifically on the properties of fat-tailed distributions that are of concern
for securitization, rather than on hypothesized limit behavior. Tail dependence
refers to the tendency for dependence between two variables to concentrate in
the extreme values. While observable in datasets, such as damages from natural
catastrophes, tail dependence is much less understood mathematically than fat
tails. Empirically, tail dependence has been seen to grow with aggregation,
raising concerns about securitizing or insuring tail dependent risks, but the
theory lags far behind these observations. This research will provide risk
managers with tools to understand and address tail dependence. Finally, global
micro-correlations are small correlations which may be statistically
insignificant when considered individually, but become dangerous when
aggregated. Proof-of-concept analyses for detecting such correlations have been
performed using flood and crop insurance claim data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first stage of this new research requires collecting and standardizing
historical loss data. After developing the appropriate datasets, the researchers
will begin the analytical work that involves developing scalar measures for tail
obesity in finite data sets, studying the conditions under which aggregation
amplifies tail dependence, studying micro-covariation in fat tail distributions
and their behavior under aggregation, and studying empirical distributions of
aggregated losses. Finally, the third stage of the research focusing on
dissemination: preparing publications for peer-reviewed journals, developing a
set of online educational materials, and hosting a workshop.