* 0960497
* Mechanisms of Climate Variability and Change
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2016
* Dennis Hartmann, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2016
* USD 1,751,305.00

The goal of this research is to understand some basic physical mechanisms which
contribute to climate variability and climate change. Three research topics will
be pursued. The first is the interaction through which the extratropical impact
of El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is regulated by the stratospheric Quasi-
Biennial Oscillation (QBO) and vice versa. Preliminary work shows that when the
QBO is easterly or ENSO is in its warm state the polar vortex is weak, but when
either of these conditions hold, the influence of the other is weak. The
research will be conducted using the NCAR Whole Earth Community Climate Model
(WACCM), with modifications to generate and sustain the QBO. The second topic is
the interaction between jet streams and high-frequency transient eddies which
plays a dominant role in the natural climate variability of the extratropics.
Earlier work by the Principal Investigator (PI) and a student showed that eddy-
jet interactions produce a positive feedback which enhances the persistence of
low-frequency annular modes. The work here seeks to understand how a similar
positive feedback operates in the variability of the North Atlantic Oscillation.
The primary tool for the analysis would be ensemble sensitivity analysis,
performed using multiple simulations from a barotropic model and later multi-
level baroclinic models. The third topic is the hypothesis that the temperature
of tropical anvil clouds remains about the same under global warming (the Fixed
Anvil Temperature, or FAT, hypothesis), previously developed by the PI and his
students. The PI's previous work suggested that FAT behavior is related to
clear-sky radiative cooling, and the PI suggests that this behavior can explain
the similarity of longwave cloud feedbacks in global warming simulations. One
avenue of experimentation would be to modify the water vapor passed to the
radiation code of the model independently of the water vapor tracked in the
convection scheme and other components of the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three
graduate students will be supported under this grant, thus providing for the
education of the next generating of scientists. In addition, research on the
above topics will enhance understanding of climate variability and change, and
may be beneficial for the development of prediction capabilities for short-term
climate variability and long-term climate change.