* 0960163
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Networked AUV-based Instrument for the Southern California Bight
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Burton Jones, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2013
* USD 273,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 09-60163&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Sukhatme,
Gaurav; Caron, David A.; Edwards, Katrina J.; Jones, Burton, H; Mitra,
Urbashi&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Southern California
&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI-R2: Acq. of a Networked AUV-based Instrument for the
Southern California Bight&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
acquiring a networked instrument composed of two complementary Autonomous
Underwater Vehicles (AUVs), supports an extensive program of research in
robotics, underwater acoustic communication and networking, marine biology,
oceanography, and biogeochemistry at the Center for Integrated Networked Aquatic
PlatformS (CINAPS). These two AUVs add capability to those already in use by
CINAPS. The work addresses two current key limitations: limited depth (depth no
greater than 200m) and limited communication (only supports communication
through the air, i.e., when the vehicles are not below the surface.) These
instruments impact agendas in two main fields: research in the Southern
California coastal marine ecosystem (in physical oceanography, geobiological
oceanography, and microbial ecology), and research in robotics, communication,
and networking.&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation consists of a Slocum Electric
Glider and an EcoMapper-EP (Expandable Payload) Autonomous Underwater Vehicle.
The Slocum glider, for use up to 1000m, was developed by in the early 1990's,
and has become an integral tool of ocean science in this decade. It is driven
entirely by a variable buoyancy system rather than active propulsion. The
glider's wings convert the buoyancy-dependent vertical motion into forward
velocity. Slocum gliders are truly autonomous, requiring a surface vessel only
for deployment and recovery. On-board communications capabilities include a two-
way RF modem, Iridium satellite and an ARGOS locator. With its onboard
instrumentation, combined with its mobility and long-range capabilities, the
glider provides continuous, near-real-time information, about the physics and
biogeochemistry of the ocean. Designed specifically for water quality and
bathymetry mapping applications, the Ecomapper for shallow use (up to 200m) is a
unique AUV. Easily deployed by one person, it is able to perform a wide-area
survey without a surface workboat or associated personnel. The EP class
EcoMapper allows for additional ports for customized sensor integration and
space for a second low-power CPU to support the additional sensors and software.
This additional CPU enables mission adaptations to occur on-the-fly based on
real-time sensor readings that are necessary when trying to detect and track
dynamically changing oceanic features a range of important processes and
associated questions can only be studied with the coupling of deep AUV
operations (up to 1000m) with shallow (up to 200m). These include (a) the toxic
effect of harmful algal blooms at greater depth, (b) the temporal and spatial
variations of the low oxygen interface (deep basins can become hypoxic or anoxic
due to isolation), and (c) fluxes of particulate material from urban runoff to
the deeper sea that are discontinuous in both time and space; the spatial extent
of which can be best resolved with autonomous vehicles that can maintain a
presence over several events. To enable these studies, new algorithms for multi-
AUV communication and control are necessary. The ability to coordinate vehicle
trajectories and missions while submerged presents a current limitation. This is
of particular concern in the Southern California Bight, the study site, a region
with high maritime traffic where surfacing of the AUVs needs to be minimized.
Used as a field instrument deployed in the Southern California Bight (SCB), the
instrument is programmed and bench-tested in the Robotic Embedded Systems
Laboratory on the USC main campus in LA. The instrument manager is supported by
the PI;s grants. USC covers all operational and maintenance
costs.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation impacts faculty
research and student education, contributing to enable new science in diverse
research projects and impacting the ongoing instruction at the institution and
serves as a learning tool to develop student scientific proficiency (through
existing courses and participation in faculty-led research). This acquisition
plays an important role in the Southern California Bight Study planned for
Spring 2010, coordinated by the Southern California Coastal Water Research
Project (SCCWRP), a public agency focusing on the coastal ecosystems of Southern
California. The PIs have close collaborative ties to this agency. Moreover, the
networked and adaptive sensor systems provide important data relating to the
climate and health of Southern California coastal ocean.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
students are involved through REU site awards at USC. Since the PI runs the USC
Computer Science department REU site for research in various areas of computer
science, students in his lab often assist with data analysis and programming for
the robotic boats. The EcoMapper vehicle, which is designed to be portable and
deployable in shallow water, is particularly suitable for the next generation of
REU students. Other PIs participate as faculty mentors in USC biochemistry REU
site encouraging similar participation from undergraduate students in biology.