* 0960003
* MRI R2: Acquisition of a Four Circle X-Ray Diffractometer for Use in Undergraduate Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* K. Ramanujachary, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 02/29/2012
* USD 263,000.00

0960003 Lofland Rowan U.

Technical Abstract This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The work outlined in this proposal aims to create a multiple user facility for a
four-circle x-ray diffractometer. The diffractometer is highly automated, as
required for a multi-user facility, particularly when most of the users are
undergraduates. The instrument is capable of small angle x-ray scattering for
studying composites and reciprocal space mapping for investigating film epitaxy,
and it has a scanning stage for completing combinatorial thin-film studies. The
instrument will allow the advancement of several important research projects
including the use of combinatorial techniques to investigate the fundamental
chemical/structural/property relationships in MAX phases, an interesting set of
compounds with unusual refractory and tribological properties, the determination
of the mechanism leading to the degradation of magnetorheological elastomers
through repeated use, the optimization of multifunctional oxides by cationic
substitutions as well as the functionalization of magnetic nanoparticles for
targeted delivery of cancer medications. These projects, from a wide array of
fields, all have potential for significant technological impact. Additionally
the instrumentation also has the potential to enhance the economy of southern
New Jersey as it can be used for interfacing with start-ups at the new South
Jersey Innovation Center located on the Rowan University campus.

Non-Technical Abstract This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The work outlined in this proposal aims to create a multiple user facility for
an x-ray diffractometer. X-rays have a wavelength near atomic dimensions,
allowing one to probe the structure of matter and thus a diffractometer is an
indispensable tool in materials research. With the proposed instrument, one can
identify new compounds and their structures, study the morphology and size of
nanoparticles, and investigate the surfaces of multilayered films, even if the
film is buried. The facility will enhance existing research and educational
programs investigating novel materials as well as promote the creation of new
interdisciplinary programs, particularly with advent of the newly announced
Cooper Medical School of Rowan University. Support of this acquisition will lead
to the development of new materials for various applications such as drug
therapies, protective coatings, energy storage, and vibration control. In
addition, this instrument will improve our ability to impact businesses in the
region through interactions with companies at the on-campus South Jersey
Innovation Center.