* 0960584
* Plant Genomics Data Computational Interface
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Eva Huala, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 792,047.00

The Carnegie Institution for Science is awarded a grant to build an application
programming interface (API) that will provide high-performance, web-based
computational access for plant genomics data. The project will include a new,
open technology for generating computational data web services; an open,
portable, optimized data warehouse that supports very fast queries of plant
biology data; and a plant biology query language, query builder, and query
optimizer that will provide a simple way to limit query results to only the
required data. The project will provide a range of data access methods to serve
the needs of computational biologists and bench biologists for large and custom
datasets. Implementation of this software at TAIR will provide REST and SOAP web
services for computational use of TAIR data, RSS feeds for TAIR objects, and an
implementation of a new query builder for TAIR.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While
strong advances have been made in data generation methods including new genome
sequencing methods, high throughput phenotyping, protein localization and
others, computational access to the resulting data still requires large amounts
of both human and machine resources. By addressing this issue through
architecture, this project leverages advances in software engineering by
combining and applying them to the specific domain of plant genomics. In
particular, developing a minimal but effective plant genomics schema using
modern data modeling; leveraging model-driven architecture to enable generation
of high-performance web services from platform-independent models; and
developing a basic, well-formed query language for the plant genomics domain are
intellectually challenging tasks that will have a significant impact on the
technology required for computational access. Wide adoption of a standard set of
web interfaces for computational access to plant genomics resources will greatly
simplify the effort required to access and integrate plant genomic data, thereby
facilitating computational analyses of the data. By providing an easy, robust,
and consistent route to computational data access, standard web interfaces will
also facilitate development of new resources that could transform existing
datasets and present them in new ways, analogous to mashups using Google Maps
data along with real estate listings, weather data, Wikipedia entries, etc. By
providing computational APIs and the technological infrastructure to create them
as open source tools, this project makes available a key set of technologies to
computational biologists beyond TAIR. As the technology proves itself, it can
move beyond plant biology into the more general biological realm. Further
information about this project may be found at the TAIR website:
http://arabidopsis.org.