* 0960077
* MRI-R2 Consortium: Acquisition of Multi-Scalar Spatial Data Collection, Analysis, and Visualization Instruments
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Emily Jones, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 418,251.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from a National Science
Foundation Major Research Instrumentation grant, Utah State University (USU)
will purchase an integrated system of instruments that facilitates collection,
analysis, interpretation and presentation of anthropological spatial data at a
variety of scales. For the collection of field data, the research team will
acquire ground-penetrating radar, resistivity, and magnetometry systems for
collecting sub-surface spatial data; GPS units with sub-meter accuracy, a
robotic total station, and a balloon aerial photography system for efficiently
compiling spatial data from landscapes; x-ray, video microscope, and 3-D
scanning devices to extract precise spatial data from artifacts and ecofacts;
and GIS-equipped, networked computers to process and disseminate these data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF-MRI award represents a collaborative application
by a consortium of entities including the USU Anthropology Program, the USU
Museum of Anthropology, USU's Regional Campuses and Distance Education (RCDE),
and the newly launched small, private business USU Archaeological Services, Inc.
Eight individuals will serve as major users of the equipment: six
archaeologists, one biological anthropologist, and one cultural anthropologist.
Despite users' varied backgrounds and research foci, the NSF-MRI grant will
provide the resources necessary for each researcher to increase the efficiency
of data collection, interpretation, and publication. The award will also enhance
users' research opportunities and open up new avenues for collaboration within
and outside the consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the NSF-
MRI grant reside primarily in the dramatic changes it will bring to education in
anthropology at USU's main campus and USU's Regional Campuses and Distance
Education (RCDE). In fall 2009, USU's first cohort of M.S. students began a
graduate program designed to prepare them for jobs in the private and government
sectors of archaeology, which host 90% of jobs in the field. These sectors are
often better funded than academic programs and routinely use the array of
instruments the NSF award will fund. In addition to using the instruments to
facilitate their own research, USU faculty members will also use them to prepare
Utah State students to serve as the next generation of highly sought-after,
technologically skilled anthropologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utah State
University anthropologists are particularly excited about RCDE's involvement in
the NSF-MRI consortium. RCDE will outfit the Logan-based instrument laboratory
with broadcast capability. This will permit anthropology faculty members to
reach students at regional centers across the state of Utah and as far away as
East Asia, enabling and enlisting them to participate in original scientific
research. Many of USU's Distance students are of Navajo, Northern Ute, Shoshone,
and Latino descent. By incorporating them into the Anthropology Program's
diverse research as USU's archaeological and museum internships for Native
American and Latino high school students have done for years, the NSF-MRI grant
will help increase the diversity of future professionals in the field of
anthropology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the USU Museum of Anthropology will
provide a vehicle for disseminating to a large, public audience the results of
cutting-edge research generated by USU and USUAS scientists and the importance
of science generally and anthropology specifically in the world today.