* 0960605
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Atlantic Section Nitrate Isotope  Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2010,06/30/2011
* Karen Casciotti, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2011
* USD 237,716.00

Nitrogen is one of the two major nutrients required universally by plankton in
the ocean, and its availability can affect the ocean's ecology, productivity,
and carbon cycle. While the cycling of fixed N in the ocean is in one sense
emblematic of other nutrient cycles, it is also unique in that its largest input
(N fixation) and output (denitrification) are biologically mediated, which
renders the ocean N budget susceptible to complex biological feedbacks. It thus
provides a platform for asking one of the core questions of global
biogeochemical cycles: How is it that the actions of individual organisms and
groups conspire with physicochemical conditions to produce a global Earth
surface environment that has been continuously habitable for billions of years?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dominant terms in the oceanic fixed N input/output
budget are poorly characterized, and we focus our attention here on N fixation.
Developing robust estimates of the global rate and distribution of N fixation
from "direct" shipboard measurements of N fixing activity is complicated by the
inherent spatial and temporal variability of this biologically mediated flux.
Thus, geochemical approaches for estimating N fixation inputs have come to the
forefront. Currently, nitrate stable isotope measurements, which could provide
an integrative estimate of N fixation on a regional or basin scale, are sparse
in the Atlantic, being focused primarily in the Sargasso Sea. The GEOTRACES
program provides a platform to put these data into a broader context through the
illumination of basin-scale patterns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
researchers from Princeton University, Brown University, and the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution will measure the d15N of nitrate in seawater and
atmospheric samples collected as part of the GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section.
Nitrate d15N is a GEOTRACES "core parameter" that will complement other
measurements and will by itself provide important constraints on the
oceanographic processes, including N fixation, lateral nitrate transport, low
latitude N cycling, the effect of the North African upwelling regions on
nutrient fluxes across the basin, and the exchange of fixed N with the
Mediterranean. In addition to yielding such specific process-related insights,
this work will provide one of the first cross-basin views of nitrate isotopes in
the interior and will thus help to simply characterize the isotope signals of
different interior water masses, including the Mode Waters, Antarctic
Intermediate Water, Mediterranean Intermediate Water, Lower and Upper North
Atlantic Deep Water, and Antarctic Bottom Water. Finally, the isotopic
characterization of atmospheric nitrate deposition will inform our understanding
of the N isotope budget and isotopic gradients of the North Atlantic. Combined,
these measurements will yield insight into modern biogeochemical processes and
will also provide first order background information for both modern physical
oceanographic and paleoceanographic applications. As an example of the latter,
studies of Atlantic sediments seek to reconstruct past changes in the rate of N
fixation, based on the modern finding that N fixation appears to lower the d15N
of thermocline nitrate in the Sargasso Sea. Progress in this paleoceanographic
work relies on a more complete picture of nitrate d15N in the modern Atlantic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The broader impacts of the proposed study
include the mentoring of a postdoctoral investigator and the inclusion of
undergraduates in state-of-the-art research. The project will also provide a
high-quality nitrate isotope data set for the North Atlantic for use by the
broader community.