* 0960043
* Workshop on Nanomaterials in the Environment & Instrumentation, Metrology, and Analytical Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Vitalius Benokraitis, World Technology Evaluation Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2010
* USD 99,576.00

With the steady increase of discovery of new anthropogenically generated
nanomaterials with novel properties and the increase in their use in consumer
products and manufacturing, periodic assessments of the state-of-the-art in the
fate and transport of nanomaterials in the environment is essential. This
workshop responds to this need by bringing together stakeholders and experts
from academia, industry, the government, and non-profit consumer advocate groups
to discuss the state of the field. This workshop sheds light on where we are in
terms of understanding how human-engineered nanomaterials react with natural
materials in the environment, the mechanisms and extent to which they are
transported from their point of release to their final resting place, and how we
detect and characterize them and their interactions in air, soil, and water. The
workshop also focuses on identifying gaps in our present knowledge and looming
challenges that need to be addressed in the next decade. Broader impacts of the
workshop include engaging in dialog a diverse group of stakeholders that do not
generally communicate with each other. Broad participation by the public and
other interested parties is fostered via live broadcast of the meeting over the
Internet. Conveners have also been sensitive to diversity in terms of selecting
steering committee members and forum speakers.