* 0960000
* MRI-R2: Development of Hyperspectral Optical Property Instrumentation (HOPI) for Biomedical and Environmental Research
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Mirley Balasubramanya, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 524,171.00

0960000&lt;br/&gt;Mehrubeoglu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to develop and
test a novel two-module major research instrument for measurement of
hyperspectral absorption and scattering properties of highly scattering
materials. The instrument will enhance instrumentation and research capabilities
useable by multiple programs and interdisciplinary researchers at Texas A&amp;M
University-Corpus Christi. The following is a list of immediate projects that
will utilize the instrument: 1) Optical Properties of Reef Inhabitants for
Determination of Bleaching Resistance in Coral Species; 2) Correlation of
satellite data and optical properties of coral reefs to determine global
environmental effects on coral decline; 3) Determination of optical properties
of breast cancer cells following treatment with mammalian cardenolides; 4)
Comparison of optical properties of cancerous cell lines and perturbations; 5)
Optical properties of nanoparticles, and correlation to size and concentration:
basic research to determine biomedical and environmental impacts; 6)
Hyperspectral investigation of optical properties of materials (1D) and
structures (2D); and 7) Research Training of underrepresented groups.