* 0960175
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Configurable Supercomputer for Arctic Research
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Gregory Newby, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,481,252.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Alaska Fairbanks
campus will install a research supercomputer that will be a broadly accessible
instrument for investigation of phenomena related to the Arctic as well as a set
of other key research areas. The instrument will be utilized by researchers from
a number of domains, including geophysical science, mathematics, biology,
supercomputing research, and engineering. The importance of the Arctic for
understanding global climate change and its many influences is a driving force
in bringing together these researchers, to address common interests from
different angles, to share results widely through publications and
presentations, and to integrate research and instrument use in the classroom.
For the scientific areas, research will be both normative and transformative.
Transformative results are part of the instrument design proposal, by providing
a rich and useful resource for collaboration, not just for individual research
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances are envisioned in geophysical
phenomena, including increased understanding of high-latitudes roles for climate
change, the atmospheric sciences, the oceans, ice sheets, and sea ice. In
biology and ecology, advances are envisioned in population genetics, marine
ecosystems, and Boreal ecosystems. In the human sphere, advances are anticipated
in human-ecosystem interaction and the influence on human infrastructure, on
integration of datasets for native language study, and understanding of
environmental influences on air and water quality. Engineering concerns, ranging
from analysis of next-generation supercomputers to radio wave propagation, will
see rapid progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research equipment infrastructure
enhancement will have broader impacts in a number of ways. As a minority serving
institution in an EPSCoR state, UAF will leverage the instrument to provide
opportunities for involvement of minorities and underrepresented groups in
teaching, research and outreach. In addition, there is a significant community
of researchers at UAF who utilize computational methods for discovery who will
be enabled by this instrument.