* 0960503
* Transitioning Undergraduate Research in Science at Wesley to Meet the Challenges of the 21st Century
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Kathleen Curran, Wesley College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2012
* USD 281,676.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are
provided to improve the current research laboratory conditions in Cannon Hall at
Wesley College. Wesley College is a leading private liberal-arts institution
with 1600 full-time traditional age undergraduates and a total enrollment of
2200. The Departments of Science and Mathematics are housed in Cannon Hall,
where the 1960s vintage science laboratories and facilities are substandard. The
building was designed at a time when the primary mission of the college was
teaching. Recently the science department has responded to Delaware's emphasis
on productive competitive research partnerships with a significant growth in its
mentored undergraduate research programs. The facility was not designed to
handle the level or size of the research programs and does not meet contemporary
research standards since research has become more complex and utilizes more
sophisticated equipment than when the building was built. The proposed
modernization of available research facilities, will address critical research
laboratory deficiencies by renovating obsolete laboratory spaces (Cannon 215,
Cannon 214, and Cannon 115) to contemporary laboratory building standards
including adequate ventilation; demolition of existing mechanical/electrical/
gas/plumbing systems, workstations, and floor finishes; constructing new
workstations, flammable storage cabinets, mechanical/electrical/gas/plumbing
systems, floor and wall finishes; and the construction of a cold room for
protein purification (FPLC). This will provide much needed space for the growing
Wesley undergraduate mentored research participants. Furthermore, with the
convergence of communication applications and operating systems from
consolidating and upgrading the cyber infrastructure for Cannon Hall will meet
the connectivity demands of the next-generation applications and devices.
Alignment of research with state needs and a capability to leverage renovations
into valuable research is a significant benefit from the renovations. The
broadest impact of the proposed modernization will be an increased ability to
seek out, attract, and prepare Wesley's very diverse research participants (70%
women, 21% from underrepresented populations, and 29% first-generation college
students).