* 0960087
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffractometer for Powder and Thin Film Materials Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Steven Drew, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2013
* USD 305,000.00

0960087 Eblen-Zayas Carleton College

Technical Summary: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

X-ray diffraction (XRD) is a powerful technique for analyzing crystalline
materials as both powders and thin films. This project will support the purchase
of a flexible, multi-purpose x-ray diffractometer to expand and support current
research directions in chemistry, geology, and physics at Carleton College. The
multidisciplinary research applications for this instrument fall into three
areas: 1) XRD spectral analysis before and after exposure of crystalline
extended linear chain materials to organic vapors to test their suitability as
vapochromic sensors, 2) determination of the presence of higher order oxides and
film crystallinity of Eu-rich EuO thin films to better understand metal-
insulator transition and colossal magnetoresistance response characteristics, 3)
characterization of clay mineralogy to support a study of the tectonic and
paleoclimate history of southeast Alaska. In addition to its research role, the
XRD instrument will also support innovative teaching opportunities for a diverse
student body both within the traditional curricula of chemistry, geology, and
physics and through year round undergraduate research projects.

Non-technical abstract: This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

X-rays have a wavelength that is comparable to the spaces between atoms in many
materials. For this reason, x-rays can provide a powerful probe for exploring
materials at a level that cannot be achieved with visible light, which has a
much larger wavelength. This project will support the purchase of a multipurpose
x-ray diffractometer (XRD) to characterize a wide variety of materials,
including materials that might be useful for various kinds of chemical and
magnetic sensors and clays that can help us understand the climate history of
southeast Alaska. In addition to enabling multidisciplinary research to promote
our understanding of materials composition and structure, the XRD system will
play an important role in training the next generation of scientists as it will
be integrated into the curriculum as well as providing research experiences for
undergraduate students in chemistry, geology, and physics at Carleton College.