* 0960195
* MRI-R2: Acquisition of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* M. Cengiz Altan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2013
* USD 533,000.00

0960195&lt;br/&gt;Johnson&lt;br/&gt;U. of Oklahoma Norman
Campus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for the acquisition of a Field-Emission
Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM) at OU for imaging, analytical work, and
electron beam lithography (EBL). Essentially these tools are the "eyes" and
"pen" required for doing nanoscience. Features of this modern FE-SEM include:
(1) low acceleration voltage which provides excellent resolution even below 1 kV
on conductors, insulators and even biological materials and (2) a bigger sample
chamber that will allow us look at larger samples without additional preparation
and will permit a "suite of techniques" that will provide truly nanoscale
topographic, structural, and compositional contrast along with elemental and
crystalline characterization. Electron beam lithography on the FE-SEM will
provide us with writing capabilities below 10 nm linewidths.&lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition of a FE-SEM will provide enormous intellectual merit to the
engineering and science programs at OU. Specific examples of the intellectual
merit of this proposal include: Accelerate research efforts on semiconductor-
based structures as innovative materials for electronic, photonic, and
spintronic device applications; Advance the development of novel nanoparticles
for targeted drug delivery; Provide an understanding of the role of scaffold
structure on cell growth and cell integration in a variety of tissue engineered
materials; and Expand our knowledge of the interactions between polymers and
single-walled carbon nanotubes.&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of an FE-SEM will also
take nanoscience outreach to the next level throughout the state. Specific
examples of the broader impacts of this proposal include: Strengthen OU's
efforts to act as a regional hub for nanotechnology in industry and academia;
Tele or web-presence will enhance our already strong electron microscopy
outreach effort; and Broad impact will be felt in existing outreach efforts with
high schools, community colleges, and regional 4 year universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Oklahoma's acquisition of a state-of-
the-art Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM) will allow
researchers access to the nanoworld, allowing easy and versatile imaging of
conductors, insulators, nanoelectronic and biological materials. Truly nanoscale
topographic, structural, and compositional images and information require this
technology to take our nanotechnology to the near-atomic level. A large sample
chamber will allow larger samples to be examined intact, with minimal
preparation, permitting a suite of analytical techniques to provide
nanochemically-informed fabrication of diverse materials. Electron Beam
Lithography (EBL) capacities on the FE-SEM will allow nanoscopic patterns to be
written onto materials at the finest widths possible. These capabilities will
provide us with the means to probe, interact, and manipulate their properties on
the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a FE-SEM will have an enormous
intellectual impact on the already first rate engineering and science programs
at OU. Specifically this proposal will allow an accelerations of research
efforts on semiconductor-based structures including innovative materials for
electronic, magnetic, and light emitting and sensing devices; will advance the
development of novel nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery; will provide
detailed understanding of the role of scaffold structure on cell growth and cell
integration in a variety of tissue engineered materials(e.g. synthetic bone and
organ synthesis); expand our knowledge of the interactions between polymers and
single-walled carbon nanotubes for the ultimate goal of electrically conductive
and high strength polymer composite materials.&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of an
FE-SEM will also take nanoscience outreach to the next level throughout the
state by strengthening OU's efforts to act as a regional hub for nanotechnology
in industry and academia. In addition, an FE-SEM will enhance our already strong
electron microscopy outreach efforts with K-12 schools, community colleges, and
regional 4-year universities by providing a means to demonstrate on site (e.g.
demonstrations and tours) or remotely through tele or web-presence the vital
role electron microscopy has in virtually all fields of scientific endeavor.