* 0960138
* MRI-R2: Development of a High-Flux Deuteron-Deuteron Fusion Neutron Source for 40Ar/39Ar Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2013
* USD 782,221.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project will develop a facility to use nuclear fusion
of deuterium atoms and ions to create a large concentration of neutrons with
uniform energy of 2.45 million electron volts. The fusion reaction has been
successfully induced in previous experiments, but this project will use a novel
radially inward-focussing deuterium ion beam geometry to pursue a neutron
concentration 1000 or more times higher than previously achieved. This neutron
generator will be used to irradiate geological samples for the argon-40/argon-39
dating method, in which potassium-39 must be converted to argon-39 through
neutron capture. The source of neutrons for this widely used dating method has
previously been conventional nuclear reactors powered by fission of uranium,
producing a broad range of neutron energies with several suboptimal effects. In
contrast, the device to be developed by this project will reduce atomic recoil
and unwanted nuclear reactions, thus producing more accurate age information
with less radiological risk to analysts, and without generating hazardous
radioactive waste. These improvements will enhance the ability to accurately
date fine-grained minerals such as clays, whose ages are often useful as a guide
for petroleum and ore deposit exploration. Other likely applications include the
chronology of human evolution and of the early solar system. The device will be
useful for applications beyond dating, specifically including trace element
geochemistry, nuclear medicine, materials science, and condensed matter physics.
The ability to provide rapid neutron activation data will be applicable to the
design of a next generation of fission reactors for nuclear power. The project
will provide training to students and postdoctoral researchers and thus
contribute to replenishing the depleted pipeline of early career scientists with
expertise in nuclear sciences, thereby addressing growing concerns arising from
national security and energy needs. The project will also enhance cross-
disciplinary collaboration between nuclear scientists and earth scientists.