* 0960156
* MRI-R2:  Development of Adaptive Reduced-Gravity Simulator for Aerospace and Biomechanics Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Robert Paz, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,675,244.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI-R2) award is to
develop a reduced-gravity simulator. Physical simulation of human activities in
a reduced gravity condition on Earth is often needed not only for training
astronauts but also for aerospace and biomechanics research. Simulation of a
reduced gravity condition for a person requires that the person's body parts
experience the forces and movements consistent with that condition. This award
will enable implementation of an innovative design of a reduced-gravity
simulator. Based on robotics and passive gravity compensation technologies, the
simulator could offload any amount (from 0% to 100%) of the body weight of a
person such that the person moving within the simulator will feel as if he/she
were experiencing reduced gravity. The equipment will provide a platform for
investigating many research questions, such as how to optimize the design for
best dynamic performance; how to identify the mass properties of different body
parts; and how to automatically adjust the system for different individuals to
achieve the desired level of gravity reduction. A fully functioning, tested, and
documented prototype of the proposed simulator will be delivered.

The technology and instrumentation system developed by this project will provide
a strong infrastructure at New Mexico State University to advance the current
interdisciplinary research and education in aerospace science for manned space
exploration and biomechanics science for better understanding of human-body
dynamics. The facility could provide a new and low-cost technology for training
astronauts and space travelers. It could also be used to create a human motion
database including detailed body inertia properties, enhance biomedical research
for neuro-rehabilitation of disabled people, and support human performance
research for achieving optimal motion gaits. The research team will work with
the New Mexico Alliance for Minority Participation to enhance higher education
of Hispanic and other minority students.