* 0960222
* MRI-R2: Development of Electrostatic high energy focused ion beam (HEFIB) nanoprobe system
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Karl Hasenstein, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 610,879.00

0960222&lt;br/&gt;Glass&lt;br/&gt;U. of Louisiana at
Lafayette&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an ongoing critical need for new-
generation techniques to probe materials structure and properties with nanoscale
resolutions and to manipulate organic and inorganic nano-materials. High energy
(MeV) ions can penetrate well below surfaces of materials with negligible
scattering and with precisely controllable ion-atom interactions, thereby
offering a unique means by which surface to sub-surface regions can be studied
and/or manipulated. The rather cumbersome magnetic focusing systems that have
been utilized worldwide as the mainstay of MeV proton microprobe systems have
attained notable operational accomplishments, but the inability of these systems
to focus heavy ion beams has skewed virtually all work with focused MeV ion
beams to those topics for which proton beams can be used - the remainder of the
periodic table has remained essentially untouched. &lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a novel electrostatic high energy focused ion beam (HEFIB) nanoprobe
system specifically designed for modifying and characterizing materials at
nanoscale dimensions using heavy MeV ions. In contrast to the mass dependent
magnetic field focusing systems now used worldwide, a mass-independent
electrostatic quadrupole focusing will enable major improvements of more than an
order of magnitude for several of the operational and physical parameters
relative to the presently available magnetic focusing systems. The most
significant of these technological improvements to be realized are the
substantial reduction of the minimum attainable probe size for MeV heavy ions to
sub-100 nm dimensions and the capability to produce sub-100 nm probes of any ion
or charged cluster.&lt;br/&gt;Collaborating in the development of the system
will be the Louisiana Accelerator Center at The University of Louisiana at
Lafayette, The University of North Texas, and National Electrostatics
Corporation. Additionally, the establishment of a synergistic collaborative
network within this development project which links national laboratories and
other universities will enhance and accelerate the dissemination of technology
advancement in a number of research areas having national and international
relevance. Notably, this unique instrumentation constitutes a revolutionary
advancement of technological resources for materials research and the students
participating in this project will work side by side with leading U.S. experts
in the field from universities, national laboratories, and industry to develop a
unique research tool, while concurrently gaining invaluable experience with
interdisciplinary fields of science and engineering. The anticipated broad
growth and impact of this technology will also simultaneously open new
opportunities for a demographically diverse community of students and
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists and engineers are continually looking for new
ways to probe and study materials on the microscopic scale and high energy ion
beams are one of the versatile technological tools available. An ion is the
result of removing one or more electrons from an atom to make it electrically
charged and therefore able to have its motion influenced with magnetic or
electric fields. When high energy ions strike the surfaces of materials they
interact with the atoms in the surface to allow the study of surface and bulk
properties. Focusing these ion beams to small spots makes it possible to
investigate the properties of materials on a microscopic scale. Patterns can
also be "written" in a process called nanolithography. However, the magnetic
focusing systems presently in use today have a major disadvantage because the
focusing is effective only for low mass proton (hydrogen ion) beams.
&lt;br/&gt;The Louisiana Accelerator Center of The University of Louisiana at
Lafayette will work with The University of North Texas and National
Electrostatics Corporation to develop the first electric field-based High Energy
Focused Ion Beam (HEFIB) nanoprobe to allow highly effective focusing of high
energy heavy ions capable of studying and modifying materials at nanoscale
dimensions. This revolutionary step forward will provide unique research tools
for scientists engaged in many important areas of materials research including
biology, medicine, agriculture, semiconductors, geology, nanofabrication,
nanomaterials, archaeology, art, forensic science, catalysis, and radioactive
waste management. The students participating in this project will work side by
side with leading U.S. experts in the field from universities, national
laboratories, and industry to develop a unique research tool while gaining
invaluable experience with interdisciplinary fields of science and engineering
in research with worldwide relevance. The anticipated wide distribution of this
technology will also open new opportunities for students and faculty across a
wide range of educational and cultural backgrounds.