* 0960344
* MRI-R2:  Acquisition of a GPU-Based Cluster for Plasma, High-Energy Density and Computational Science at UCLA
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Philip Pritchett, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,782,780.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specialized computer processors,
designed primarily for video games, called graphics processing units (GPUs) have
the potential to revolutionize scientific computing, by providing large
computing resources at low cost and low power. A cluster based on GPUs will be
constructed at UCLA focusing on plasma simulations using the particle-in-cell
(PIC) method. The network that links this cluster together is carefully designed
so that the simulation tools of interest will run very efficiently on it. The
cluster itself will consist of 96 dual quad-core (Intel i7) nodes each connected
to two Nvidia Tesla GPUs (192 GPUs total) and will be housed within the
Institute for Digital Research and Education (IDRE). The cluster will have three
main purposes. First, the cluster will serve as a testbed for developing new
parallel particle-in-cell (PIC) algorithms and codes to run on systems that have
many GPUs networked together. The codes should run efficiently on future
computers housed at large national, supercomputer centers. Second, the cluster
will be an instrument to enable breakthroughs in new particle accelerator
technology, fusion energy, space plasmas, astrophysics, and basic plasma
science. Third, the cluster will help to advance research and education in broad
and diverse areas of Computational Science at UCLA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
plasma physics subjects to be studied could have a broad impact on a wider range
of fields that have a significant societal impact, fields such as new compact
accelerator technology, fusion energy, and the reliability of communication
satellites. The cluster will also have broad educational impact in that students
will be able tackle problems at the cutting edge of a variety of fields, that
previously would have required resources typical of a national laboratory. The
Principal Investigator on this project is also the Director of the UCLA
Institute for Digital Research and Education. Two of the co-PI's are IDRE staff
members. Through IDRE, the cluster and the activities centered around it
researchers in other science domains will learn how to compute on GPU's and the
GPU cluster will also be used to train students across a wide array of
computational based research topics.