* 0961304
* Strengthening Qualitative Research through Methodological Innovation and Integration: A Longitudinal Analysis of Human Mortality
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Susan Leonard, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2012
* USD 146,224.00

SES#: 0961304&lt;br/&gt;PI: Susan Leonard&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dramatically falling death rates lead to increased
life expectancy in the US between the late 19th century and the early 20th
century. The widely accepted explanation is that deaths from infectious diseases
such as smallpox and cholera were on the wane and deaths from degenerative
diseases like heart disease and cancer were on the rise, but changes in the
names of diseases make testing this hypothesis difficult. This study aims to
develop a database that systematically standardizes the causes of death, groups
deaths into categories, and provides information about the quality, reliability,
and importance of standardization and classification to understanding long-term
trends in death rates. The database will contain individual death records from
Holyoke and Northampton, Massachusetts from 1850 to 1912 and two alternate cause
of death classifications, one based on a standardization of the causes of death
given in the original records and the other based on assigning deaths to the
early International Classification of Causes of Death. The data will also
include measurements of how reliable the classifications are, and whether
classification makes a significant difference in mortality trends.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The database will be made available to
the public in a form suitable for use by historical mortality researchers and
public users for example, genealogists. With this data, researchers will be able
to better understand the role of controlling infectious disease in lowering
overall death rates. The methods used to create the database will also be useful
for researchers working in other settings where the meaning of causes of death
may be unclear.