* 0961803
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Global Positioning Satellite Monitoring for High Risk Sex Offenders in San Diego: Implemenitation and Outcome.
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2010,06/30/2011
* Elliott Currie, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2011
* USD 9,611.00

The introduction of surveillance technology to the United States' criminal
justice system is arguably the most significant development in criminal justice
policy in the last 30 years. Forms of surveillance technologies, including
Electronic Monitoring (EM) and Global Positioning Systems (GPS), are quickly
becoming a standard criminal justice tool used for the continuous control and
punishment of offenders. It is, therefore, necessary to understand how
technology is used in current criminal justice legislation and policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using California, Florida, Idaho, and Massacusetts as
study sites, this dissertation will use a multi-method research design that
includes archival analysis of offender legislation and offender management
documents as well as analysis of interviews with parole officers,
administrators, and offenders. Findings from the analysis of this data will help
to answer the following questions: 1) What is meant by the "electronic
monitoring" of paroled offenders as a criminal justice policy? 2) What is the
relationship between the legislative intent and reality of electronic monitoring
of paroled offenders? 3) How is GPS surveillance technology, allied with
criminal justice policy, reshaping the (a) lives of parolees? (b) lives of
parole officers? (c) operation of parole? and (d) operation of other criminal
justice agencies?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from this research will
deepen understanding of the relationship between surveillance technology and the
criminal justice system. They will be informative for the development of
policies regarding the use of such technologies in pursuit of the goals of the
criminal justice system.