* 0961853
* Collaborative Research: the influence of predators on community structure and resultant ecosystem functioning at a biogeographic scale
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* James Byers, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2014
* USD 261,861.00

Predators structure ecological communities by consuming and altering the traits
of prey, yet these effects have only recently been linked to local variation in
ecosystem functions such as primary production and nutrient cycling. Such
linkages may operate differently across biogeographic scales because factors
known to affect local predator mechanisms also vary with latitude. The mismatch
between knowledge of how predators locally affect ecosystem functions and the
biogeographic range at which predator-prey interactions occur inhibits
understanding of linkages between ecological communities and ecosystems, and
thus our ability to manage valuable ecosystem services. Intertidal oyster reefs
provide a model system to address this knowledge gap: they occur throughout the
mid-Atlantic and Gulf coasts; they contain a similar food-web assemblage across
latitudinal gradients in predation, resource supplies, and environmental
conditions; they are strongly influenced by predator effects; and they influence
sediment and nutrient cycles by enhancing benthic-pelagic coupling. This
research involves a series of standardized sampling and experimental studies to:
(1) investigate biogeographic patterns in oyster food web structure, resource
supplies, environmental conditions, and sediment properties associated with reef
function (2) determine how the vital rates of oysters, which can influence
benthic-pelagic coupling, vary geographically; and (3) examine experimentally
the relative importance of consumptive and non-consumptive predator effects on
oyster reef communities and the ecosystem processes they provide and how these
effects vary latitudinally. It will provide a mechanistic understanding of the
basis for biogeographical shifts in valuable ecosystem services performed by an
important marine foundation species, and it will also advance understanding of
the interactions between predator effects in food webs and the ecosystem
processes that depend on them.

By linking predator effects and benthic-pelagic coupling on oyster reefs in a
biogeographic context, this research will provide valuable information to
resource managers charged with restoring oyster reefs and recovering ecosystem
services. By promoting the exchange of conceptual and methodological ideas among
research groups at four major research universities, this project has already
and will continue to foster interdisciplinary expertise among its investigators
as well as their future graduate and undergraduate students. In addition to
mentoring a post-doc, this research will prepare at least three graduate and
three undergraduate students for scientific careers by having them independently
develop projects related to the project. The investigators are committed to
mentoring a diverse group of students across multiple educational levels, and
they will continue to disseminate results to the public through lectures, open
house events at their respective institutions, as well as radio, newspaper, and
television interviews.