* 0961920
* Collaborative Research: Life in the Dead Zone: Microbial respiration, production, diversity and gene expression in seasonally anoxic estuarine waters
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Jeffrey Cornwell, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2014
* USD 836,774.00

Every summer in many estuaries and coastal margins, eutrophication elevated
phytoplankton production drives rapid bacterial respiration creating hypoxic and
anoxic bottom waters. These so-called "dead zones" exclude fish, kill benthic
organisms, and eliminate habitat. Despite their popular name, anoxic/hypoxic
zones are not really dead, but rather are populated with living and very active
microbial communities. In fact, bacterial production in anoxic waters can exceed
that in overlying oxic waters due, in part, to reduced grazing and increased
cell size and abundance. Once oxygen is depleted, microbial respiration
undergoes a succession of redox reactions with decreasing energy yield as
terminal electron acceptors are depleted (e.g., O2, NO3-, Mn (IV), Fe (III), and
SO42-). This combination of high production and reduced growth efficiency
creates a condition in which respiration may be very high, making anoxic zones
significant sinks for organic matter and key sites for nutrient cycling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research documented respiratory succession in
Chesapeake Bay bottom waters based on redox chemistry measurements.
Heterotrophic bacterial production was very high at some stages of this
succession, suggesting elevated respiration. Also, the phylogenetic composition
of bacterioplankton communities in anoxic waters was similar to oxic surface
waters for nearly half the summer, only changing after the appearance of H2S.
This suggests that typical aerobic estuarine bacteria are able to shift to
anaerobic metabolisms and continue to dominate. Most of what is known about
microbial respiration and community composition in anoxic water comes from
studies of permanently anoxic systems like the Black Sea and Cariaco Basin. By
comparison, very little is known about what is a much more common and more
dynamic marine environment - seasonally anoxic estuarine waters. This project
will conduct a 3-year integrated study to advance the quantitative and
mechanistic understanding of biogeochemical cycling in one of the largest
seasonal estuarine anoxic zones in the USA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
hypothesize that: 1) Dominant sub-pycnocline respiratory processes undergo a
succession from aerobic respiration to nitrate respiration and metal reduction
to sulfate reduction; 2) Bacterial growth efficiency decreases with this
respiratory succession, but bacterial production remains high, resulting in very
high carbon respiration rates; 3) Bacterial community composition changes little
during respiratory succession until sulfate respiration dominates (i.e., the
sulfide threshold), but gene expression closely tracks changes in redox
conditions in order to support the most energetic respiratory processes. The PIs
will address these hypotheses by quantifying carbon respiration rates using
several techniques including carbon respiration rate; quantifying bacterial
production, biomass and growth efficiency; and characterizing succession in the
composition and respiratory gene expression patterns of microbial communities in
water column and sediments during each stage of respiratory succession. This
project will integrate biogeochemical, biological, and genomic data to explain
how biogeochemistry influences, and is influenced by, microbial respiration,
production, diversity, and gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The project will provide (1) reliable measurements of production and
respiration in anoxic/hypoxic waters, (2) techniques applicable to other
ecosystems, and (3) ecological insight for predicting future changes with
ongoing restoration efforts in anoxia-impacted estuaries. These measurements
will be useful for calibrating biogeochemical models and for estimating carbon
budgets. Two graduate students and one postdoctoral scientist will be trained in
several state-of-the-art geochemical and molecular biology techniques. Two
teachers will be engaged to work on this project and to participate in the
seven-week Environmental Science Education Partnership (ESEP) Teacher Research
Fellowship Program (www.esep.umces.edu) at UMCES Horn Point Laboratory. New
discoveries will be incorporated into graduate-level courses entitled Aquatic
Microbial Ecology, Biological Oceanography, and Environmental Geochemistry.
Nucleic acid sequences will be deposited in online repositories including
GenBank.