* 0961900
* Collaborative Research:  Determining rates of group-specific phytoplankton and bacterial  uptake of inorganic and organic nitrogen by means of stable isotope techniques
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Boris Wawrik, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2014
* USD 392,863.00

Intellectual Merit: The marine nitrogen (N) cycle involves a complex network of
biological transformations among different inorganic and organic N reservoirs.
Considerable progress has been made in defining N cycling processes in marine
environments in recent years, but significant questions remain unanswered in
part due to methodological limitations. Traditional tools for studying N
cycling, for example, cannot accurately assess phytoplankton or bacteria
specific N use in marine ecosystems. Therefore there is a need to develop new
techniques and methodologies. The PIs of this project have recently made two
important advances in this context: (1) a flowcytometric methodology (FCM) to
separate phytoplankton from bacteria was applied to separately measure N uptake
by these two groups. Prior methodologies relied on measurements of different
size fractions, which always contain some degree of both phytoplankton and
bacterial uptake. FCM allows for the distinct separation of bacterial versus
phytoplankton N incorporation. (2) N-based DNA stable isotope probing (SIP)
methodology has been adapted to interrogate N uptake in specific phytoplankton
populations. DNA SIP can provide evidence for the uptake of an N source into a
specific population of phytoplankton or bacteria. This methodology is in
contrast to traditional measurements, which cannot make inferences about
individual populations or species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
apply these two methodological advances in order to obtain the next generation
of N uptake measurements. Phytoplankton and bacteria specific uptake rates will
be measured via the FCM technique, and the individual groups or species of
phytoplankton or bacteria will be interrogated for N uptake via DNA SIP. These
tools will be applied across the well-characterized nutrient gradient found in
Chesapeake Bay during one summer cruise and one winter cruise. Phytoplankton,
bacterial, and archaeal populations will be characterized along the sampling
transect via multiplexed pyrosequencing technology. N uptake will be measured
for inorganic (NH4+, NO3-, and NO2-) and organic N sources (15N and 14C urea
dual-labeled and amino acids) as substrates. The investigators hypothesize that
phytoplankton will derive a larger percentage of their N nutrition from organic
forms along the transect (i.e. North to South), as competition with bacteria for
ammonium increases. DNA SIP will be applied to specific dominant phytoplankton
and bacterial populations in order to investigate their N nutrition. By applying
this unique combination of methodologies, the project will provide unprecedented
community, group and species level resolution of N uptake in Chesapeake Bay and
will furnish us with an improved understanding of N cycling in the Bay and
marine systems as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project
will be integrated into the education of students at the high-school,
undergraduate, and graduate levels. Several graduate students will be directly
involved in conducting the proposed research, and the PIs will provide
undergraduate directed research opportunities for talented and motivated
students seeking research experience. Students will be trained in several
research areas including: molecular biology, microbial ecology, ecosystems
biology, as well as environmental and analytical chemistry. Additionally, the
PIs will extend K-12 educational outreach to the community through engaging six
Oklahoma high school teachers in summer research projects, followed by
interactive videoconferencing via a mobile platform to provide virtual
interactive field trips to K-12 teachers in Oklahoma schools. This will be
achieved through collaboration with the K-20 Center for Education and Community
Renewal at the University of Oklahoma. K-20 is an interdisciplinary, statewide
center focusing on educational and community renewal in Oklahoma through
interactive, action-oriented partnerships among schools, universities, industry,
community and governmental agencies. The Center has an extensive network of over
500 schools and industry partners throughout the state.