* 0961971
* Instrumental Variable Methods for Observational Studies
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Dylan Small, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2013
* USD 144,704.00

The instrumental variable (IV) method is an approach to estimating a causal
relationship in the presence of unmeasured confounders. A central concern in
most studies using the IV method is that the IV is not perfectly valid in the
sense that it is correlated with unmeasured confounders. This project will
contribute to improved methodology for using the IV method. The project will
develop a new, more interpretable sensitivity analysis for IV studies that is
calibrated to observed covariates. A new way of designing IV studies to make the
study less sensitive to the proposed IV being invalid (i.e., correlated with
unmeasured confounders) also will be developed. The approach will involve
setting up a matched comparison between a group of subjects with a high level of
the IV and a group of subjects with a low level of the IV in such a way that the
IV is a strong predictor of the treatment that is received in the two groups.
Finally, a new IV method for studies with binary outcomes will be developed that
is easier to implement and more robust than existing methods.

A main goal of many empirical studies in the social sciences is to provide
evidence about the effects caused by policies or treatments. For practical
and/or ethical reasons, most such studies are observational rather than
randomized studies. A central difficulty for observational studies is that
because treatments were not randomly assigned, the subjects receiving different
treatments may not be comparable so differing outcomes after treatment may not
be effects caused by the treatment. The instrumental variable (IV) method is an
approach for estimating a causal relationship that can overcome unmeasured
confounding. The basic idea is to use an "instrumental" variable to extract
variation in the treatment that is unrelated to the unmeasured confounders, and
then use this variation to estimate the causal effect of the treatment on the
outcome. This project will provide ways to better assess sensitivity of results
from using the IV methods to concerns that the proposed IV is related to
unmeasured confounders (and thus not a valid IV), and better ways to make use of
an IV when the outcome of the study is a binary variable. The project also will
develop and disseminate freely available software for implementing the new
methods. By offering rigorous analysis in complex setting otherwise not suited
for experimentation, improved methodology for observational studies has the
potential to lead to improved policies and practices of both public and private
institutions.