* 0961725
* Collaborative Research: Chemical Changes Accompanying Petroleum Weathering in the Coastal Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* David Valentine, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2014
* USD 373,024.00

The weathering of petroleum hydrocarbons in the coastal ocean is a phenomenon
that marine chemists and environmental chemists have been interested in for more
than three decades. While there have been countless studies on this topic,
advances have stalled due to the narrow analytical windows provided by
traditional analytical techniques, leaving fundamental questions unanswered.

In this project, researchers at the University of California at Santa Barbara
and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will look at this problem in a new
way through a concerted application of two advanced approaches: comprehensive,
two-dimensional gas chromatography and Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance
mass spectrometry, to provide an unprecedented level of detail on the weathering
of hundreds to thousands of petroleum hydrocarbons. Specifically, this research
will identify and apportion the role of photolysis, evaporation, dissolution,
and biodegradation associated with oil weathering at the natural oil seeps off
Santa Barbara, CA, where more than 5 million liters of oil seep annually into
the ocean. This effort directly addresses recommendations by the US National
Research Council's 2003 report Oil in the Sea III, and will be driven by two
overarching hypotheses: (1) Hydrocarbon mass loss in chronic oil slicks is
dominated by evaporation > biodegradation > dissolution > photo-oxidation; and
(2) High-molecular-weight and polar compounds in petroleum are transformed
primarily in shallow sediments by microbiological processes, yielding high
molecular weight dissolved organic molecules and a residual tar. These
hypotheses will be addressed by collecting and analyzing oil samples from the
Santa Barbara seeps. Changes in the distribution of molecules within each sample
will be assessed as a function of environmental exposure to provide tests of the
hypotheses. New data analysis tools will also be developed and validated.

Broader Impacts: Results from this research will contribute broadly to an
understanding of petroleum weathering and carbon cycling in the Earth system,
and will be broadly disseminated through popular outlets. Knowledge gained from
this research will also be translated directly to federal agencies including the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Assessment and Restoration
Division where such information is critical for short and long-term decision
making following oil spills. Direct educational impacts of this research include
the training and education of undergraduate and graduate students.