* 0961229
* Planktonic interactions in a changing ocean: Biological responses of Emiliania huxleyi to elevated pCO2 and their effects on microzooplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Suzanne Strom, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2014
* USD 557,708.00

The calcifying Haptophyte Emiliania huxleyi appears to be acutely sensitive to
the rising concentration of ocean pCO2. Documented responses by E. huxleyi to
elevated pCO2 include modifications to their calcification rate and cell size,
malformation of coccoliths, elevated growth rates, increased organic carbon
production, lowering of PIC:POC ratios, and elevated production of the active
climate gas DMS. Changes in these parameters are mechanisms known to elicit
alterations in grazing behavior by microzooplankton, the oceans dominant grazer
functional group. The investigators hypothesize that modifications to the
physiology and biochemistry of calcifying and non-calcifying Haptophyte
Emiliania huxleyi in response to elevated pCO2 will precipitate alterations in
microzooplankton grazing dynamics. To test this hypothesis, they will conduct
controlled laboratory experiments where several strains of E. huxleyi are grown
at several CO2 concentrations. After careful characterization of the biochemical
and physiological responses of the E. huxleyi strains to elevated pCO2, they
will provide these strains as food to several ecologically-important
microzooplankton and document grazing dynamics. E. huxleyi is an ideal organism
for the study of phytoplankton and microzooplankton responses to rising
anthropogenic CO2, the effects of which in the marine environment are called
ocean acidification; E. huxleyi is biogeochemically important, is well studied,
numerous strains are in culture that exhibit variation in the parameters
described above, and they are readily fed upon by ecologically important
microzooplankton.

Intellectual Merit

The implications of changes in microzooplankton grazing for carbon cycling,
specifically CaCO3 export, DMS production, nutrient regeneration in surface
waters, and carbon transfer between trophic levels are profound, as this
grazing, to a large degree, regulates all these processes. E. huxleyi is a model
prey organism because it is one of the most biogeochemically influential global
phytoplankton. It forms massive seasonal blooms, contributes significantly to
marine inorganic and organic carbon cycles, is a large producer of the
climatically active gas DMS, and is a source of organic matter for trophic
levels both above and below itself. The planned controlled study will increase
our knowledge of the mechanisms that drive patterns of change between trophic
levels, thus providing a wider array of tools necessary to understand the
complex nature of ocean acidification field studies, where competing variables
can confound precise interpretation.

Broader Impacts

This research project will provide support for two early-career scientists, a
graduate student, and numerous undergraduate students. Undergraduate student
involvement will come largely from SPMCs long-standing two resident programs:
the award-winning Multicultural Initiative in the Marine Sciences: Undergraduate
Participation (MIMSUP) and Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU). The
mission statement of the MIMSUP program is to increase diversity within the next
generation of marine scientists through coursework and research. Students
participating in MIMSUP conduct independent research projects, present at
national and international meetings, and conduct community outreach. The REU
program provides the portal for our research to reach a nation-wide
audience;just last year SPMC received 118 REU applications representing 90
different universities. Undergraduates from WWUs Biology and Environmental
Science departments will also participate in this research through courses
taught by the project PIs. Finally, SPMC has received funding to hire a K-12
outreach coordinator who will develop a series of workshops, public lectures and
presentations, and contributions to K-12 curriculum. Findings from this research
will be incorporated into all of these outreach efforts.