* 0961774
* Investigating the Electoral Impact and Deliberation of the Oregon Citizens' Initiative Review
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2011
* John Gastil, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2011
* USD 218,479.00

In June 2009 Oregon's governor signed into law a bill to create Citizens'
Initiative Review (CIR) panels for the 2010 statewide general election. Two-to-
three times in the summer of 2010, a stratified random sample of 18-24 Oregon
citizens will deliberate on an initiative for 5 days, then prepare a one-page
statement that goes into the official Voters' Pamphlet distributed to each
registered voter by the Oregon Secretary of State. This research is the first
opportunity to assess the impact of a small deliberative group (i.e., the CIR
panels) on a large-scale electoral process. In doing so, this project will
address two questions.

First, the research assesses whether the CIR process maintains its design
integrity and leads its citizen panelists to engage in high-quality deliberation
that yields a well-informed and reasoned Pamphlet statement. To address this
question, the project's research team assesses the CIR itself: its overall
design and the soundness of its deliberation and judgments. This involves
creating and analyzing transcripts of the CIR panel meetings, as well as
archival records of the CIR planning process.

Second, the investigators explore whether the CIR's statement in the Voters'
Pamphlet has a substantial electoral impact: whether it changes how people
choose to vote and the reasons they give for the voting choices they make. The
bulk of this project's budget will measure electoral impact through a panel
survey of likely Oregon voters, with the first wave occurring before the first
CIR panel convenes and the second coming at the end of the election. The design
and content of the survey will make it possible to discern the degree to which
Oregon voters read or otherwise learned about the CIR statements in the Voters'
Pamphlet and whether those statements influenced their vote directly or by
shaping their perceptions of relevant pro-and-con arguments or factual disputes.

This research will help practitioners improve the ballot initiative process.