* 0961801
* The Equatorial Mixed Layer and Upper Ocean Mixing
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Robert Pinkel, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,587,985.00

Diurnal cycling of the tropical mixed layer is central in the dynamics governing
air-sea exchanges of heat and moisture which, in turn, are central to a variety
of equatorial phenomena including Tropical Instability Waves, the Madden-Julian
Oscillation, El Nino/Southern Oscillation, tropical storm cyclogenesis, and the
overarching cycle of monsoon seasons. The enhanced stratification below the
seasonal mixed layer is also important, as it regulates vertical fluxes into the
surface layer from the cooler, nutrient rich upwelling waters below.

Understanding the processes that control turbulent mixing of momentum and
tracers in this transition layer is an outstanding problem in upper-ocean
physics. Based on both modeling results and prior observations, this project's
investigators will pursue the hypothesis that turbulent structures in an active
mixed layer, combined with shear across the upper pycnocline, generate energetic
Near-N Internal Waves (NNIW). These NNIW are confined to the region of elevated
buoyancy frequency in the uppermost pycnocline. When they break, they contribute
to turbulent dissipation and mixing across the transition zone. In the tropics,
the most likely candidate for this kind of NNIW generation is nighttime
buoyancy-driven convection combined with the Equatorial Undercurrent shear. The
tropical generation of NNIW will compared with previous temperate-latitude
observations of the analogous generation by Langmuir circulation and inertial
currents, using new observations taken with a combination of a High-resolution
Phased Array Doppler sonar, the fast-profiling CTD, and the High-resolution
Acoustic Doppler systems aboard the R/V Revelle.

Intellectual merit. The project focuses on a link in the air/ocean system that
is vitally important yet incompletely understood: net mixing through the
uppermost layers of the sea. The mixed layer and uppermost pycnocline together
form a crucial barrier between the atmosphere and deep ocean, controlling the
net fluxes of heat, momentum, nutrients, and greenhouse gases. This uppermost
layer is also vital to marine life, setting the scene where light and nutrients
meet, and where pollutants and contaminants are dispersed. Appropriate scaling
of these fluxes has been shown to be important to global air-sea coupled
simulations, which can be sensitive to both the degree of surface mixing and to
the mixed layer depth.

Broader impacts. The results will help improve air-sea exchange estimates, and
hence both environmental and climate effects, thereby helping improve the
information by which long-term policy decisions are made. The results and
interpretations will be disseminated broadly to enhance scientific understanding
and facilitate both decision making and further scientific work. The proposed
activity will provide training and scientific opportunities for a graduate
student, and data to support ongoing scientific studies involving students,
post-docs, and summer interns. Partnerships and collaborations across
institutions will be actively developed.