* 0961097
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Stranded Cosmopolitans: Imagined Belonging in an Out-Of-The-Way Brazilian City
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Timothy Murphy, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 19,778.00

University of California-Davis doctoral student, Timothy E. Murphy, supervised
by Dr. Donald L. Donham, will undertake research on the growth of provincial
urban culture outside of global cities and how this culture affects social
divisions of race, class, and gender. The project will provide insight into
significant changes taking place in provincial cities throughout the world, as
previously isolated people are cognitively incorporated into larger worlds, even
when those worlds remain outside their physical reach. The research is important
for increasing our understanding of the diffusion and authority of new ideas.

The research will be carried out on a network of middle-class Brazilians who
live in a city located at the heart of the impoverished Brazilian Northeast. The
study will focus on non-elite residents who are considered cosmopolitan,
knowledgeable about sophisticated cultures from outside, despite the reality
that poverty makes it impossible for them to travel. Data collection will begin
with participant observation by accompanying informants throughout occupational,
leisure, and consumer activities to 1) learn where and how they acquire their
cultural knowledge; 2) assess the extent to which their daily practices and
perceptions are linked to the world outside the city; and 3) analyze how they
understand and operationalize dominant norms of race, class, and gender. The
researcher will also conduct focus groups and surveys to collect comparative
data on the dominant (non-cosmopolitan) local culture.

The research is important because it will advance our understanding of how even
disadvantaged people in remote locales may connect to and identify with distant
places and ideas. This is significant beyond the local case of "stranded
cosmopolitans" in provincial Brazil because it may be through similar
personalized pathways that new concepts -- be they political, cultural, or
religious -- diffuse from global centers into local lives. The project also
contributes to the education and training of a social scientist.