* 0961536
* Collaborative Research:  Americans' Response to the Economic Crisis: Public Attitudes toward Social Policies
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Jeff Manza, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2012
* USD 38,682.00

SES-0960960 Ernest Brooks Indiana University

SES-0961536 Jeff Manza New York University

How does the American public respond to economic and political change in the
21st century? Did the ongoing economic crisis affect voters' policy preferences?
And have the crisis and legislative responses by the Obama administration
generated more (or less?) support for government interventions when it comes to
social welfare, taxes, and national security? This collaborative research seeks
to develop answers to these questions. The project does so through a new
national survey to be conducted in 2010: The Survey of American Policy Attitudes
toward the Crisis (SAPAC). This survey uses experimental methods to gauge the
dynamics of policy attitude formation. The data collection coincides with a far-
reaching economic downturn (and set of legislative conflicts) that are
mechanisms potentially exerting pressure toward opinion change. The survey
experiments will offer results with which to adjudicate two competing views of
how public opinion is formed during times of crisis. The economic approach views
public opinion as a self-regulating system in which environmental and policy
changes continually exert pressure toward shifts in public attitudes. A second
approach sees mass opinion as more fundamentally shaped by pre-existing social
forces and ideological biases. This approach anticipates greater resistance to
change pressures, and also quite different responses to such pressures among
such key groups as liberals and conservatives, and middle and working-class
Americans.

Broader Impacts

In addition to advancing scholarship on the dynamics of opinion formation, the
2010 SAPAC survey will also make possible a broad, over-time portrait of how
American policy attitudes are currently evolving. This is because the 2010 data
collection will directly extend earlier surveys we fielded in 2007 and 2009. In
looking at questions concerning social welfare, taxes, and national security,
this research brings into focus issues of lasting importance to Americans in the
21st century.