* 0961071
* EAGER:  "Collaborative Research:  Dynamic Melt Control for the Manufacture of Enhanced Polymer-Based Biomedical Devices"
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* John Coulter, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 02/28/2011
* USD 60,004.00

0961071 and 096174 collaborative proposal Abstract

The research objective of this EAGER award is to develop effective molecular
orientation focused novel processing science for bioinert and biodegradable
polymer systems. During recent years novel polymer melt manipulation techniques
have been developed at Lehigh University. These techniques induce carefully
designed polymer melt oscillation to align polymer molecules in desired ways
during product manufacturing. Processing optimization will be assured via
coupled studies of the mechanical and cellular response of resultant bio-polymer
products. The project will further enhance the effectiveness of melt
manipulation processing for localized product quality control, and do so
specifically for polymers associated with biomedical applications. An
interdisciplinary research team coupling strengths at Lehigh University and
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University will explore the connections
between applied melt manipulation conditions and final biomedical product
quality attributes. Components of the study will explore 1) the development and
assessment of novel routes to implement dynamic melt control; 2) the capability
to reliably tune important biodegradable polymer product quality characteristics
such as degradation kinetics via dynamic melt control during manufacturing; and
3) the level to which blood-polymer surface interactions can be influenced via
dynamic melt control based product manufacturing. If successful, the results of
this research will enable the development and cost effective manufacture of
biopolymer-based medical devices with mechanical, blood interaction, and
biodegradable properties tailored to specific biomedical applications. The
advanced material processing techniques developed will enable production in a
high-volume and low cost environment. To assure the societal relevance of the
proposed research endeavor, significant industrial involvement and guidance will
be included. The broader educational impact of the program will be enhanced by
the inclusion of undergraduate students. In addition, numerous middle and high
school students per year, the majority of which will be from under-represented
and minority populations, will be exposed to the research as part of established
and award winning programs that partner the two Universities with the
surrounding school districts.

