* 0961762
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Investigation of Material Implications of Oral Health and Health Care in Central Appalachia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2012
* Susan Shaw, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 04/30/2012
* USD 19,981.00

Doctoral student Sarah Raskin (University of Arizona), supervised by Dr. Susan
J. Shaw, will undertake cultural anthropological research on the material and
symbolic aspects of the mouth in relation to oral health among central
Appalachians, for whom toothlessness is both a stigmatizing clich√© and an
embodied reality. The goal of the research is to expand social science
understanding of stigma, its emobodiment, and its connections to sociopolitical
histories of community, state, and nation. The research has been timed to
coincide with and collaborate with Virginia initiatives to expand access to
basic dental health care in this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher
will undertake thirteen months of multi-method ethnographic research in
southwest Virginia, where 35 percent of adults report loss of many or all teeth,
a rate more 7 times that of the rest of the United States. Research methods will
include semi-structured interviews; free listing and ranking activities to
elicit cultural models of the mouth and its care; structured observation; and
media scans. She also will document experiences of tooth loss, oral pain, other
dental sequelae, and experiences of home and clinical care. The research data
will be analyzed using narrative and cultural consensus techniques. Research
questions include: (1) how do healthcare providers, patients, and public health
stakeholders conceive of the ideal mouth, ideal oral hygiene, and the
possibility of achieving those ideals; and (2) is variability in how stakeholder
conceptions correlated with structural, material, political economic, and/or
symbolic factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant because it
extends narrative and cultural consensus analysis to an illness cluster and site
understudied in social science. Through collaboration with local stakeholders,
findings from this project will provide baseline data for future studies on the
effects of Virginia's pilot project on oral health-care and disease. Funding
this project also supports the education of a social scientist.