* 0961943
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Effects of Forelimb Anatomy on Throwing Performance: a Biomechanical Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2012
* Daniel Lieberman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 09/30/2012
* USD 17,485.00

This project studies how changes in the body that occurred during human
evolution affect the ability to throw well. Humans are unique among primates in
being able to throw objects with both great precision and speed. This ability
may have helped our ancestors hunt and defend themselves. To better understand
the evolution and biomechanical bases for human throwing capabilities, this
study investigates how changes in the shape of the bones in the arms, shoulders
and back affect throwing performance. The researchers are collecting data on how
the body moves during a throw using a high speed, 3D camera system. They will
then use a custom written computer program to break down and examine the
individual motions of each body part during that throw. These data will be
collected from a large sample of individuals who vary in the anatomy of their
arms, shoulders and back. In addition, restrictive braces will be used to alter
the throwing motion in controlled ways. These manipulations will allow us to
assess how different components of the trunk and arms contribute to speed and
accuracy.

This project uses an interdisciplinary approach combining aspects of
anthropology, biology, physics and sports medicine to address how different
aspects of human anatomy relate to throwing performance. A better understanding
of this relationship will improve not only our understanding of human evolution,
but will also contribute to our knowledge of how injury occurs in throwing
athletes.