* 0961494
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social and Political-Economic Dynamics of Foodways in Peri-Urban Honduras
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Aeleka Schortman, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2011
* USD 10,500.00

University of Kentucky doctoral candidate Aeleka Schortman, under the
supervision of Dr. Sarah Lyon, will undertake research on the contemporary
transformation of food systems in developing countries. The agrarian transition,
which is occurring throughout the world, is characterizied by movement away from
local production and towards food-import dependence and industrialization. As a
result, food provisioning is now less reliant on small-scale and subsistence
production. Schortman will investigate the implications of these changes for
individual, household, and community dynamics.

The research will be carried out in Petoa, a peri-urban, industrializing town in
northern Honduras. Peri-urban areas, or satellite towns surrounding large urban
centers, are key sites of agricultural and foodway change, as they are home to
mixed rural and urban livelihoods and land use patterns. Nonetheless, peri-urban
centers remain under-investigated in studies of foodways, which tend to focus on
either rural or urban food use and production patterns. Schortman will collect
data on which foods people produce, purchase, and consume; the meanings they
attach to these foods and production systems; food provisioning adequacy;
household histories; and household socioeconomic characteristics. She will use a
mix of ethnographic research methods, including semi-interviews and informal
interviews, focus groups, household case studies, and both direct and
participant observation.

This research is unique in bringing together social, symbolic, political, and
economic dimensions of foodways changes. It will contribute to practical and
theoretical understandings of the agrarian transition in developing nations,
urbanization and industrialization, and foodway change in a peri-urban locale.
Supporting this research also supports the education of a social scientist.