* 0961596
* Improved Semi-Nonparametric Estimation and Testing By Modified Likelihood
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Dennis Kristensen, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 05/31/2013
* USD 235,771.00

Economic theory often has little to say about the specific functional forms of
components entering economic models. This has lead to an increased use of non-
and semiparametric estimation and testing methods in economics since these in
general impose weaker functional restrictions on the models of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many popular non- and semiparametric estimators
involve so-called kernel-smoothing. However, these can be challenging to
implement since they involve choosing appropriate bandwidths which are an
integral part of the estimators: The resulting estimators are in general
sensitive to the bandwidth choice. Unfortunately, theory offers few guidelines
for how these should be chosen in finite samples: First of all, the bandwidth
does not appear in the asymptotic distribution of the parametric estimator.
Secondly, for the first-step estimation error to vanish at an optimal rate,
undersmoothing is required. This rules out standard bandwidth selection methods
such as plug-in and cross-validation. For a few special estimators, methods have
been developed, but these can be complicated to implement and do not always
perform well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We here propose a novel class of
semiparametric profile estimators that do not suffer from these problems: We
develop a modified version of the standard objective (likelihood) function
defining the estimator. The modification entails that it can be used to estimate
both the nonparametric component and the parametric one. The advantages of this
modification are three-fold: First, the modification ensures that an error term
normally appearing in the expansion of the parametric estimator now vanishes.
Thus we expect that the modified version will have better finite-sample
properties. Second, by removing the error term, we do not have to undersmooth in
order for the first-step estimation error to vanish at an optimal rate. Hence
standard bandwidth selection methods can be used. Finally, the proposed modified
estimator is no more difficult to implement than standard estimators and require
no heavy computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We also demonstrate how the modified
objective function can be used to improve on existing non- and semiparametric
testing procedures using kernel-smoothing methods. The modified tests are shown
to dominate the original ones in terms of Pitman's relative efficiency criterion
and as such are more powerful. As with the kernel-based semiparametric
estimation procedures, the issue of how to select bandwidths in the
implementation of kernel-based testing procedures is to a large extent
unresolved. We will examine the issue of bandwidth selection for the new class
of test statistics developed in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel
procedures can be used to improve upon existing econometric methods developed
for many semiparametric models, including partially linear models, single-index
models, (semi-)varying-coefficient models, and models with time-varying
parameters. These and many other models will be considered in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;