* 0961077
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Legal Consciousness Among Youth at the Red Hook Community Justice Center
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Avi Brisman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2011
* USD 11,656.00

Doctoral student Avi Brisman (Emory University), supervised by Dr. David Nugent,
will undertake research on legal consciousness, which is how people understand,
imagine, and use the law, as well as their attitudes and feelings towards the
law. Past research has typically focused on adults, neglecting a consideration
of what young people know about the law or the criminal justice system
(specifically, law enforcement and courts) and how they know what they know.
This project provides an in-depth exploration of the development of legal
consciousness among youth associated with a multi-jurisdictional community court
(the Red Hook Community Justice Center or RHCJC) in Brooklyn, New York. The
RHCJC also functions as a community center, offering a wide range of programs
for youth who come to the RHCJC voluntarily to participate in community
organizing, development, empowerment, leadership, and artistic programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the research is to explore how youth perceive
law enforcement and courts, and how they conceive of justice and fairness. More
specifically, the central research questions are: 1) How is legal consciousness
shaped by the different kinds of experiences that youth have with the law and
the criminal justice system via the youth programs at the RHCJC? 2) How do those
unique experiences mold or define the substantive nature of their legal
consciousness? and 3) Aside from the development of or impact on legal
consciousness, what other effects do the youth programs at the RHCJC have on the
lives of the youth? The researcher is gathering data through on-going
ethnographic fieldwork at Redhook, including participant observation and
informal and semi-structured interviews. Interviews with participants are being
done at different stages of their participation, to capture the possibility that
the youth's legal consciousness changes over time through sustained interactions
with other actors in the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
important because it will shed light on the role that youth imagine for law and
legal institutions in their community, as well as their own place in working
with institutions and agents of formal social control. This project will also
improve our understanding of how to invest in the resources (financial and
human) to develop youth, community, society and their productive futures.