* 0961924
* Collaborative Research: Hypoxia in Marine Ecosystems: Implications for Neritic Copepods
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Mary Beth Decker, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2014
* USD 149,946.00

The occurrence of low-oxygen waters, often called "dead zones" in coastal
ecosystems throughout the world is increasing. Despite these increases, the
pelagic food-web consequences of low-oxygen waters remain poorly understood.
Laboratory research has demonstrated that hypoxic water (&lt; 2 mg l-1) can
result in mortality, reduced fitness and lower egg production of planktonic
copepods, a major link in food webs supporting pelagic fish. Observations in the
sea indicate that hypoxic bottom waters usually have depressed abundances of
copepods compared to normoxic waters (&gt; 2 mg l-1). The gradient of declining
oxygen concentration with respect to depth (oxycline) can be a critical
interface in coastal pelagic ecosystems by altering the migratory behavior and
depth distribution of copepods and their spatial coherence with potential
predators and prey. This project will result in a mechanistic understanding of
how behavior and fitness of copepods are affected by hypoxia. The PIs will
compare bottom-up and top-down controls on the ecology of copepods in Chesapeake
Bay waters experiencing seasonal hypoxia and those that are normoxic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of this project are to: 1) analyze
changes in migratory behavior and fine-scale (meter) distribution of copepods
across the oxycline over hourly and diel time scales while simultaneously
examining the distribution and abundance of their food (phytoplankton and
microzooplankton) and predators (fish, gelatinous zooplankton); 2) estimate
effects of hypoxia on the "fitness" of copepods using a suite of measurements
(length/weight ratios, feeding, egg production, and egg hatching success) to
develop condition indices of copepods captured at different times and depths in
hypoxic and normoxic waters; and 3) evaluate effects of hypoxia on copepod
mortality by hypoxia-induced, stage-specific copepod mortality in hypoxic bottom
waters and by changes in top-down control of copepods from predation by fish and
gelatinous zooplankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxyclines may be a barrier to
vertical migration of copepods and thus disruptive to predator avoidance
behavior. Faced with increased predation risk from fish and jellyfish, copepods
may seek refuge in hypoxic waters for part of the day and/or make short-term
vertical excursions between hypoxic and normoxic waters. By regulating vertical
migrations, copepods may increase utilization of microzooplankton prey
concentrated in the oxycline. Hypoxic waters may elevate consumption of copepods
by jellyfish and depress consumption by pelagic fish. This project will evaluate
copepod distribution and migration behavior, individual fitness and stage-
specific mortality in hypoxic and normoxic waters. It will examine food-web
consequences of increased or decreased spatial coherence of copepods and their
predators and prey in regions with hypoxic bottom waters and will contribute to
fundamental understanding of food-web processes in eutrophic coastal
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As hypoxia becomes more
prevalent in estuarine and shelf waters, increased understanding of its effects
on planktonic food-webs becomes essential for effective, ecosystem-based
management. The effects of eutrophication and hypoxia are areas of research
emphasized in the JSOST Ocean Research Priorities Plan. Information gained from
this project will be critical for food-web modeling in development of fisheries
ecosystem plans for Chesapeake Bay. In a broader sense, the research is needed
to achieve goals in the Chesapeake Bay Program's "Chesapeake 2000" Agreement.
The proposed research will support two graduate students and a postdoc. In
addition, the Horn Point Laboratory is part of the mid-Atlantic NSF-COSEE
program and this project will support the participation of two summer teacher
interns. The Horn Point Laboratory also participates in the NSF Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program. REU undergraduate students will be
involved in the proposed research. Dissemination of results to the public and
environmental managers will be facilitated by the infrastructure of University
of Maryland Center for Environmental Science's Integration and Application
Network (www.ian.umces.com).