* 0961830
* Collaborative Research: A mechanistic understanding of biogeographic patterns and life histories in benthic organisms in advective coastal environments
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,12/31/2014
* John Wares, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2014
* USD 263,793.00

The biological and physical mechanisms that establish and maintain species
boundaries in the ocean are controversial. Contributing factors are offspring of
species with planktonic larvae being physically transported outside their natal
range, and adults thriving when transplanted into regions immediately beyond
their natural distributions. It is unclear, however, why long-distance dispersal
of a benthic organism's larva should persist on evolutionary timescales. There
is more larval dispersal from natal habitat than would seem propitious.
Furthermore, long larval duration is known to increase reproductive output for
species persistence, makes population retention of favorable alleles less
likely, and reduces the genetic diversity of the population.

The Co-PIs have shown that maintenance of range boundaries for a species are
governed by a function analogous to that derived for allelic frequency/genetic
clines in the coastal ocean. As with other recent advances in biodiversity
theory, this work suggests a convergence between conditions that maintain the
distribution of alleles within species and those that maintain the distribution
of species themselves. This confluence of theory provides substantial
opportunity for development of inter- and intra-species competition in an
advective environment. It potentially would unify genetic and population-level
theory, and create a holistic view of life in advective environs.

It is clear from preliminary work that a synthesis would depend critically on
tradeoffs between dispersal mode and successful reproductive output. The theory
would be developed both by pushing its analytical envelope, and by drawing upon
extensive, existing databases to quantitatively constrain reproductive and
dispersal tradeoffs. For example, although tradeoffs between larval quantity
versus quality (i.e., many "energetically cheap" larvae versus few "highly
provisioned" individuals) have long been the subject of qualitative models, they
have not been quantitatively defined for life history characteristics of
different benthic marine taxa. Combining analytical developments and observed
life-history tradeoffs would provide 1) evolutionarily stable states for a range
of dispersal strategies, 2) mechanisms that define species boundaries as a
function of physical (e.g., temperature and alongshore variation in currents)
and biological (like larval mortality) parameters and 3) quantitative origins of
dispersal behaviors that would locally retain larvae, and result in
relationships between inter- and intra-species fitness.

Such findings would predict species boundary locations and the presence/absence
of various dispersal strategies as a function of local circulation,
environmental conditions and their gradients. Predictions would be tested
against data on species ranges gathered as part of an extensive literature and
database search.

Broader impacts: This research would allow a better mechanistic understanding
species' ranges that occur due to changes in the Earth's climate. For example,
this study will test the hypothesis that warming favors species with longer
larval planktonic duration. Therefore, high-latitude areas now dominated by
species with direct development would shift to a mixture of planktonic
dispersers and direct developers as the climate warms. The research would allow
managers to understand how disruption to habitat can alter species ranges by
changing alongshore sources and transport of planktonic larvae. A quantitative
theory of species range will also help managers understand what sets the
ultimate limits of recently introduced exotic species, allowing improvement of
management strategies. This proposal includes the following education
components. Two graduate students will be trained in cutting-edge techniques in
the fields of quantitative phylogeography and biogeography. In addition, two
undergraduate students each year will assist with all aspects of the project and
will present their work at a national meeting. The students will be mentored to
write REU proposals to NSF. Undergraduates will be recruited with the help of
the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, of which UGA is a flagship
member. Undergraduates will also be recruited from the Research and Discovery
Program at UNH, from colleges with limited opportunities for undergraduate
research.