* 0961523
* Intermediate-depth Ventilation of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current in the Southwestern Scotia Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Alejandro Orsi, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2014
* USD 392,356.00

The Intermediate-depth Ventilation of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current in the
Southwestern Scotia Sea project seeks answers to these climate-relevant
questions: Is the export of ventilated cold waters from the Antarctic Slope
Current (ASC) at the northern side of the South Scotia Ridge (SSR) sufficient to
explain the observed rapid freshening and cooling of the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current (ACC) downstream of Drake Passage? Where and how is Modified Circumpolar
Deep Water (MCDW) injected to the deep water of the ACC? Is the proximity of the
ACC to the continental slope of the SSR a critical factor in determining how
much MCDW is delivered across the slope? The aim of this project in answering
these question is to correctly represent the ventilation rate for the
Circumpolar Deep Water (CDW) in large-scale ocean circulation models. The main
goal is to identify and describe the main mechanism governing the offshore
transport of ventilated upper waters from the ASC to the Scotia Sea along
intermediate density layers.

The guiding hypothesis for the project is that the magnitude and location of the
northward injection of cold, fresh, ventilated slope water from the ASC to the
deep Scotia Sea within isopycnal layers varies with the proximity of the
southern boundary of the ACC to the South Scotia Ridge, and is therefore subject
to considerable mesoscale variability.

The specific objectives are to characterize the flow of the ASC in the
southwestern Scotia Sea where it converges with the ACC, assess mechanisms for
production of ventilated slope waters along the path of the ASC, determine the
physical and chemical properties, and volume transport of ventilated slope
waters carried along this path and their cross-slope outflows, identify the
pathway(s) for their spreading and sinking into the Circumpolar Deep Water (CDW)
layer of the ACC in the Scotia Sea, and determine the spatial distribution of
diapycnal mixing across the ridge and the Antarctic Slope Front system,
including its relationship to tides and intrusions.

The hydrographic data from two well coordinated international cruises in the
southwestern Scotia Sea, and the one-year time series of current, salinity and
temperature measurements from three moorings deployed across the northern slope
of the SSR, will be analyzed and synthesized with all historical and
complementary data sets relevant to the objectives of this project.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed analysis will determine the importance of
direct ventilation of the deep ACC in the Scotia Sea relative to indirect
ventilation through upward mixing of bottom trapped outflows of denser bottom
waters. By better constraining mechanisms by which climate related changes in
the cold Antarctic coastal waters can rapidly impact the rest of the World
Ocean, this analysis will improve our ability to model deep ocean ventilation.
The first long-term moorings from this critical interface region between the
Weddell Sea and the Global Ocean will add to the regional database with current,
temperature and salinity profile measurements that resolve the small cross-slope
scales associated with the hypothesized ventilation mechanism. It builds on an
earlier international experiment (DOVETAIL: 1997-2000) and is coordinated with a
Spanish research program.

Broader Impacts: This research project provides an extraordinary opportunity to
foster international collaboration with South American and European
investigators involved in concurrent regional field programs. Two Ph.D. students
will be supported by this grant, and will assimilate data collected in this
program into their research projects. Project documentation and results
publication will contribute to the US component of the IPY SASSI research
program (http://sassi.tamu.edu). All data from this program will be quality
controlled, submitted to NODC and added to the Southern Ocean Database
disseminated to the broader community online at http://woceSOatlas.tamu.edu.

This project is a contribution to the U.S. CLIVAR (CLImate VARiability and
predictability) program.