* 0961660
* Collaborative Research: The Great Southern Coccolithophore Belt
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,02/28/2015
* William Balch, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2015
* USD 1,088,876.00

Intellectual merit: Recent advances in satellite remote sensing enable
estimation of suspended calcium carbonate (particulate inorganic carbon or
'PIC') from space. This radiative approach is operationally specific to marine
coccolithophores (Haptophyceae) and sensitive enough to quantify PIC
concentrations in oligotrophic gyres. Global images of suspended PIC taken over
the seven years of the MODIS Aqua mission show a 'Great Belt' of PIC near the
sub-Antarctic front of the Southern Ocean that circles the globe. This feature
occurs every year during austral summer and appears to be within the high-
nutrient, low chlorophyll region of the Southern Ocean. The area of the Great
Belt is ~88 million km2, 26% of the global ocean. Evidence from several cruises
into the Great Belt region of the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific sectors has
verified elevated concentrations of coccolithophores; previous work in the
Atlantic sector verified high optical scattering from PIC. The few ship
observations we have are entirely consistent with the satellite views. In this
project, the investigators will systematically study the coccolithophores of the
Great Belt guided by the following science goals: (a) identify the
coccolithophore species within this belt; (b) measure the abundance of
coccolithophores and associated PIC; (c) measure coccolithopore calcification
rates; (d) elucidate factors that may limit coccolithophore latitudinal range
(e.g. stratification, temperature, macronutrients, trace metals, grazing); (e)
demonstrate whether the variability in PIC relates to shallow export flux; (f)
define how variability in PIC production relates to the pCO2, total alkalinity
and dissolved inorganic carbon budgets; and (g) examine the impact of short-term
ocean acidification on coccolithophore growth and calcite dissolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve cruises along the 50 S parallel
to sample the Great Belt, during the austral summer. The investigators will use
a combination of underway surface sampling (primarily optical and hydrographic)
and vertical station profiles (using CTD/rosette and large volume submersible
pumps) to address hypotheses related to the above goals. The cruise track will
elucidate both zonal and meridional variability in the Great Belt. Controlled
carboy incubation experiments will examine the impact of ocean acidification at
various future scenarios on coccolithophore growth and dissolution. Dilution
experiments will address grazing-related mortality and dissolution questions.
Controlled metal-addition incubations will focus on potential iron, zinc and
cobalt limitation of the coccolithophores or competition from diatoms related to
silica availability. The proposed field observations and metal-addition
experiments will provide important information on the current status of the
Great Belt in the context of global biogeochemistry. The ocean acidification
experiments to be undertaken are more forward-looking in terms of the fate of
the Southern Ocean coccolithophores in a future acidified ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The globally significant size of the
Great Belt indicates that it likely plays a major role in global biogeochemistry
and climate change feedbacks. Thus, the investigators expect this work to have
broad, transformative impacts in biological and chemical oceanography. Ocean
acidification from the burning of fossil fuels is predicted to lower the pH of
the surface ocean by 0.3 units in the next century and up to 0.7 units - a
5-fold increase in the proton concentration by the year 2300. A major goal of
this study is to examine the effects of ocean acidification on coccolithophores
in a region of low calcite saturation (i.e., one of the first regions expected
to become sub-saturating for calcite). The results of these experiments will
therefore be highly relevant to our basic understanding of the marine carbon
cycle. Related to career development and Criterion II activities, the project
includes field experience on two cruises for NSF REU undergraduates from Maine
universities or colleges, providing funds for them to attend a scientific
meeting. Participation of undergraduate students from Maine colleges builds
capacity in our rural coastal state and helps thwart the serious issue of 'brain
drain', in which the best students are leaving Maine to seek opportunity in
wealthier, more populated states. A teacher will also participate on the cruises
(via the NSF-sponsored ARMADA program). This teacher will develop learning
modules for students about such topics as coccolithophores, calcification,
export production, metal-plankton interactions, ocean acidification and climate
change.