* 0961876
* 2010 Photoions, Photoionization &amp; Photodetachment Gordon Research Conference
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Albert Stolow, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Wendell Talbot Hill
* 01/31/2011
* USD 5,000.00

This award provides support for the 2010 Photoions, Photoionization &amp;
Photodetachment Gordon Research Conference. (Galveston, TX. January 31-February
5, 2010 Chair: Albert Stolow). This conference series attracts the world's
leading experts on the basic phenomena linked to the ejection of electrons by
absorption of light. This fundamental process underlies attosecond science,
modern x-ray and synchrotron science, high harmonic generation and strong field
physics, spectroscopy/dynamics in complex environments, ultrafast time-resolved
spectroscopies and photoionization probes of molecular dynamics. The deep
intellectual theme unifying all of these is the physics of the electronic
continuum, a field which unites collision physics with spectroscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are that the fundamental study of
photoions, photoionization and photodetachment underpins broad areas of highly
important science. The implications of attosecond science, strong field physics,
laser control, modern x-ray science etc. are broad and far reaching. This 2010
conference brings together world-class researchers from various areas of
physics: laser science, synchrotron science, chemical physics, x-ray science,
strong field physics, ultrafast physics. This meeting provides a forum for
disseminating NSF-sponsored research to a broad and international group of
scientists and US-based graduate students. This grant will partially offset
registration and/or travel costs of participants, such as graduate students
and/or postdocs attending the meeting.