* 0961964
* DDIG: Was There a Sensory Trade-off in Primate Evolution? A method of tracing vomerolfaction in the fossil record
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Eric Delson, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/29/2012
* USD 19,715.00

There is a long-standing hypothesis in physical anthropology that a sensory
trade-off has occurred between smell and vision in primate evolution. This
trade-off is suggested to have taken place during the time that anthropoid
primates adapted to a diurnal rather than nocturnal activity pattern. Thus,
these primates began using visual stimuli more prominently than smell or
chemosensation in communication. While this trade-off hypothesis seems supported
by reduction in the anatomical structures related to pheromone detection and
enhancement of the visual system in some living primates, it has not been tested
using the fossil record. Fossils have largely been excluded from answering this
question because features related to chemosensation, particularly the
vomeronasal organs, which are important in pheromone detection, do not
fossilize.

This study identifies bony anatomical features related to chemosensation in
primates to understand variation in the expression of these features in living
primates and compare the resultant information to fossil primates. We have
identified a hard-tissue correlate of primate chemosensation in the form of
bilateral bony grooves on the nasal floor, formed by articulation with the
cartilage surrounding the vomeronasal organs. The palatal grooves and their
relationship to the vomeronasal organs (occurrence, relative size) are analyzed
statistically in a range of living primates using histological and CT methods.
Skulls of fossil primates that preserve the nasal floor will are also examined
using CT to identify the presence, size and morphology of the palatal grooves to
understand the timing and context of the reduction of chemosensation in
anthropoid primates and test whether this corroborates the sensory trade-off
hypothesis.

This research promotes graduate education and will result in a Ph.D. for a
female graduate student. The data recovered from this project will increase
knowledge on the interface of ecology and adaptation in early primates as well
as contributing information to understanding reduction of human chemosensation.
This research will be made available to the scientific community and the
interested public through journals and scientific magazines.