* 0961316
* Medical Tourism in the Czech Republic
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,11/30/2012
* Amy Speier, Eckerd College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2012
* USD 49,465.00

Dr. Amy Speier, Eckerd College, will undertake research on the growing
transnational practice of medical tourism, in which patients seek lower cost
health care by traveling abroad. This phenomenon is widely viewed as
illustrating how globalization transforms the relationship between people and
territory; it also may be an outcome of the growth of health care consumerism.
One of the new medical tourism destinations is Eastern Europe, which has an
older tradition of medical tourism focused on the allegedly healing powers of
spas. Speier will pursue her research in the Czech Republic, where she will
compare the new and the older forms of medical tourism to illuminate which
factors are most salient for recent developments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of Spier's research will be patient-tourists from North America who travel
to the Czech Republic for in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment. She will
determine their motivations for leaving North America for medical care, why they
have chosen the Czech Republic in particular, and what their experiences are.
She will employ a mix of ethnographic methods including, participant
observation; surveys; focus groups; and interviews with patient-tourists, the
providers, and the medical tourism companies that facilitate travel between
different parts of the world. This new data will then be compared to earlier
research she has carried out on the Czech spa
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because strategies to
reduce health care are a major national concern. At the individual level,
medical tourism is one such strategy, with larger implications that are not yet
well understood. This research also will contribute to understanding
transnational reproductive medicine in the context of global economics and
networks, as well as North American responses to infertility.