* 0961980
* Radiocarbon in Dissolved Organic Matter in Ocean Water
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Ellen Druffel, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2014
* USD 570,870.00

The average radiocarbon (14C) age of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the deep
ocean ranges from 4000-6500 14C years. However, the data set used to estimate
this range is based on only a few sites in the world ocean. For this reason, a
scientist from the University of California, Irvine will participate in three
CLIVAR Repeat Hydrography cruises to collect water samples from six detailed
profiles in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans for which there is no data (P6-along
32°S in the South Pacific, A10 along 30°S in the South Atlantic, and A20 along
50°W in the North Atlantic). Seawater samples will be analyzed by accelerator
mass spectrometry to determine the 14C signatures of DOC. In addition, the black
carbon from DOC will be isolated and analyzed for 14C and 13C signatures. With
the data set, the scientist plans to test the following three hypotheses: (1)
14C of bulk DOC in the South Pacific Ocean is intermediate between values in the
Southern Ocean and those in the North Pacific, and these 14C ages can be used to
determine the timescale of DOC cycling in deep waters of the Pacific; (2) 14C
levels in bulk DOC of the Atlantic Ocean are highest in the north (43°N), lower
in the equatorial region (10°N) and lowest in the South Atlantic (30°S), and
reflects the timescale of DOC cycling as deep water travels south in the western
Atlantic; and (3) black carbon constitutes a significant amount of DOC in open
ocean water, and its 14C age is greater than 20,000 14C
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proponent will help high school teachers prepare
science curricula for their classes and teaches a short course called
"Radiocarbon in Ecology and Earth System Science" during the summer. She
currently serves on the board for the Florida Center for Ocean Science Education
Excellence and aids in the development of college level web-based educational
classes. One graduate and two undergraduate students will be supported and
trained as part of this project.