* 0961720
* Transient Diagenesis in Organic Poor Sediments: Lake Superior
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Josef Werne, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/2014
* USD 416,961.00

In this project, researchers at the University of Minnesota at Duluth will
investigate the geochemistry of organic carbon, nitrogen, phosphorous, and iron
in the sediments of Lake Superior and quantify their temporal and spatial
variability. The geochemical budgets of nitrogen and phosphorus in Lake Superior
are presently unbalanced, and major trends in nutrient concentrations and
primary productivity remain unexplained. The researchers' preliminary data
suggest that the sediments of Lake Superior have experienced large vertical
migrations in the depth of oxygen penetration, analogous to those implicated in
organic-poor sediments in the deep ocean. Given the importance of redox
conditions for the sediment nutrient recycling, they hope to elucidate the
seasonal and multi-decadal responses of these sediments to the temporal changes
in water column chemistry and biological productivity.

The specific objectives are: (1) to characterize the geochemistry of organic
carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and iron in Lake Superior sediments and quantify
their temporal and spatial variability; (2) to simulate the diagenetic
biogeochemical cycling in the lake and calculate the in situ rates of the
organic carbon mineralization pathways and sediment-water nutrient fluxes at
sites with different oxygen penetrations; (3) to elucidate seasonal and multi-
decadal sediment responses to variations in the organic carbon sedimentation and
bottom water concentrations of oxygen and nitrate, and quantify sediment
contributions to the water column N and P budgets; and (4) to gain insights into
the causes, consequences, and the dynamics of the increasing N:P imbalance in
Lake Superior.

These objectives will be accomplished using direct measurements of geochemical
parameters in the lake and sediment incubations. Results will be integrated into
sediment reactive-transport models and mass-balance water column models for
examination of in situ process rates, reconstructions of past dynamics, and
future projections.

Broader Impacts: Arguably, study of these phenomena in Lake Superior will
advance understanding of geochemical dynamics in other carbon-limited sediments.
The sediment chemistry models developed will contribute to the ongoing system-
wide modeling efforts in Lake Superior, will serve the large community of Lake
Superior researchers, and will be transferable to other environments. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be included on the research team.