* 0961221
* Collaborative Research: Applying O2/Ar, DELTA17O and 222Rn methodologies to constrain organic carbon productivity in the upper ocean of the ETSP
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2010,07/31/2012
* Edward Young, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 99,256.00

Recently the National Science Foundation funded a field campaign to study the
occurrence of nitrogen fixation in the eastern tropical South Pacific
(ESTP-10째S-20째S, 80째W-110째W) and determine its contribution as a source of new
nitrogen to primary production in the region. The proposed cruise tracks cover a
wide range in primary productivity, from some of the most productive to least
productive marine waters in the world. Two scientists from the University of
Southern California in collaboration with a researcher from the University of
California, Los Angeles will participate in the cruises to quantify the
contribution of nitrogen fixation to primary and export production rates. To
attain their goal, the researchers would determine Net Community Production and
Gross Photosynthetic Production (NCP and GPP) by measuring biological O2
supersaturation and 17O excess of oxygen dissolved in the upper ocean. Oxygen
supersaturation from biological processes can be determined from measuring O2/Ar
ratios of near surface waters, which effectively removes the effect of
supersaturation produced by bubble injection and other physical processes. The
17O excess permits surface water oxygen that has been produced by photosynthesis
in situ to be distinguished from oxygen from the atmosphere. In addition, 222Rn
profiles in the upper water column would also be obtained and used to assess the
rate of air-sea gas exchange and eddy diffusivity across the thermocline. A
system to measure near-surface radon while underway is also planned and should
ascertain spatial/temporal variability in gas exchange and help identify
recently upwelled or downwelled water masses. Results for the O2/Ar and delta
17O methodologies, coupled with areal mapping of radon deficiencies will yield
an excellent data base for estimation of carbon export within the ETSP.

In terms of broader impacts, the research may lead to reduced uncertainties in
the gas exchange rates which could improve the precision of productivity
measurements. This project represents a collaborative effort between two
academic institutions in the Los Angeles area. One postdoc and two undergraduate
students from the University of Southern California will be supported and
trained as part of the project.