* 0961272
* SHARIAH WITHOUT COURTS: A STUDY OF ISLAMIC JUDICIAL PRACTICES IN ENGLAND
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2010,07/31/2012
* John Bowen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 60,074.00

Dr. John R. Bowen (Washington University in St Louis) will undertake research on
England's Shariah Councils. Across Europe and North America, some Muslims have
proposed the creation of religious tribunals to mediate in family and other
disputes. These proposals often meet with opposition from those concerned about
lack of transparent procedures, possible patriarchal attitudes towards women and
children, and the effects of introducing political Islam into Western law. But
in England, Muslims already have created institutions for mediating disputes
that are based on Islamic norms or sharî`a. The English case, with its advanced
Islamic institutional development, thus provides an instructive case for both
social scientific discussions and public policy debates.

The researcher will conduct his investigations primarily at three English
councils, two tribunals that offers mediation and one tribunal that offers
binding arbitration. He will gather data from observations, interviews, and
analyses of decisions, with a focus on how Islamic judges deliberate and reach
decisions. Attention will be paid especially to determining the extent to which
prior experience of these judges in their countries of origin shapes what they
do in England, and to what extent judges craft their decisions around the
English social and legal context.

The research forms part of a larger scientific project comparing Islamic
deliberative processes across three Western countries: the United States,
France, and Great Britain. The research is important because it will add to
social scientific knowledge of how Islamic, and, by extension, other religious
quasi-legal institutions function in varying contexts. Findings will contribute
needed information to public policy debates about the role of religious courts
in Western secular societies. The results will be disseminated in planned public
lectures and in publications.