* 0961433
* Microstructural Engineering of SiC-Si3N4 Nanocomposites Using a Combination of Classical Molecular Dynamics and Cohesive Finite Element Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/17/2009,11/30/2010
* Vikas Tomar, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 11/30/2010
* USD 60,130.00

Silicon Carbide (SiC)-Silicon Nitride (Si3N4) nanocomposite material system
consisting of nano-sized SiC reinforcements in a Si3N4 matrix is an important
material system with excellent promise for use in high temperature structural
systems. A fundamental theoretical understanding of the effect of nano-sized SiC
reinforcements on the behavior of the composites is required before further
attempting to improve the properties of these composites by varied morphological
alterations. In this research such computational and theoretical microstructural
engineering analyses for improved fracture strength will be performed with an
explicit account of the multiple length scales associated with the second phase
(SiC particles), the primary phase (Si3N4 matrix) and the grain boundaries
(GBs), using the cohesive finite element method (CFEM). Since the second phase
and the GBs involve nanoscopic lengthscales, the analyses will also focus on
combining available experimental information with the corresponding classical
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations for exploring differences in the fracture
resistance prediction of various SiC-Si3N4 morphologies when the experimentally
derived cohesive traction-separation relations are replaced by the atomistically
derived ones. In view of the significant demand for new materials in advanced
civil and mechanical systems such as advanced fossil fuel energy conversion
systems, the developed analysis tool and analyses outcomes will represent a
significant scientific and engineering milestone. The research will be
integrated with K-12, undergraduate, and graduate educational enhancements, RET
and REU program development, minority and underrepresented group involvement,
new course development, and in-classroom teaching experience enhancement. The
results of the research will be incorporated in the graduate and undergraduate
solid mechanics courses being taught and in the micro-/nano-mechanics courses
being developed. Lecture notes of the new courses taught and the research
computer codes will be posted on the World Wide Web with user-friendly
interfaces. Rising junior and senior high school women and students from
underrepresented communities will be provided opportunities to explore
technology, math, and science concepts using hands-on learning during summer
time University campus visits.