* 0961825
* RUI: River and sediment-modulated stress in planktonic and early settlement Mya arenaria
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Mark Green, Saint Joseph's College
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2014
* USD 500,225.00

Estuaries are productive, complex and have great economic value by virtue of
their fisheries, ecosystem services and recreation potential. They are typically
less buffered to acid than open oceans due to the combined effects of acid
production during heterotrophy and acidic inputs from both land and atmosphere.
Within estuaries, it is important to understand how varying acid burdens impact
living resources, particularly those that provide ecosystem services and/or
generate income as fisheries. The bivalve Mya arenaria, the focal species of
this proposed research, is one such resource that sustains a valuable coastal
fishery while providing service via its filtration capacity. Because Mya shells
are constructed from a relatively soluble form of calcium carbonate (aragonite),
and the clams often inhabit eutrophic waters, they may be particularly
vulnerable as pH declines. Planktonic larvae and benthic juveniles are critical
life stages -- even small reductions in theier abundances could substantially
decrease adult populations.

This proposed research addresses four distinct hypotheses concerning the roles
of riverine and sediment interactions on the viability of larval and juvenile
Mya. Research activities include the following.

1. Fieldwork will evaluate the spatial and seasonal changes in aragonite
saturation state within the Kennebec River Estuary and Casco Bay. Seasonal
sampling will be coupled with high-frequency sampling during the annual Mya
spawn to observe and document the effect of lowered aragonite saturation state
on the health status of larval Mya.

2. Using larval Mya, laboratory experiments will mimic the aragonite saturation
state observed in Casco Bay during the high-frequency cruises. Metamorphic
change (veligers, pediveligers, and metamorphosed juveniles), growth rate, and
survivorship of Mya will be evaluated as a function of aragonite saturation
state.

3. Spatially intensive daily cohort monitoring of the intertidal mud flats in
Falmouth, Maine, will establish the link between changes in abundance of
settling juveniles and aragonite saturation state during the period of Mya set.
Cohort monitoring of settling Mya will be examined in reference to sediment pH
and aragonite saturation state in nearby deposits to ascertain if sediment
saturation state is a primary settlement cue for transitioning larvae.

4. A diagnostic model will be developed for the shellfish management community
that can be used to detect aragonite saturation state of the water column. The
model would run on routine oceanographic measurements (salinity, temperature,
oxygen and chlorophyll fluorescence).

Intellectual merit of study: The chemical consequences of increasing atmospheric
CO2 and resulting hydrolysis of carbonic acid is well understood and resultant
ocean acidification has been accurately predicted with the current generation of
global circulation models. These predictions have accelerated research into the
effects of ocean acidification on marine organisms, particularly those with
CaCO3 exoskeletons. Estuarine waters are far less buffered than oceans, are
subject to a variety of acid loadings, and are quite possibly acidifying at a
faster rate than the open ocean. Yet, these regions have been largely ignored in
'acidification' research. Effects of acidification on calcifying organisms are
similar regardless of whether of acid origin -- atmospheric exchange, net
heterotrophy, or discharge of acidic river water. Likewise, each of these acid
fluxes is being perturbed via anthropogenic activity (e.g. fossil fuel use,
deforestation, agriculture). The proposed research will further understanding of
the combined and cumulative impacts of varied acid burdens on calcifying
organisms in coastal waters.

Broader impacts of study: Saint Joseph's College of Maine is an undergraduate
institution with many potential opportunities to introduce students to the
excitement of scientific research and discovery. This project will have special
significance to the 70% of women that make up the student body at Saint Joseph's
College, many of whom will experience research science for the first time. The
immersion of students into research will be modeled after other sponsored
research at SJC, resulting in a new marine science major, in over 35 SJC
undergraduates attending and/or presenting research results at
national/international conferences (12 as co-authors), and in 4 students co-
authoring recent papers for publication.