* 0961754
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cancer, Citizenship, and Scarcity in the Land of Opportunity
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Julie Armin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 10,144.00

University of Arizona doctoral student, Julie Armin, supervised by Dr. Mark A.
Nichter, will undertake ethnographic research on the lived-experience of cancer
treatment for uninsured patients who qualify for state-funded care. Because
cancer is a disease dependent upon high-tech medical interventions, it offers a
particularly rich locus for examining how the experience of health care is
affected by ability to pay. As the United States improves access to cancer
screenings through programs that offer free or reduced-cost exams, there is an
accompanying need for treatment among low-income and uninsured individuals. This
ethnographic study of patients, families, and health care providers will examine
the experiences of these new "medical citizens," who make claims on various
health care resources, including hospitals, medical experts, lay professionals,
charities, and state programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted in Tucson, Arizona, a city less than an hour from the United States-
Mexico border, with a population that often looks to Mexico for less expensive
health care. The researcher will use a combination of ethnographic research
methods, including in-depth interviews, structured observations, and
participant-observation. The research goals are: 1) to document the experience
of financial treatment policies from the individual, household, and health care
provider perspectives; 2) to examine the clinical bureaucratic practices that
invite or restrict access to health care; and 3) to explore the work done by
individuals, families and providers who take responsibility for cancer care,
with particular attention to gender. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
important because it will contribute to theories that seek to explain why social
inequalities persist, even in equality-promoting democracies. The research also
will help to illuminate how the work as well as the costs occasioned by serious
illness are distributed. In addition, research findings may inform the public
policy analyses that seek to determine how policy may both enable and constrain
individuals, and possibly contribute to health disparities. Supporting this
research also supports the education of a social scientist.