* 0961914
* Nitrogen cycle changes across the Cretacous-Paleogene mass extinction event
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Tracy Quan, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2014
* USD 343,893.00

The mass extinction event at the Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) boundary was one of
the largest such events during the Phanerozoic and was following by a period of
drastic changes in ecological and biogeochemical conditions. This research is
the first to investigate changes in the nitrogen cycle across the extinction
event. The PI applies a previously established a relationship between nitrogen
isotopes and the oxidation state of the environment based on the predominant
nitrogen reactions and their associated isotopic fractionation. They will
measure the bulk, kerogen, and porphyrin d15N values across the K-Pg boundary
for several cores to determine nitrogen cycling and paleoredox reactions before,
during, and after the mass extinction event. The PI will test the hypothesis
that the oxygen concentration in the deep waters decreased following the impact
event, and that cores located in different ocean basins will record different
d15N profiles as dictated by the deep water redox state at each location. The
results will provide important information about the processes of global mass
extinction and the subsequent recovery of biogeochemical systems. Funding
supports a new female PI and a graduate student. Further broader impacts include
collaboration with the COSEE-NOW (Center for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence
Networked Ocean World) to develop educational products aimed at improving ocean
literacy. Funding support is provided by the Marine Geology and Geophysics
Program of NSF's Ocean Science Division and by the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).