* 0961728
* Collaborative Research: Organic geochemical and isotopic reconstructions of North Pacific climate and sea ice variability
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Konrad Hughen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2013
* USD 167,555.00

Reconstructing past sea ice cover is a fundamental challenge in
paleoceanography/paleoclimate research. Conceptual and numerical models of
abrupt changes and the role of high vs. low latitudes as the drivers of climate
change invoke sea ice as a principle cause of variability, but to date there
have been no reliable proxies of past sea ice extent. Understanding the role of
sea ice in past changes also critically impacts our understanding of the
consequences of future changes in Arctic sea ice cover. This research calibrates
and applies a set of new organic biomarkers (IP25 sea ice index, and TEX86
temperature index) to reconstruct changes in sea ice and associated sea surface
temperatures from a series of high sedimentation rate cores from the Bering and
Chukchi Seas. Specifically, the researchers will 1) produce a high latitude
spatial dataset of relative IP25 concentrations and compare the distribution of
these compounds with modern sea ice extent, 2) generate a new database of
biomarker distributions in surface sediments from high-latitude oceans and
compare with known SST variations, and 3) reconstruct past changes in seasonal
sea ice and associated sea surface temperatures during the late glacial and
Holocene from selected high latitude sites. In addition to the societal
relevance of better understanding the role of sea ice extent in climate change,
broader impacts include support of a PhD student, summer research projects for
undergraduates, and a new faculty member at the University of Texas at Austin.