* 0961128
* Collaborative Research: Transformation or Continuity in Americans' Definitions of Family
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2010,08/31/2012
* Brian Powell, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2012
* USD 73,971.00

SES-0961128&lt;br/&gt;Brian Powell&lt;br/&gt;Indiana
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0961189&lt;br/&gt;Lala
Steelman&lt;br/&gt;University of South Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project will conduct a nationally representative phone survey in
which an estimated 800 adults from the continental United States will be
interviewed about their definitions of family and the lines that they draw
around what they consider to be families. This survey constitutes the third wave
of a survey that was completed in 2003 and 2006. These data are the first
sociological surveys of this scope that tap into Americans' definitions of
family and their rationale behind these definitions. These data also are
distinctive in their inclusion of both close-ended and open-ended questions on
these topics. A comparison of the first two surveys suggests that between 2003
and 2006 there was a striking change in Americans? views regarding the meaning
of family?one that move toward a more inclusive definition of family. The
collection of data in 2010 would provide an opportunity to test whether this
change in Americans views has continued, accelerated, stalled or reversed. The
data also will enable the principal investigators to explore the potential
influence of state legalization of same-sex marriage on Americans? views
regarding same-sex couples. Closed-ended questions will be analyzed with
multivariate statistical analyses, and open-ended questions will be explored
with state-of-the-art qualitative analytical techniques. The inclusion of open-
ended questions (e.g., why they believe that certain living arrangements do or
do not count as family) also offers a unique glimpse into how people explain
their views regarding family.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How others define ?family? has numerous public
policy implications. Although public opinion is not the only factor that drives
social policy, changes in public policy are responsive in part to public views.
Recent ballot initiatives regarding same-sex adoption, foster care and marriage
further accentuate the potential influence of public definitions. Transformation
or continuity in Americans? views regarding family may be implicated in the
extension of (or restriction of) familial rights and benefits?for example,
insurance rights, access to health insurance, hospital visitation, child
custody, and end-of-life decisions. In addition, a valuable feature of this
project is the training of a large team of young scientists at two universities
(estimated at over twenty graduate students and fifteen undergraduates) in the
multiple aspects of the research process. Upon completion of the data
collection, students also will be encouraged to analyze these data by themselves
or in collaboration with the principal investigators. Finally, this project will
result in a data set about family that also should be of great use to other
scholars.