* 0961325
* Collaborative Research: Does larval transport or physiological tolerance set the southern range boundary of a northern blue mussel?
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Michael McCartney, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2014
* USD 226,137.00

Intellectual Merit This project will test whether the southern range boundary of
a northern blue mussel, Mytilus trossulus, is determined by limitations on the
dispersal of larvae, or the physiological tolerance of larvae and/or juveniles.
Mytilus trossulus and its sister species, M. edulis, co-occur throughout the
Canadian maritime provinces and the northern Gulf of Maine. While the abundance
of M. trossulus decreases abruptly south of the Canadian border, M. edulis
ranges south to North Carolina. Work to date has demonstrated that: 1) Adult M.
trossulus in northeastern Maine inhabit coastal sites, islands, and man-made
structures that are within the colder water of the Eastern Maine Coastal Current
(EMCC). 2) Drifters released in the EMCC rarely enter nearshore waters to the
south, suggesting that across-shelf transport is extremely limited. 3) Larvae of
the two species may differ slightly in thermal tolerance, and some evidence
suggests that tolerance may also be affected by nutritional status. 4) Mytilus
trossulus juveniles transplanted within the northeastern Maine region, but
outside of the EMCC, have high survivorship, while transplants further to the
southwest suffer high mortality. In combination, these results suggest that
larval transport sets the proximate range boundary within northeastern Maine (on
a scale of 10 km), but thermal tolerance would ultimately limit the distribution
on a larger spatial scale (200 km).

This research project is designed to test this pair of hypotheses via a
combination of field and lab experiments. Satellite drifters equipped with
temperature loggers deployed in and out of the EMCC during the season of M.
trossulus larval dispersal (mid-June to mid-August) will be used to quantify the
physical flow fields and temperature regimes during larval dispersal. Drogues
will allow us to assess whether larvae at different depths may experience
different flow fields. Data from hydrographic surveys, combined with regular
spatial and temporal sampling of mussel larvae and new settlers, will be used to
assess possible associations between larval and post-settlement stages and
different water masses. The physiological tolerance of new settlers will be
assayed via transplants to sites in and out of the EMCC. Finally, laboratory
growth and survival experiments will assay larval performance in different
thermal and feeding regimes. The investigators will use molecular markers to
identify the morphologically indistinguishable larvae and settlers of these
sibling species.

Broader Impacts

This project will provide training for one MS and one PhD student, and several
undergraduates. The PIs are at institutions that emphasize undergraduate and
graduate research, and our project will provide numerous student opportunities
for field and laboratory research in oceanography and benthic ecology. Such
research opportunities are likely to attract a number of students who would
otherwise pursue careers in biomedical research. The Gulf of Maine is home to a
thriving Mytilis edulis aquaculture industry, and M. trossulus is a commercially
inferior species ? growers are concerned about its possible spread. Hence a
better understanding of the factors determining the range boundary of this
species will help growers avoid M. trossulus spat. Results will be disseminated
to enhance communication with the Maine aquaculture community. All of the
fieldwork will be conducted in a region of Maine facing great educational
challenges; teachers from area schools will be recruited to assist with summer
field and laboratory work.

