* 0961649
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Methods Based on Parametric and Semiparametric Hierarchical Models to Solve Problems Related to Socio-Economic-Demographic Deprivation Measures
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Tapabrata Maiti, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2014
* USD 265,972.00

The existence of disparities among communities of diverse racial and economic
backgrounds has received considerable attention in last two decades or so.
Scholars, bureaucrats, legislators, governing bodies, and numerous other
constituents share a sustained concern about the persistent trend of disparity
across diverse communities. Today, there is an increasing demand for
quantitative tools to analyze such disparity information from high-throughput
sources. Simple descriptive statistics that relate to socio-economic, socio-
demographic, and socio-health deprivation measures often can mask the important
features while analyzing such data. Thus, the exploration of disparity can be
better understood by developing sophisticated statistical tools that can extract
the salient features from complex data sources. This project will explore
innovative multilevel modeling techniques to develop measures that are
scientifically more efficient and meaningful for these purposes. Specifically,
the research will develop new small area estimation models and estimation
techniques that encompass mean-variance relationship, distributional robustness,
and multiple comparisons using hierarchical and nonparametric Bayesian
approaches. Furthermore, some estimating equation approaches will be developed
to study the association between socio-demographic and socio-economic variables
with cancer incidence, linked via multilevel generalized linear models. The
methods potentially are suitable for analyzing high-dimensional and sparse
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The statistical development will enrich small area
estimation technique in various dimensions. The Dirichlet process-based robust
modeling will advance the research on clustering in the context of analyzing
socio-economic data. The multiple comparison procedures will enhance the
simultaneous inference literature in the context of hierarchical modeling. The
methods also will have implications in other areas of research such as
education, epidemiology, and genetics. In addition, the project will contribute
towards research-based training of graduate students and foster
interdisciplinary collaboration.