* 0961135
* CASC 20th Anniversary Symposium: Changing Science and Engineering - the Impact of HPC
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Stanley Ahalt, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Manish Parashar
* 09/30/2010
* USD 25,000.00

Project Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Coalition for Academic Scientific
Computation (CASC) is an organization of about 60 of the nation's leading
academic institutions in high performance computing and scientific computation,
including national laboratories and the nation's largest academic scientific
computing centers. The objective of this Symposium is to provide a forum for
presentations and open discussions among the attendees on the topic of "Changing
Science and Engineering: the Impact of HPC." The presentations will yield a
better understanding of the role and value of academic scientific computing
centers in promoting the use of HPC in advancing science and engineering. The
forum will provide opportunities to set new directions for the future and help
in crafting strategies for the support and evangelizing of academic scientific
computation nationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is the gathering of industry and academic thought leaders with CASC
members to provide a forum for establishing a significant future strategic
vision for the role of academic scientific computing centers in the nation's
scientific computing infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the project is the opportunity to set new directions for the future and help in
crafting strategies for the support and evangelizing of academic scientific
computation nationally.