* 0961827
* Collaborative Research:  The Impact of Multiple Nursery Areas and Adult Age Structure on the Population Dynamics of Marine Fishes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* John Wilkin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2013
* USD 192,908.00

Many marine populations exhibit complex life histories in which larval and
juvenile stages are spatially separated from adults. This is the case for many
coastal-spawning, estuarine-dependent fishes which utilize multiple estuaries as
nursery grounds to ensure that recruitment failure in any single estuary does
not translate to total recruitment failure at the population level. For these
species, the location and timing of spawning is believed to regulate the pattern
of supply of larvae to potential estuarine nursery areas. Furthermore, many of
these species exhibit age-dependent coastal migrations which increase in
amplitude with age. Thus, there is the potential that changes in the age
structure in the population can affect the pattern of supply of larvae to
nursery areas and structure the pattern of recruitment. The investigators will
carry out an integrated empirical and simulation approach to study the sources,
patterns and consequences of larval supply to estuarine nursery areas for
Atlantic menhaden (Brevoortia tyrannus) along the East Coast of the US. The
first goal will be to quantify the contribution of these nursery areas to coast
wide recruitment. Juvenile menhaden from nursery areas from Massachusetts to
Georgia will be sampled and the microchemical constituents of their otoliths
will be characterized. These chemical signatures will be used to assign the
nursery affinities of adult menhaden in the coastwide population. The
investigators will test the null hypothesis that the Chesapeake Bay remains the
most important source of recruits to the population. By determining the nursery
affinities of adults from different year classes in the population they will
assess whether the contribution of nurseries varies or has shifted over time.
The second goal is use a population model linked to an individual-based coupled
physical-biological model of recruitment to evaluate whether the known age-
dependent migrations of adult menhaden are sufficient to cause the observed
shifts in the distribution of larval menhaden that seed potential nursery areas.
The simulation model will assist in evaluating mechanisms behind observed
changes in the distribution of juvenile menhaden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will contribute to the fundamental understanding of the regulation of spatially-
structured marine populations. The last decade has seen the range extension of
several estuarine-dependent marine species with dispersive larvae and the long-
term recruitment decline of others. This integrated research program seeks to
explore the effects of population demography, oceanographic circulation, and
nursery site diversity on subsequent population dynamics. Given the documented
changes in habitat quality in many estuarine nursery areas, and the anticipated
impacts of climate change on oceanographic circulation, distributional changes
in individual species are likely to become more common. Moreover, given the
pivotal role that many estuarine-dependent species play in many marine
ecosystems, understanding distributional changes will have direct consequences
for the structure and function of the ecosystems to which they belong. The
project will also train young scientists in areas of research (quantitative
fisheries ecology, physical oceanography) for which there is current a national
need.