* 0961713
* Collaborative Research:  The Physics and Statistics of Global Sea Level Change
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Carl Wunsch, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,360,390.00

Sea level rise (and in some places, sea level fall) is one of the most
troublesome of ongoing environmental changes, with potential and likely impacts
generating huge costs for inevitable adaptation. Despite a growing literature
discussing past, present and future sea level shifts, quantitative understanding
of the causes of both regional and global mean sea level change remains quite
poor?because the shifts reflect some of the most basic elements of physical
oceanography, geodesy, glaciology, and meteorology, including biases from
inadequate and shifting observation systems and small but accumulating errors in
ocean models. Almost all of the resulting issues are discussed somewhere in the
voluminous and growing literature, but primarily in isolation. The intent of
this project is to combine into one framework, that of a specially adapted ocean
general circulation model and all of the available data, to quantify the causes
of regional and global sea levelchange. Separate, but overlapping efforts would
be directed to the period(s) since 1992, and the much more data sparse periods
prior to that time.

Intellectual Merit: Understanding of the components, spatial distribution and
rates of sea level rise has enormous social consequences. A sea level rise of 1
mm per year versus one of 4 mm per year sustained for 25 years implies
adaptation costs that differ by orders of magnitude. Observed regional rates of
change, which are the ones of societal importance, are more than an order of
magnitude greater and of both signs.

Broader Impacts: At the present time one cannot make credible predictions, and
this work should take a major step toward that goal. Impacts and adaptation
strategies are not part of this proposal, but it should be of interest to anyone
concerned about those problems.