* 0961157
* Collaborative Research: Does larval transport or physiological tolerance set the southern range boundary of a northern blue mussel?
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,07/31/2012
* Philip Yund, University of New England
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2012
* USD 465,663.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project will test whether the southern range
boundary of a northern blue mussel, Mytilus trossulus, is determined by
limitations on the dispersal of larvae, or the physiological tolerance of larvae
and/or juveniles. Mytilus trossulus and its sister species, M. edulis, co-occur
throughout the Canadian maritime provinces and the northern Gulf of Maine. While
the abundance of M. trossulus decreases abruptly south of the Canadian border,
M. edulis ranges south to North Carolina. Work to date has demonstrated that: 1)
Adult M. trossulus in northeastern Maine inhabit coastal sites, islands, and
man-made structures that are within the colder water of the Eastern Maine
Coastal Current (EMCC). 2) Drifters released in the EMCC rarely enter nearshore
waters to the south, suggesting that across-shelf transport is extremely
limited. 3) Larvae of the two species may differ slightly in thermal tolerance,
and some evidence suggests that tolerance may also be affected by nutritional
status. 4) Mytilus trossulus juveniles transplanted within the northeastern
Maine region, but outside of the EMCC, have high survivorship, while transplants
further to the southwest suffer high mortality. In combination, these results
suggest that larval transport sets the proximate range boundary within
northeastern Maine (on a scale of 10 km), but thermal tolerance would ultimately
limit the distribution on a larger spatial scale (200
km).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is designed to test this pair of
hypotheses via a combination of field and lab experiments. Satellite drifters
equipped with temperature loggers deployed in and out of the EMCC during the
season of M. trossulus larval dispersal (mid-June to mid-August) will be used to
quantify the physical flow fields and temperature regimes during larval
dispersal. Drogues will allow us to assess whether larvae at different depths
may experience different flow fields. Data from hydrographic surveys, combined
with regular spatial and temporal sampling of mussel larvae and new settlers,
will be used to assess possible associations between larval and post-settlement
stages and different water masses. The physiological tolerance of new settlers
will be assayed via transplants to sites in and out of the EMCC. Finally,
laboratory growth and survival experiments will assay larval performance in
different thermal and feeding regimes. The investigators will use molecular
markers to identify the morphologically indistinguishable larvae and settlers of
these sibling species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide training for one MS and
one PhD student, and several undergraduates. The PIs are at institutions that
emphasize undergraduate and graduate research, and our project will provide
numerous student opportunities for field and laboratory research in oceanography
and benthic ecology. Such research opportunities are likely to attract a number
of students who would otherwise pursue careers in biomedical research. The Gulf
of Maine is home to a thriving Mytilis edulis aquaculture industry, and M.
trossulus is a commercially inferior species - growers are concerned about its
possible spread. Hence a better understanding of the factors determining the
range boundary of this species will help growers avoid M. trossulus spat.
Results will be disseminated to enhance communication with the Maine aquaculture
community. All of the fieldwork will be conducted in a region of Maine facing
great educational challenges; teachers from area schools will be recruited to
assist with summer field and laboratory work.