* 0961579
* US GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section: Trace Metals in the Surface Waters of the North Atlantic Transect - Plus an Archive of the Vertical Profiles
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Kenneth Bruland, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2012
* USD 427,307.00

As a complementary addition to the U.S. North Atlantic GEOTRACES cruise, a
scientist from the University of California, Santa Cruz will provide the core
program with an additional 500 surface samples collected using a surface clean
fish sampling system. The samples will be analyzed for a suite of key GEOTRACES
dissolved trace metals including iron, aluminum, manganese, zinc, cadmium,
copper, and non-key elements such as cobalt, nickel, lead and silver. Given the
surface samples will be collected from surface waters with a wide range in
productivity and export production, as well as contrasting internal, riverine
and atmospheric inputs, it will provide the science community with an extensive
data set for investigating the sources and removal processes for trace metals
from the surface ocean. The availability of this extensive data set also will
facilitate collaboration with researchers investigating atmospheric deposition
and modeling of transport and cycling of metals in the surface ocean. In
addition, data on surface samples collected just prior to arrival on station and
upon departure will provide an important check on the data from near surface
samples collected with the GEOTRACES carousel sampling system close to the
vicinity of the ship. This data will help confirm that all is well with the near
surface carousel samples or, if needed, provide a mechanism to correct the near
surface data from the carousel sampling system. Besides the surface water
samples, an archive of about 528 samples from vertical profiles will be
collected from each of the 22 standard or normal GEOTRACES full-depth profiles.
Vertical profiles of the trace metals will be analyzed at the 6 "super stations"
to facilitate an intercomparison study with other GEOTRACES analysts to ensure
quality control between our surface water data and the vertical profile data for
the various key GEOTRACES trace metals.

As regards broader impacts, the researcher will continue his trace metal
intercalibration efforts by providing the chemical oceanography community with
reference samples and baseline data for these samples which benefits not only
U.S. scientists but the international community as well. Six months of a
postdoc's salary will be supported by this project with the remaining funds
provided by the EU GEOTRACES program.