* 0961735
* Globalization, Trade, and the Task Content of U.S. Employment
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* David Rigby, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2013
* USD 214,870.00

The structure of the global economy currently is being transformed in ways that
will have profound implications for the location of production, the nature of
work, and economic well-being around the world. Early stages of globalization
were characterized by the international exchange of final products, whether port
for wheat or automobiles for apparel, resulting in a spatial division of labor
that was sorted by industry. In contrast, the current round of globalization is
separating production tasks once integrated within firms and industries,
shifting them to locations around the world. To understand the implications of
this shift for the U.S. economy, greater understanding is needed about tasks
that can be "offshored" and which are likely to remain place-bound. The
objective of this research project is to measure how trade has impacted the task
structure of the U.S. economy. While theoretical models of task trade have
recently been developed, empirical exploration has been severely limited by lack
of appropriate data. The investigators will create a unique dataset suited to
measuring the impact of task trade by linking detailed U.S. Census microdata
that describe trade flows, firms, workers and the tasks in which they are
engaged. These data will enable the researchers to explore three primary
questions: (1) What is the impact of trade on the task structure of the U.S.
economy? (2) How is trade-induced job loss related to the analytic and
interpersonal complexity of occupations? (3) How has the subnational geography
of tasks shifted in the U.S. economy over the last fifteen years, and how are
these shifts related to the regional impacts of trade and the characteristics of
local production systems?

In today's highly interconnected world, patterns of trade are closely linked to
economic performance and the geography of work. This project will improve
scientific knowledge regarding the transformation of the global system of trade
from one premised on exchanges of final goods to one focused on the exchange of
a rapidly increasing array of intermediate goods and services. The project will
measure the impact of the changing nature of trade on the structure of work in
the U.S. economy and the differential effect of that change across U.S. regions.
The results of this project will help to identify the nature of jobs that are
robust to trade competition and those footloose activities that are likely to be
increasingly located offshore. The project also will contribute to ongoing
debates in fields like education and labor economics regarding the preparation
required for 21st century workers in advanced economies.