* 0961369
* Collaborative research: Modeling control of Antarctic Bottom Water  production by small-scale bathymetry and tides
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Tamay Ozgokmen, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 06/30/2014
* USD 347,494.00

Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) is the dominant abyssal water mass in the global
ocean. It is produced as very cold, dense water formed over the Antarctic
continental shelves sinks down the continental slope as a density outflow,
entraining ambient deep-ocean water masses as it descends. There has been recent
progress in understanding the dynamics and modeling other major density
currents, notably those in the Nordic and marginal seas. However, less progress
has been made in understanding Antarctic density flows, hampered primarily by a
lack of detailed field data. As a consequence we do not, at this time, have a
clear answer to two following fundamental questions: What is the relative
importance of processes believed to determine the production rate and
hydrographic characteristics of AABW at the primary formation sites around
Antarctica? Why do Antarctic outflows retain sufficient density contrast to sink
to the deep ocean floor, whereas most other outflows entrain sufficiently
vigorously to reach neutral density at intermediate
depths?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on an extensive profile and mooring data set
obtained in and around an energetic density outflow during the Antarctic Slope
(AnSlope) field program in 2003-2005 in the NW Ross Sea, the investigators have
defined a numerical modeling study that can address the above questions.
Analyses of the field data, and exploratory modeling efforts, suggest that
Antarctic outflows are significantly impacted by the following factors: (1)
small-scale (sub-Rossby radius) topographic variability (corrugations, isobath
convergence, continental slope curvature, steep slopes); (2) nonlinear
interaction of the outflow with cross-slope advection and mixing associated with
'independent' energetic processes such as tides; and (3) nonlinear equation-of-
state effects, notably thermobaricity. An extensive set of numerical studies
using a spectral element Large Eddy Simulation (LES) model will be carried out
to study the sensitivity of outflow dynamics and AABW production to these
factors. The models will be guided by Antarctic field data (AnSlope, and
complementary programs in the southern Weddell Sea), but will be applied to
idealized topographies and hydrographic fields. We will develop
parameterizations of Antarctic density outflows and AABW production rates, and
test these within the framework of coarser-resolution regional ocean models
using Regional Ocean Modeling Sysytem. The study will address the overarching
objective of improving the representation of AABW formation in climate system
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This project is the first
known application of an LES model to the climatologically significant problem of
global bottom water formation around Antarctica. We will use this tool to
quantify the relative importance of the principal factors influencing the
production rate and properties of AABW over parameter ranges that cover the
major Antarctic outflows. Outcomes will be compared and contrasted with outflows
elsewhere in the world ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
parameterizations that we will develop will improve our ability to simulate AABW
production in earth climate system models that cannot resolve the small spatial
and temporal scales of the outflow and its entrainment processes. AABW is a
critical component of the meridional overturning circulation and is the dominant
contributor to ventilation of the global deep ocean. One graduate student will
be supported at RSMAS/UM by this grant. The Earth and Space Research (ESR) Co-
investigator will continue to provide scientific oversight for a Western Oregon
University grant to develop K-12 curricula and educate teachers in climate
science. Presentations will be given at annual training workshops, and Oregon
and National Science Teacher Association meetings. Both ESR and the University
of Miami maintain specific web pages focused on education and outreach.