* 0961474
* Leaf Hydrophobicity and Canopy Storage Relationships of Common Species in Semi-Arid Environments of the Western United States
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2010,10/31/2011
* Curtis Holder, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 10/31/2011
* USD 97,831.00

The repellency of a water droplet by a leaf surface (i.e., leaf hydrophobicity)
is a common adaptation among plant species in habitats exposed to daily
precipitation. Leaf hydrophobicity may be an important variable that influences
canopy storage capacity during a rainfall event. Canopy storage capacity is the
amount of water held by the canopy during a rainfall event before water starts
to drip as indirect throughfall. Species with highly repellent leaf surfaces may
increase the quantities of throughfall at a site and result in greater
hydrological inputs beneath the canopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Curtis
Holder in the Department of Geography and Environmental Studies at the
University of Colorado at Colorado Springs will examine the extent to which leaf
hydrophobicity influences canopy storage capacity in common species of the semi-
arid Western United States. Specifically, the three objectives of this project
are to determine if leaf hydrophobicity and canopy storage capacity differs
between species with contrasting leaf habits and growth forms, to compare
methodologies that calculate leaf hydrophobicity and canopy storage capacity,
and to determine if leaf hydrophobicity influences canopy storage capacity on a
leaf area basis. To address these three objectives, the investigator will
measure canopy storage capacity by a mass-balance approach with rainfall
simulation and an immersion method. Additionally, the investigator will measure
leaf hydrophobicity by calculating the contact angle between a water droplet and
the leaf surface using a digital camera and goniometer. Canopy characteristics
(leaf and woody area, leaf orientation, and leaf surface properties) of each
species will also be determined. If differences in leaf hydrophobicity and
canopy storage capacity between species are significant, then hydrological
inputs to a watershed may be significantly influenced by vegetation changes.
Within this context, this project will increase our understanding of
hydrological processes and inform the planning and management of vegetation
cover in watersheds contributing as raw water source regions for municipalities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance our understanding of hydrologic
fluxes within watersheds by examining the significance of leaf hydrophobicity as
a mechanism that influences canopy storage capacity. By measuring leaf
hydrophobicity and canopy storage capacity of common species within a watershed,
this project will provide information on the significance of leaf hydrophobicity
in forest hydrology models that could enhance our understanding of the delivery
of water resources from municipal watersheds. Several undergraduate and graduate
students will receive valuable educational opportunities by participating
directly in field data collection during this project.