* 0961947
* Targeted and comparative viral community genomics of the Eastern North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Matthew Sullivan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2014
* USD 576,716.00

Two climatically and biogeochemically important features characterize the
Eastern North Pacific (ENP). This region encompasses one of the planet's largest
oxygen minimum zones, and annually hosts a phytoplankton bloom that leads to
some of the highest dimethyl sulfide (DMS) concentrations observed. Oxygen
minimum zones (OMZs) play integral roles in marine biogeochemical cycles, as
major sinks for nitrogen and sources for climatologically active trace gases
including methane and nitrous oxide. There is increasing evidence that projected
ocean warming and circulation changes is decreasing dissolved oxygen
concentrations within the coastal and interior regions of the ENP, causing
lateral and vertical OMZ expansion. This will have a direct effect on coastal
benthic ecosystems and the productivity of marine fisheries, as well as
potentially positive climatalogical feedbacks. In addition, the DMS produced in
the ENP is a potential negative feedback for atmospheric warming through its
role in atmospheric cloud formation, while it also accounts for approximately
half of the planet's total biogenic sulfur flux. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI of
this project has collaborated with Dr. Steven Hallam (UBC) since June 2008 to
archive viral community DNA, paired with high molecular weight genomic DNA from
microbial biomass (since June 2006) and a rich synoptic oceanographic
metadataset, along defined redox gradients in the ENP as part of the Canadian-
funded Line P time series program. The viral samples focus on open-ocean station
OSP and span surface waters, hypoxic interior, and upper and lower oxichypoxic
transition zones. Microbial investigations, ongoing since 2006, have examined
community diversity and population structure of indigenous microbial groups in
the ENP. Time-series analyses have revealed dynamic seasonal changes, consistent
with changing light, temperature, and nutrient conditions. However, little is
known about the role that co-occurring viral communities play in modulating
microbial community dynamics and responses to both water column hypoxia and
massive DMS production and sulfur cycling. Marine viruses are responsible for
the largest flux of carbon in the oceans by lysing microbial cells, while also
encoding "host" metabolic genes. In the case of marine cyanobacteria, phage
directly impact global carbon cycling by encoding ~60% of the core reaction
center genes in surface water photosystems. Understanding coupled viral,
microbiological and biogeochemical processes the ENP is critical to understand,
predict, or one day possibly mitigate changes in productivity and trace gas
cycling associated with OMZ expansion and changing DMS production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate viral community diversity
and metabolic capacity through viral metagenomes sampled along defined
spatiotemporal gradients in the ENP. The endeavor is highly leveraged with
funding already secured for sequencing 20 viral metagenomes, and their co-
occurring microbial communities at high phylogenetic resolution using 16S
hypervariable sequence tagging through the DOE JGI Community Sequencing Program
and the Moore Foundation viral sequencing initiative. This project will identify
relevant patterns of viral-host interaction with profound ecological and
evolutionary consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The microbial
and viral sampling effort will be performed by post-docs and graduate students
in the context of a 50+ year oceanographic sampling effort that allows these
trainees see the vast biogeochemical and physical oceanographic measurements
required to "survey" an ocean community. This project will expose undergraduates
and high school students to the excitement of field-based oceanographic research
through a combination of direct involvement in research, a Biosphere 2 "hands-on
sampling training", and a new course at Tucson High School entitled "Ocean
viruses: From isolates to genomes and metagenomes".