* 0961716
* Dynamics of near-surface eastward flows in the South Indian Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Ryo Furue, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 06/30/2015
* USD 446,113.00

Objectives and intellectual Merit: A remarkable aspect of the upper-ocean
circulation in the tropical and subtropical South Indian Ocean (SIO) is the
presence of near-surface, eastward flow across the basin, which often appears as
a set of distinct currents and jets. These currents have been detected in
observations and simulated in numerical models. At the same time, their
underlying dynamics remain unclear. In this regard, they flow counter to the
westward direction predicted by both Ekman and Sverdrup theory. Furthermore,
they appear to be linked to the Leeuwin Current (LC) along the west coast of
Australia and to larger-scale circulations , namely, the Indonesian Throughflow
(ITF) and the Southern Ocean. Thus, the eastward flow represents a fundamental
gap in our understanding of the large-scale mean flow in the SIO.

This project will use analyses of in situ observations and numerical models to
fill that gap. The observational analysis will rely on three main datasets. Each
dataset combines Argo data with historical data, the different mapping
techniques resulting in products with characteristics suited to different
aspects of the analysis: the CARS dataset developed at CSIRO is a high-quality
monthly-mean dataset of T , S , and other water-mass properties, which allows
for tracing watermasses; the IPRC dataset incorporates the additional product of
absolute dynamic topography, allowing an estimation of absolute geostrophic
velocity; and the UTas dataset maps Argo and historical data on density
surfaces, which will be useful in resolving finer frontal features and
characterizing downwelling/upwelling regions. Satellite winds will be used to
compute Ekman and Sverdrup flows and to force the models. To test specific
hypotheses about the processes that control the surface eastward currents, an
ocean circulation model will be used.

The research team combines the talents of scientists at the IPRC, CSIRO, and the
University of Tasmania, with scientists at the latter institutions contributing
their extensive knowledge of in situ observations in the SIO to the project
Broader Impact: Understanding the dynamics of these first-order features is
necessary to validate and improve climate models. Moreover, these currents
interact with the LC and the ITF, and are likely part of a basin-scale
overturning circulation closed by downwelling within the LC and near the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current. The dynamics of the surface eastward currents
therefore should play an important role in SIO decadal variability. The results
will likely apply to similar features in the other oceans.