* 0961289
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Why do forensic evaluators with access to the same information come to different conclusions when retained by opposing sides in legal proceedings?
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Marcus Boccaccini, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 04/30/2013
* USD 125,622.00

How objective are expert witnesses when they are retained by one side in
adversarial legal proceedings? The social sciences have offered almost no data
to address "adversarial allegiance," the presumed tendency for experts to reach
conclusions that support the party who retained them. Recently, the principal
investigators found strong evidence of adversarial allegiance among some
forensic evaluators who scored risk assessment instruments for sex offenders
facing trial. But only carefully-controlled experimental research can identify
why adversarial allegiance exists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses an
experimental design to examine a) whether allegiance effects in risk assessment
scores occur when evaluators in adversarial proceedings do not get to choose the
side of the case they work for, and b) the extent to which evaluators'
conclusions appear to be the product of decision making processes that are known
to lead to biased conclusions in other contexts. Participants are forensic
evaluators and graduate students who score offender risk measures for one side
in a sex offender trial. Participants will complete questionnaires before and
after they score offender data, allowing researchers to assess the pre-existing
attitudes and the decision making processes associated with any allegiance
effect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results will help courts better scrutinize expert
scientific testimony. Results will also inform training curricula to reduce bias
in forensic psychological evaluation, and perhaps in other forensic science
disciplines. Regardless of their discipline, experts who are retained by one
party in adversarial legal proceedings are probably vulnerable to allegiance for
similar reasons. Eventually, a research program that identifies the processes
underlying adversarial allegiance can inform interventions to minimize these
processes.