* 0961977
* Measuring the Incapacitation Effect of Incarceration
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2011
* Steven Raphael, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 12/31/2011
* USD 83,229.00

A central question in the fields of criminology and the economics of crime
concerns the extent to which incarcerating the criminally active reduces
national crime rates. The short-run causal pathways connecting incarceration to
crime are two-fold. First, those who are incarcerated cannot commit crimes.
Second, individuals may be deterred by the threat of incarceration. Despite the
simplicity of these ideas, the results from empirical research vary
considerably. Much of this research suffers from a key problem: any societal
forces that increase criminal activity will increase the incarceration rate. For
example, if the economy were to sour and more people commit crime as a result,
more people will be arrested and sent to prison. In the aggregate, we observe
crime increasing as incarceration increases, creating the false impressions that
incarceration increases crime.

This project will measure the effect of incarceration on crime by making use of
an unusual policy event. In August 2006, the Italian government released one-
third of the nation's prison inmates in an effort to relieve prison
overcrowding. Any inmate with less than three years remaining was immediately
released. As a result, in August of 2006 the Italian prison population declined
abruptly, discretely, and substantially. Since this change in incarceration was
clearly driven by a policy choice rather than changes in external factors that
cause crime, any observable changes in crime surrounding the pardon can be
attributed to the change in the prison population. This project will evaluate
the impact of this pardon on Italian crime rates. The resulting empirical
results will provide estimates of the amount of crime caused by prisoner
releases and will be used to produce estimates of the annual crimes prevented
through incarceration. Most importantly, the project will provide estimates that
are free from bias associated with a reverse impact of crime on incarceration.