* 0961814
* Collaborative Research: Host-environment-pathogen interactions in a model coral disease system
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Sean Callahan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2014
* USD 276,909.00

Diseases of marine organisms have emerged as a serious problem contributing to
the decline of coral reef resources worldwide. Loss of coral reef habitats carry
social and economic implications especially in island states, such as Hawaii,
which depend on reefs for food, shoreline protection and tourism. Our ability to
manage coral diseases is hampered by a lack of knowledge of which environmental
variables affect disease, mechanisms of host defense, and the etiology of most
of the numerous described coral diseases. The PIs of this project discovered a
coral disease system that can be used as a model to explore many components of
the host-environment-pathogen triangle of disease causation. Montipora white
syndrome (MWS) is an infectious disease that results in progressive tissue loss
on colonies of Montipora capitata, and has been found on reefs throughout the
Hawaiian archipelago. It is particularly prevalent in Kaneohe Bay, Oahu, which
has a long history of reduced water quality, and this suboptimal environment
sets the stage where host-pathogen interactions occur. In Kaneohe Bay, M.
capitata is a major reef-building species, and is found in two color morphs (red
and orange) that harbor different clades of zooxanthellae. During preliminary
surveys, the PIs discovered intraspecific variability in response to MWS between
color morphs. Although the red morph was dominant within survey transects (80%
of the colonies), the orange morph was disproportionately affected by MWS (70%
of the affected colonies). Microbial studies found a shift in bacterial
communities on MWS-affected and healthy M. capitata and allowed identification
of potential pathogens. Numerous bacterial strains were cultured and screened
for pathogenicity and three strains, which produced lesions, were identified as
potential pathogens. Two of the putative pathogens (Vibrio spp.) produced
diffuse tissue whereas the other bacterial strain (Pseudoalteromonas sp.)
produced acute tissue loss.

In the field, the PIs also observed two patterns of tissue loss on M. capitata;
a slow, chronic pattern of tissue loss, which they followed through time with
tagged colonies (chronic MWS), but also a rapid onset of acute tissue loss
(acute MWS). Thus they discovered an infectious coral disease that results in
significant coral mortality that has the unique component of differences in
disease susceptibility among color morphs. The PIs identified three potential
bacterial pathogens that will be used to investigate underlying factors
affecting the coral-environment-pathogen triad of disease causation. The Hawaii
Institute of Marine Biology (HIMB) is located within Kaneohe Bay allowing year-
round access to reefs for research on Montipora white syndrome. The goal of this
project is to investigate the host- environment-pathogen triangle of disease
causation for Montipora white syndrome. The objectives of this research will be
to: 1) investigate mechanisms contributing to differential disease resistance in
red (less susceptible) vs. orange (more susceptible) morphs of M. capitata. The
PIs will compare antimicrobial activity in the holobiont, mucus and mucus-
associated bacteria of the two color morphs of M. capitata, and will compare the
natural coral-associated microbial flora between the two color morphs; 2) use
manipulative aquarium studies to determine whether environmental stressors
(elevated temperature, nutrient stress) differentially affect the progression or
transmission efficiency of MWS in red vs. orange morphs of M. capitata; 3) use
challenge experiments to confirm the role of bacterial pathogens as causative
agents of MWS, and to determine the response of red vs. orange morphs of M.
capitata to three putative pathogens. This project will involve a
multidisciplinary team to provide a broader perspective of coral disease
processes. This will be the first comprehensive study conducted on a coral
disease in Hawaii.

Broader impacts and integration of research/education will consist of
multidisciplinary, hands-on research experiences for graduate and undergraduate
students from the University of Hawaii and the University of Mississippi. Both
universities have diverse student bodies and large complements of minority
students. The UM graduate student will also have the opportunity to contribute
to the fieldwork in Hawaii. Information from this project will be integrated
into general biology classes at UH West Oahu and microbiology classes at UH
Manoa, both of which serve native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders. This project
will provide opportunities for undergraduate students from Pacific Islands to
experience research through the Undergraduate Research Mentoring (URM) program
sponsored at UH. K-12 education will include integration of these results into
classes for high school students participating in the PaCES/B-WET Summer
Environmental Science Program for high school students coordinated through HIMB
each summer. It will also be used for training students through the He'e Nalu,
an environmental science program for at-risk youth. In Mississippi, the public
will be informed through the Central Gulf of Mexico Center for Ocean Sciences
Education Excellence (COSEE) and J.L. Scott Marine Education Center.