* 0961163
* Collaborative Research: Developing A Prototype Drifter to Measure the Oceanic Geomagnetic Field
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Maurice Tivey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2014
* USD 330,087.00

The PI's request funding to build an inexpensive magnetic drifter that works
well for a typical, hypothesis-driven NSF project that studies a specific
region. They envision a mode of data collection where investigators release a
flotilla of inexpensive surface drifters upstream of an area they wish to study
with magnetic field data. The drifters pass over the study site, collecting the
desired data. These relatively, small, low power and inexpensive magnetic
sensors can be obtained and combined or integrated with the circuitry within the
drifter. Because the drifter moves slowly, the magnetometer can be set up to
read the geomagnetic field infrequently keeping the data rate
low.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic field data from the oceans have been critical
for understanding the origin, evolution and structure of the ocean basins. The
marine magnetic stripe anomalies not only document Earth?s magnetic field
polarity reversals but also form the basis for the Geomagnetic Polarity
Timescale and are used to reconstruct the history of the ocean basins. These
anomalies are best resolved by sea surface magnetic measurements. Satellite
magnetic measurements, while global in extent, lack the lateral resolution to
resolve these magnetic stripe anomalies in detail. While we have a working
knowledge of most of the ocean basins there are areas, such as the southern
ocean, that have only sparse shiptrack coverage. In a recent global compilation
for the World Digital Magnetic Anomaly Map (WDMAM, Purucker, 2007) the available
data was so sparse that a model of magnetic anomalies was used to help
interpolate data. Shiptime is expensive and global coverage in remote areas is
simply not feasible in the near future. The solution we believe is to use the
proven technology of ocean drifters and floats used by the physical
oceanographic community and mount small, low power, inexpensive magnetometer
sensors to these drifters to cover areas of the ocean that are undersampled at
present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
broader impact emphasized in the proposal seems mainly the advanced training of
a post-doc; and potentially involving a summer undergraduate student. Clearly
the ability to collect much-needed geomagnetic data at a fraction of the cost of
ship time would have broad impacts in the geosciences community. The proposal
will support a female postdoctoral fellow. Data obtained will be used by many
other researchers and have a broad impact throughout the tectonics community.