* 0961227
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Unintended Side Effects of Increased DNA Capabilities
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2011
* Brenda Velazquez, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 09/30/2011
* USD 10,597.00

Forensic DNA analysis has provided swift justice in countless crimes and has
proven particularly useful in identifying rapists. Because forensic DNA evidence
is especially useful for the investigation of sexual crimes, the development of
the new technology has undoubtedly facilitated the prosecution of sexual
assaults. Less noticed, however, has been the possibility that unanticipated
consequences of the increasing availability of forensic DNA technology may, at
the same time, inadvertently discourage the prosecution of sexual assaults,
especially in cases of non-stranger/acquaintance rape. The increased likelihood
of convictions in rape cases where identity is the issue may shift prosecutorial
attention, resources and even enthusiasm towards the prosecution of stranger
rather than non-stranger/ acquaintance rape cases. This could potentially retard
or even reverse the progress made by the feminist and anti-rape movements of the
1960s and 70s to recognize and prosecute non-stranger/acquaintance rape.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a study of the social impact of technology on the
prosecution of sexual assault cases. A longitudinal analysis of alleged cases of
adult rape brought before a U.S. County Attorney's Office over a 14-year time
period will help to determine if there are unintended consequences of technology
on a crime whose definition is historically malleable and which is, in part,
dependent on social stereotypes and commonly held notions of gender appropriate
behavior. In addition, in-depth interviews with individuals involved in the
legal system's response to rape claims, both in the participant county and the
surrounding area will complement the quantitative analysis of rape prosecutions.
The researchers seek to measure the impact of technological innovation on the
ongoing social construction of the social problem of non-stranger/acquaintance
rape.