* 0961037
* Federal Statistics Fellowship Program
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2010,09/30/2017
* Keith Crank, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,241,015.00

This award continues NSF support for the American Statistical Association's
Federal Statistics Fellowship Program. The Fellows Program also is supported by
the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The overall objective of
the program is to foster collaborative and interdisciplinary research efforts
that will stimulate the development and advancement of methodology and social
science research relevant to issues on which Federal statistical agencies seek
to provide information. The program accomplishes this goal by bringing academic
researchers into the supporting Federal statistical agencies to work with agency
statisticians and social scientists on problems of mutual interest. Specific
research topics will vary but are likely to include survey methodology
(including questionnaire design, data collection, estimation, and analysis),
social and demographic studies (including research on the decennial Census
undercount, coverage analysis of demographic surveys, and special problems of
collecting data on sensitive issues), and economic measurement and analysis
(including micro level studies of industry sectors, measurement of labor force
characteristics, and measurement of non-wage benefits).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to basic research, the Fellows Program aims to achieve the following
goals: provide academic scholars with the unique opportunity to have "hands-on"
access to federal agency data; bring about an improvement of the quality of the
data collected and disseminated by agencies; develop a research group of
personnel for the future recruitment of statisticians and other research
scientists to help fill government needs; stimulate methodological and
substantive research in academia on the problems of collecting and analyzing
data that provide the basic information for making decisions that can have
significant effects on society; and increase the interaction and collaborative
research and education among federal agencies and between federal agencies and
academic institutions. The Fellows Program directly benefits both the
researchers supported by the program and the participating Federal statistical
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;