* 0961125
* Collaborative Research: Transformations in Political Party Organizations and the Rise of Candidate-Centered Elections in the U.S., 1878-2008
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,01/31/2011
* James Snyder, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carol A. Mershon
* 01/31/2011
* USD 154,556.00

Candidate-centered politics and personal voting in the United States are much
stronger today than they were in the past, and party organizations are much
weaker. This project asks two main questions: i) Why did this happen?; ii) What
are the implications of this development for the future of American
democracy?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional wisdom in the American Politics
literature is that the era of candidate-centered elections took hold sometime in
the 1950s or 1960s. At this point the traditional party organizations finally
succumbed to a variety of pressures, including changes in campaign advertising
technologies such as television, the replacement of patronage with civil service
employment, and an increase in the resources available to individual elected
officials for constituency service. Voters saw parties as increasingly
irrelevant, and their partisan loyalties grew weaker. However, several prominent
scholars argue that this transition began earlier and was more gradual. They
emphasize the importance of primary elections in weakening party organizations
and cultivating personalistic politics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
pursue several empirical projects that will shed some light on the relative
importance of various factors that might have weakened party organizations and
fostered candidate-centered elections. How important was the direct primary? the
expansion of civil service and decline of patronage? the introduction of new
communications technology? By how much did the campaign efforts of candidates
increase relative to those of parties, and when did these changes occur? Did
they occur earlier in states with competitive
primaries?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will also investigate the effects
of candidate-centered voting in primary elections. How often do incumbents
involved in scandals lose in the primary? How often does this happen in safe
districts or states, where these incumbents would be likely to win in the
general election despite the scandal? Do primaries foster or hinder inter-party
competition? Do primaries prevent the election of geographically or
ideologically balanced tickets? Do they cause
polarization?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the research will investigate the
relationship between the weakening of party organizations and the rise of intra-
party factions over time and across states. Do voting data and newspaper
accounts provide evidence of regular divisions within party electorates? Are the
factions ideological, sectional, sssue-based, urban vs. rural, or personal? Did
personalistic factions grow in importance after the adoption of primaries? The
work can also use the study of intra-party factions to investigate voter
behavior and information. How strongly do ideological or issue-based factional
divisions affect voter behavior in primaries? Do these divisions also spill over
into general elections?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project reflects not only its capacity to shed light on US politics. The
research addresses a general puzzle in the literature on elections: why are some
elections candidate-centered and others party-centered? In addition, even today
there is considerable debate about the benefits and costs of candidate-centered
politics compared to party-oriented politics (e.g., arguments about the decline
of collective responsibility countered by arguments about better
representation), and some of this stems from disagreement about the main forces
driving candidate-centered elections. This work will help to assess these costs
and benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will yield broad educational and
social benefits, including (i) three new digital databases that will be made
publicly available; (ii) publications in a variety of different media; (iii)
datasets of use to journalists and political commentators; (iv) a research
collaboration between two major educational institutions; (iv) mentoring and
employing research assistants who are women and under-represented minorities;
and (v) professionalization of undergraduates and graduate students who co-
author with the PIs.