* 0961956
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Emerging Futures: The Politics of Cultural Production Among Indigenous Kanak Youth
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Fred Myers, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 14,330.00

New York University doctoral student, Tate LeFevre, supervised by Dr. Fred
Myers, will undertake research on the dynamic processes that produce new
indigenous citizen identities when former colonies become independent. This
research will center primarily on the networks of cultural production that
evolve outside of centralized institutional frameworks as new generations of
activists configure, contest, and share what it means to be indigenous.
Understanding these processes from the ground up is critical to understanding
the evolving institutions and problems of the modern nation state.

The research will be carried out in the context of the intensified political
stakes generated by an upcoming referendum on New Caledonia's independence from
France. The researcher will undertake 12 months of anthropological field
research in Noum√©a, the country's capital. She will employ a mixed-methods
strategy for data collection, including: participant observation, video and
audio recording, collection and analysis of life stories, conversational
analysis, archival research, and social network analysis.

By analyzing how indigenous identities are formulated and expressed, this
research will contribute to understanding "indigeneity" as an increasingly
important strategy of self-representation and resistance around the world. This
will contribute to social scientific theory of how independent modern nations
develop in an increasingly integrated world. It also will help to inform
policies for international relations with post-colonial countries. Funding this
research supports the training of a social scientist.