* 0961226
* AHRC-NSF MOU:  The Impact of Transitional Justice on Human Rights and Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Kathryn Sikkink, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 08/31/2013
* USD 311,036.00

The Impact of Transitional Justice on Human Rights and
Democracy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When, how, and why does transitional justice
strengthen democracy and deter human rights violations? This project explores
those questions using statistical and case study analyses of human rights
trials, truth commissions, and amnesties in countries transitioning from
authoritarian rule since 1970. It aims to build theory to explain the success of
these mechanisms, resolve existing contradictory results on success, train
researchers working in this field, and contribute to successful international
and domestic policies on transitional justice, democracy, and human
rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two researchers' previous projects produced
contradictory results. Kathryn Sikkink's research team at the University of
Minnesota found that trials achieve success on human rights. Leigh Payne's
research team based at the University of Oxford concurs that trials are
essential to improvements in human rights and democracy, but only when combined
with amnesties or amnesties and truth commissions. To reconcile results, the
researchers plan to merge their data bases to find discrepancies, develop common
definitions, and provide more nuanced categories of types of mechanisms. The
result of the merger is to develop a publicly accessible data base to be used to
develop transitional justice theory and policies. The theoretical framework the
researchers plan to develop involves three explanations for the success of
trials. Existing theory claims that trials should have a deterrence effect
through judicial enforcement, the expansion of human rights norms and
socialization processes, and the development of rule of law systems. The
researchers will further explore the success of trials in relationship with
amnesties and truth commissions to further develop a justice balance theoretical
approach. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research is directly engaging with the
factors that facilitate countries in their transition from open conflict to
peace and stability. It incorporates the advanced training of young scholars and
graduate students in quantitative and qualitative research methods. The
researchers will make the resultant data base publicly accessible in order to
provide the opportunity for further transitional justice research by other
scholars and practitioners. The findings for the project will be presented at
academic conferences and in scholarly journals, at meetings in international and
domestic governmental and non-governmental organizations, and on the project
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project is coordinated in cooperation with the
Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) of the United Kingdom