* 0961262
* Extending Abyssal Mixing Observations and Parameterizations
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Douglas Luther, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2013
* USD 247,868.00

Intellectual Merit: Observational studies suggest the existence of only weak
diapycnal mixing in the ocean interior, with orders of magnitude more mixing
near the bottom in regions of rough topography. In contrast, numerical
circulation and climate models generally employ spatially uniform
parameterizations of abyssal diapycnal mixing. However, several recent numerical
studies demonstrate the sensitivity of the large scale abyssal ocean circulation
to the spatial distribution of abyssal diapycnal mixing, leading modelers to
recognize that mixing parameterizations mimicking the observed spatial
variability are required to improve simulations of the ocean circulation.

As is typical in oceanography, a major problem hampering both the development
and validation of improved abyssal mixing parameterizations is the scarcity of
observations. Microstructure observations, the most direct and accurate tool
with which to infer diapycnal mixing, have only been accomplished in a few
select regions of the global ocean and will unfortunately not become a routine
measurement in the near future due to their cost and the necessity for very high
levels of quality control. Consequently, much work has focused on ways to infer
diapycnal mixing indirectly from standard hydrographic data, potentially
yielding a much more densely sampled global map of diapycnal mixing. A now
common approach is the application of fine-scale parameterizations, relating
turbulent dissipation to shear and/or strain variance on scales of order 10
meters, based on nonlinear internal wave-wave interaction theory. However, it is
becoming increasingly clear that fine-scale parameterizations are reliable
predictors only for a very limited range of conditions. The method is known to
break down in special environments (e.g., the coastal slope, canyons) and to be
a poor predictor of diapycnal mixing in weakly stratified water. The
stratification limitation is severe since both the global abyssal ocean (depth >
1000 m) and the Southern Ocean fall in that category. The abyssal and Southern
Ocean are important branches of the Meridional Overturning Circulation and thus
the credibility of climate modeling studies depends on accurate representation
of diapycnal mixing in these ocean volumes.

The World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) hydrographic data will be re-
analyze using Thorpe scale analysis. Thorpe scale analysis has been shown to be
a more robust predictor of dissipation and diapycnal mixing than fine-scale
parameterizations, in particular in weak stratification and regions where the
characteristics of the internal wave field deviate from the canonical Garrett-
Munk model, yet has not been applied extensively to the WOCE hydrographic data
set. The expected results from this work are an improved observational knowledge
of the spatial distribution of mixing in the abyssal ocean. We also propose a
comprehensive comparison and validation of existing abyssal mixing
parameterizations intended for use in general circulation and climate models.

Broader Impacts: The funds requested in this proposal are intended for the
support of a postdoctoral investigator. The results from this project will be
disseminated in the refereed literature, made available online and presented at
appropriate scientific meetings. The spatial variability of mixing significantly
affects the abyssal circulation and stratification, the strength and depth of
the Antarctic Circumpolar Current as well as various aspects of the meridional
overturning circulation (MOC). In turn, these relate to the ability of the ocean
to store and transport heat and greenhouse gasses, and thus the response of the
climate system to anthropogenic and natural forcing. This project is expected to
result in a better observational knowledge of the spatial distribution of mixing
than achieved to date, and to contribute to the improvement of diapycnal mixing
parameterizations intended for ocean general circulation models and climate
models.