* 0961771
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Knowledge in the Experience and Understanding of a Psychological Disorder
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Brenden Raymond-Yakoubian, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 20,000.00

University of Chicago doctoral student Brenden Raymond-Yakoubian, with guidance
from Dr. Jean Comaroff, will investigate how knowledge concerns, evinced in
discourse, figure into the experience and understanding of psychiatric
disorders. The discourse of knowledge concerns includes discussions of what
constitutes accurate information, what can and cannot be known, what is
considered to be evidence, and how evidence may be deployed in psychiatric
contexts. The focus of the research will be obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
in the American treatment context. OCD is estimated to have a prevalence rate of
1 to 3 percent in the US, which gives this research the potential for broad
social value. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will undertake ethnographic
fieldwork at two clinical programs in the United States which treat OCD. The
researcher will also undertake fieldwork with OCD support groups, with OCD-
related advocates, and at conferences related to OCD and its treatment.
Additional research will be conducted through analysis of OCD medical, research
and self-help literature as well as popular media. Data collection will focus on
determining what the discourses in this context are, how they are interrelated,
what role knowledge plays in these discourses, and how knowledge concerns
circulate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous social science study of OCD has focused
on the disorder as a form of personal ritual or cultural modeling. This new
project will contribute to better understanding of OCD, and potentially other
psychiatric disorders, by investigating how knowledge concerns affect the
cultural experiences and understandings of OCD. This will contribute to social
science theory of the relation between mental illness and culture, as well as to
improving care for those with OCD. Additionally, this research will support the
education of a social scientist.