* 0961000
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Penal Transformations and Politics in New South Wales and Pennsylvania
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2013
* Matthew Lassiter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 03/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This research explores broad changes in state politics related to the re-
emergence of imprisonment as a major social policy since the 1970s and how these
changes affected the possibilities of penal reform. Specifically, it focuses on
how the increased use of imprisonment transformed the management and internal
order of prisons and how this related to other areas of state governance in two
jurisdictions, New South Wales and Pennsylvania. Several questions will guide
this research: How did the visibility of prisons and their role in state
politics change during this period and what effect this did this have on prison
operations? How were prison regimes reorganized after the decline of
rehabilitation and what were the penal philosophies informing such changes? How
did actors select and adapt correctional practices from other jurisdictions and
what were the effects of this borrowing? How did the changes inside prisons
parallel reforms in state government and other areas of social
policy?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory motivating this research treats prisons
as an integral part of state politics rather than as isolated institutions, and
it also explores the movement of penal practices across jurisdictional borders.
By the 1970s, prison issues attracted more public attention than they had for
decades, becoming a centerpiece of contention between political parties that
were gradually converging on many other issues. This was particularly evident
during public inquiries into scandals and corruption involving prisons, which
often discredited practices and officials. Inquiries also created openings for
major reforms, penal experimentation, and transferring practices from other
jurisdictions. Despite large differences between Pennsylvania and New South
Wales, each state experienced volatile penal politics and adopted some similar
practices. This research will explore whether the greater visibility of prison
issues helped institute many reforms, particularly those borrowed from other
jurisdictions. The primary method for this project will be archival research
supplemented with interviews.