* 0961932
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Isotopic Investigation of Mobility, Exchange, and Tomb Membership in Bronze Age Arabia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Clark Larsen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/29/2012
* USD 20,000.00

This project investigates changes in human migration patterns with the
development of interregional exchange networks in the United Arab Emirates
throughout the Bronze Age (ca. 3100-1200 BC). Stable strontium, oxygen, and
carbon isotope values extracted from human tooth enamel will be utilized in
reconstructing the childhood geographic residence of individuals in order to
identify non-local adults interred in tombs across the Oman Peninsula. This
study tests the hypothesis that the burial of foreigners within local tombs was
a common practice by the Early Bronze Age but declined rapidly in the Middle
Bronze Age after the fall of the Indus Valley civilization, with which this
region was interconnected. This research challenges the long-standing assumption
that these monumental tombs acted as powerful symbols tying local populations to
the land where their ancestors were buried; the presence of non-locals in these
tombs may point to a more flexible and complex funerary ideology than previously
speculated. This project will contribute significantly to our knowledge of the
influence of trade on mobility and migration patterns in ancient Arabia and
seeks to address broader issues by challenging the theoretical assumptions
behind these relationships. Through analyses of isotopic signatures from
skeletal remains, evidence of the exchange of people has the potential to give
insight into the political economy and idealogical aspects of life in this
region and facilitate a comparison between the archaeological record and direct
biogeochemical evidence as to the true nature of foreign relations and
subordination during this time.

This project impacts a female graduate student's training and generates
opportunities for success, as well as contributing to the education and training
of undergraduates in methodology related to stable isotope analysis. The project
provides interdisciplinary collaboration with Emirati scholars. Public outreach
is also a key aspect of this project and underrepresented groups will be able to
attend the Girls Explore Archaeology! Program, which introduces middle school-
aged girls to the science behind archaeology.