* 0961718
* Collaborative Research: Developing A Prototype Drifter to Measure the Oceanic Geomagnetic Field
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2010,05/31/2013
* William Sager, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2013
* USD 44,510.00

The PI's request funding to build an inexpensive magnetic drifter that works
well for a typical, hypothesis-driven NSF project that studies a specific
region. They envision a mode of data collection where investigators release a
flotilla of inexpensive surface drifters upstream of an area they wish to study
with magnetic field data. The drifters pass over the study site, collecting the
desired data. These relatively, small, low power and inexpensive magnetic
sensors can be obtained and combined or integrated with the circuitry within the
drifter. Because the drifter moves slowly, the magnetometer can be set up to
read the geomagnetic field infrequently keeping the data rate low.

Magnetic field data from the oceans have been critical for understanding the
origin, evolution and structure of the ocean basins. The marine magnetic stripe
anomalies not only document Earth?s magnetic field polarity reversals but also
form the basis for the Geomagnetic Polarity Timescale and are used to
reconstruct the history of the ocean basins. These anomalies are best resolved
by sea surface magnetic measurements. Satellite magnetic measurements, while
global in extent, lack the lateral resolution to resolve these magnetic stripe
anomalies in detail. While we have a working knowledge of most of the ocean
basins there are areas, such as the southern ocean, that have only sparse
shiptrack coverage. In a recent global compilation for the World Digital
Magnetic Anomaly Map (WDMAM, Purucker, 2007) the available data was so sparse
that a model of magnetic anomalies was used to help interpolate data. Shiptime
is expensive and global coverage in remote areas is simply not feasible in the
near future. The solution we believe is to use the proven technology of ocean
drifters and floats used by the physical oceanographic community and mount
small, low power, inexpensive magnetometer sensors to these drifters to cover
areas of the ocean that are undersampled at present.

Broader Impacts:

The main broader impact emphasized in the proposal seems mainly the advanced
training of a post-doc; and potentially involving a summer undergraduate
student. Clearly the ability to collect much-needed geomagnetic data at a
fraction of the cost of ship time would have broad impacts in the geosciences
community. The proposal will support a female postdoctoral fellow. Data obtained
will be used by many other researchers and have a broad impact throughout the
tectonics community.