* 0961598
* Collaborative Research: Putting People in Their Place: Constructing a Geography for Census Microdata
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Barbara Buttenfield, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2016
* USD 444,602.00

Professor Barbara Buttenfield in the Department of Geography at the University
of Colorado Boulder and Nicholas Nagle in the Department of Geography at the
University of Tennessee will develop methods that situate public use census
microdata in space at finer resolutions than are currently available in the
public domain. The methods they will use impute a set of sample weights
(probabilities) that allocate microdata records to census tracts with the
addition of ancillary data, even to sub-tract levels. These sample weights
respect publicly available census tract statistics, as well as correlations
between census data and ancillary landuse and land cover. Importantly, the
methodology is derived using statistical methods of empirical likelihood, and
allows for quantification of uncertainty and simulations of small area
populations, thus offering a significant advance over existing methodologies.
While the method depends entirely on publicly available data, validation will
utilize confidential census records held at the Census Research Data Centers.

Deliverables from this research include methods, tools and usage guidelines that
allow efficient construction of sample weights. Workshops will make these tools
available to urban geographers, landuse planners, transportation specialists,
demographers and educators. A website will disseminate the methods as Matlab,
Python and R scripts, as a contribution to cyberinfrastructure, so that others
may utilize tools. This website will be evaluated through a three-week short-
course at the University of Colorado, by a planning workshop at Tennessee (an
EPSCOR state) as well as by workshops at geography, urban planning and
statistics national conventions. The project will provide specific
recommendations to the US Census Bureau so that they may improve the relevance
of public data for small area research, estimation and policy analysis.