* 0961062
* Collaborative Research: Synthesis, Characterization, Modelling and Simulation of Polymer Nanoencapsulated Aerogels
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Hongbing Lu, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Glaucio H. Paulino
* 10/31/2010
* USD 49,063.00

Aerogels are lightweight porous materials with high thermal insulation and sound
attenuation values. Nevertheless, practical use has been slow because they are
also very fragile materials. This problem has been addressed by casting a
polymer coating around their entire internal porous surface. That coating
connects (crosslinks) the skeletal nanoparticles, reinforces the interparticle
necks while the internal void space is not compromised. The new material
combines the ultimate specific compressive strength of carbon fiber reinforced
epoxies with the thermal conductivity of glass wool. A critical factor that
controls the distribution of forces across the skeletal framework, potentially
increasing the ultimate strength of the material is the nanostructure
morphology. Thus this project will study experimentally the effect of the
structural morphology on the thermal and mechanical properties of crosslinked
aerogels. Synthetic conditions will be varied systematically by using
statistical experimental design methods, while modeling and simulation will help
understand the nanostructure-property relationships. Major factors will be
identified to condense the design space of crosslinked aerogels in order to
provide optimal materials and structures in the shortest time period.

Strong lightweight materials is a National Priority for energy conservation, the
National Defense, Homeland Security and the Space Program. Polymer crosslinked
aerogels are multifunctional materials that combine low mass density with
mechanical strength suitable for armor and thermal properties suitable for
thermal insulation. Applications in energy efficient buildings, vehicles,
cryogenic fuel tanks are clearly visible. Commercialization will boost the local
State economy while in the academic setting the project will create an excellent
interdisciplinary intellectual environment for the education of graduate and
undergraduate students in all aspects of material science and engineering.