* 0961184
* Routes to vertical mixing in the Equatorial Under Current: quantification through high-resolution numerical simulations
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Sutanu Sarkar, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2014
* USD 450,888.00

Intellectual Merit: Understanding and quantifying the vertical fluxes of heat
and momentum in the tropical Pacific equatorial undercurrent (EUC) system is one
of the central problems linking the small-scale physics of flow instabilities
and turbulent mixing to larger scale climatic variability such as ENSO.
Significant progress has been made in the last two decades, spurred primarily by
simultaneous observations of mean and turbulent vertical profiles combined with
classical linear stability analyses. Nevertheless, significant uncertainty
remains and, in particular, the mechanisms by which a unique mix of high-
frequency internal waves and coherent turbulence patches is initiated and
sustained at depths where the background shear is linearly stable are only
poorly understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a high-resolution
numerical investigation will be conducted to quantify the pathways through which
energy sources - surface wind, buoyancy flux and mean kinetic energy of the jet
- feed into turbulent dissipation. The improved modeling capability in this
project, based primarily on high-resolution LES will complement on-going
observational programs. These three-dimensional, non-hydrostatic simulations
performed on large-scale NSF computational facilities will directly resolve the
flow instabilities leading to turbulence and vertical fluxes. The analysis of
the space-time dataset will focus on elucidating the finite amplitude, nonlinear
mechanisms responsible for sustaining turbulence in regions where background
conditions are linearly stable. The modeling will incorporate the new
observations in the form of background profiles of shear and stratification with
corresponding wind stress and heat flux. The principal objective of the effort
will be to understand the physical mechanisms of turbulence generation and
transport operative in the EUC under a variety of conditions and to quantify the
associated energy transport and vertical fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Scientifically, the proposed effort will contribute to the development
of physically based parameterizations and predictive capabilities of broad
societal interest. The project will directly support the training of one post-
doctoral scholar of Vietnamese origin, an under-represented community in
science. It will contribute to the development of computational and information
technology infrastructure through collaboration with an existing NSF funded
project on database design for computational fluid dynamics simulations. The
project will also directly support graduate education at UCSD by incorporating
analytical and numerical techniques and results into existing courses in
environmental and computational fluid dynamics cross-listed between Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering and the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at UCSD.
The cross-disciplinary nature of the PI team will ensure broad dissemination of
the results among the geosciences and engineering communities.&lt;br/&gt;