* 0961426
* Exploring Organizational Court Culture on Case Disposition Time
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Wendy Walsh, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 04/30/2013
* USD 148,452.00

This study builds upon the theory of local legal cultural and the organizational
analysis of criminal courts by considering how these factors work together to
enhance courtroom efficiency. This research explores the relationship among
several elements of criminal courts (management tools, legal culture, and
institutional characteristics such as vertical prosecution) and their impact on
courtroom efficiency and the timely administration of justice. It is unclear how
well existing theories account for the complexity of crimes involving young
victims, such as in child sexual assault cases. This project will examine
whether current models of organizational court culture are robust vis-Ã -vis
these cases, or alternatively, whether the theoretical models need to be
refined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these research questions, this project
will collect and analyze qualitative and quantitative data from multiple sources
including: an in-depth case study of three Oregon counties using an online
survey administered to key stakeholders, site visits to conduct interviews with
prosecutors, judges, and court administrators, and a review of relevant statutes
and laws. The research team will also gather retrospective data on criminal
justice processing of sexual crimes against children for the past two years from
three Oregon District Attorney's Offices and conduct interviews with prosecutors
on a sample of cases that took more than two years to be criminally
resolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on this topic is essential for
developing comprehensive theoretical models to enhance the administration of
justice. The results will: 1) identify a theoretical framework for understanding
differences in case resolution time; 2) establish and promote effective models
of prosecution; and 3) improve practice guidelines for prosecutors. By
collecting data from key decision-makers in the court system, this study will
have the broader impact of contributing to the enhanced comprehension of the
nuances of legal institutions and criminal processing in terms of both theory
and practice.