* 0961779
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Modeling the Origins of Primate Sociality: Do Mouse Lemurs Recognize Kin Through Vocalizations?
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Leanne Nash, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 02/29/2012
* USD 20,000.00

Arguments of human uniqueness emphasize our complex sociality, unusual cognitive
capacities, and language skills, but the timing of the origin of these abilities
and their evolutionary causes remain unsolved. Unlike the largely solitary
ancestral mammals, the first primates are thought to have maintained social
networks, communicating via vocalizations and scent marks. These networks may
have facilitated selection for increased cognitive and communicative abilities
at the very emergence of the primate order by providing a medium for kin
selection (selection caused by behavior benefiting kin). Unfortunately, the
mechanisms by which ancestral primates might have recognized kin are unknown.
This study will be the first test of vocal recognition of kin in a species used
to model ancestral primates, the grey mouse lemur. Innovative, sophisticated
methodology includes marking wild lemurs with transponders and conducting
playback experiments at feeding platforms containing transponder readers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, this project is
multidisciplinary, encompassing socioecology, anthropology, bioacoustics,
conservation, and field methodology. The project will have great theoretical
value for reconstructions of primate origins and will investigate the
feasibility of developing novel conservation tools using vocalizations to
monitor kin groups of small, nocturnal mammals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts are in conservation, education and international collaboration.
These lemurs are vulnerable, not only because forest degradation in Madagascar
is estimated to have exceeded 90% since the arrival of humans, but also because
they are not well understood. Increased knowledge of their social systems will
help tailor conservation plans to their needs. The co-PI will integrate this
project into science education by creating a webpage so her NSF GK-12 students
can follow the research as it progresses. The project will develop new
collaborations between German, Malagasy, and American researchers. It will train
a field assistant and a Malagasy student in skills vital for launching careers
in research, conservation, or park management.