* 0961624
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Narrative, Quantification, and the Chinese Political Diaspora
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Julia Adams, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/2012
* USD 11,947.00

The investigators will use "quantitative narrative analysis" (QNA) to create a
database of narratives from two diaspora-based Chinese social movements. QNA is
a hybrid methodology involving aspects of in-depth qualitative research and
large-N quantitative research. The methodology combines narrative theory,
quantification, and computing to discover and demonstrate trends in very large
collections of narrative textual information. The methodology, however, is still
in its formative stages and is in need of testing and further development. In
the present project, QNA will be used to create a relational database of
narratives for comparing a religious social movement, called Falun Gong, and a
secular, political reform social movement, the Chinese Democracy Movement.
Quantitative analysis of the database will permit modeling of mobilization
patterns: who did what, when, where, why and how. The database also will allow
investigation of discourse patterns relevant to cultural themes and patterns of
signification. By using Chinese materials, the project will both assess the
generalizability of the QNA approach and adapt QNA methods and software to the
particularities of Chinese.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Narrative is a universal form
of human communication found in the widest variety of social contexts -- from
ancient texts to contemporary blogs, from religious conversion stories to
courtroom testimonies. Since so much human communication is conveyed through
narrative, innovative methods to exploit narrative structures to draw inferences
about social life can potentially find application in diverse areas of social
research. The current project will use QNA to improve our understanding of both
Chinese social movements and the intersection of religion and politics. The
project also will advance the frontiers of computer-assisted analysis of
communication. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.