* 0961481
* Studies of Social Structure and Economic Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Matthew Jackson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 303,156.00

Social networks affect many economic outcomes ranging from which jobs people
find to which products they buy. A prominent aspect of network structure is
homophily: the tendency of interactions between individuals to be biased towards
others who have similar characteristics. Substantial homophily can lead to the
fragmentation of societies and communities and thus can significantly affect who
interacts with whom, what people learn and what they believe, and how people
behave. This project, continuing studies from an earlier grant, includes
investigations as to how homophily and other social network properties influence
behaviors such as informal borrowing and lending among individuals, word-of-
mouth communication, and participation in microfinance programs in the
developing world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this research concerns
how homophily in social networks affects word-of-mouth learning and diffusion.
The focus of the research is on how the specifics of the learning process
affects the extent to which homophily can retard learning and diffusion. An
important question would be whether or not adjustments made by individuals in a
society in the way that they process information can help correct for biases
that the structure of a social network might introduce. Interestingly,
preliminary investigations show that societies in which individuals follow
simple rules of thumb for how they process and relay information to and from
friends can learn more and learn faster on an aggregate level than societies
where individuals are more sophisticated and ``rational?? in their information
processing on an individual level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of this
research concerns the relative roles of choice and chance in social network
formation and in producing homophily patterns. Do high school students choose to
form a disproportionate share of their friendships with others of their own
race, or does institutional structure (e.g., assignment of students to classes,
participation in various clubs, etc.) lead students to meet others of their own
race in disproportionately high numbers? Data analysis based on a model
developed under the previous grant suggests that both biases are present and
significant; and that the relative roles of choice and chance differ
significantly across races. For example, Asians, Blacks, and Hispanics face
three to six times higher biases in the rates at which they meet their own types
than Whites. This part of the project would involve tracing the sources of these
differences across races, and developing a general statistical model of network
formation for identifying the roles of choice and chance in combination with
other factors in a wider variety of settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third
part of the research involves analyzing network data from 75 villages in rural
India together with participation by residents of those villages in a recent
microfinance loan program. This rich data set includes social networks of eleven
different varieties including friendship networks, borrowing networks, advice
networks, business networks, and family ties; as well as information about which
residents have taken out microfinance loans and what their repayment rates are
over time. The network properties influencing microfinance participation will be
investigated, including things like caste and subcaste homophily. The data
should also provide novel insight into structural contrasts across different
sorts of networks. The research will include continued development of and
testing of a new theory that suggests how borrowing and favor networks should
differ from other social networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this research include the interdisciplinary importance of new tools for
analyzing and understanding social networks. The project will also shed new
light on policies designed to encourage desegregation and economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;