* 0961423
* Collaborative Research: Estuarine Response to Climate Forcing
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2015
* Raymond Najjar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2015
* USD 331,155.00

An investigation into the causes of interannual variability in estuarine
salinity, stratification and circulation will be conducted using salinity
observations, statistical methods, realistic 3-Dimensional hydrodynamic models,
and simplified 2-Dimensional numerical models. The overall objective is to
quantify interannual variability of estuarine circulation, stratification, and
salinity, to explain the physical mechanisms responsible for such variability,
and provide an assessment of the likely changes in these metrics in response to
future climate change. Observational analysis and 3-Dimensional modeling will be
focused on Chesapeake and Delaware Bays, for which (a) extensive salinity
databases exist, and (b) a robust numerical model has been developed and
validated. Process-oriented modeling studies will be conducted to examine how
the estuaries respond to interannual variability in river runoff and shelf
salinity, sea-level rise and potential changes in tidal and wind mixing.
Multiple model hindcasts will be conducted in which the individual impacts of
interannual variability in open-ocean sea level, river flow, shelf salinity, and
meteorological forcing are assessed. Statistical models will be applied to the
historical salinity data to investigate how salt intrusion length and estuarine
stratification vary with river flow, shelf salinity and sea level rise.
Projections of future climate impacts on these estuaries will be made by using
the regional output of state-of-the art climate models that have been
extensively evaluated for the Mid-Atlantic region. General insights into the
sensitivity of estuarine physical processes to climate variability and change
will be afforded by (1) the differing physics of Chesapeake Bay (partially
mixed) and Delaware Bay (well mixed); (2) process oriented and realistic
3-Dimensional modeling studies; and (3) configuration of 2-Dimensional semi-
analytical models over a large parameter space of river flow, tidal velocity
amplitude, and estuarine geometry.

Intellectual Merit. Much of current estuarine research focuses on relatively
short time scales (tidal, weather-related, and seasonal). Little is known of
interannual variability in estuarine salinity, stratification, and circulation.
The inevitability of sea-level rise and climate change demands a rigorous,
physically based approach for quantifying their impacts. This project addresses
that need with a collaborative effort between two teams with complementary
expertise in numerical modeling, estuarine dynamics, climate change impacts, and
time-series analysis.

Broader Impacts. This research project will impact the broader community of
estuarine scientists and coastal managers as it will better quantify the
potential impacts of climate change on estuarine salinity and stratification,
factors that greatly influence water quality and the sustainability of living
resources such as oysters and crabs. The long-term model simulations and
analysis products will be made available to the Chesapeake and Delaware Bay
management communities as they prepare for the impacts of climate change.
Results will also be communicated to a broad range of stakeholders, including
the general public, through several climate assessment activities underway in
the Mid-Atlantic Region. Because the modeling and data analysis approaches
developed here can be applied to any estuary, and because we will utilize
simplified 2-Dimensional model to provide insights about the potential impacts
of climate change on a broad class of estuaries, the impacts of the work extend
beyond Chesapeake and Delaware Bays. Educational impacts of the proposal are
through the support of graduate and post-doctoral research at the interface of
the disciplines of estuarine dynamics and climate change.