* 0961041
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Cultural Models of Genetic Screening &amp; Perceptions of Sickle Cell Disease in High-Risk Guadeloupean French Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Pamela Erickson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 14,820.00

University of Connecticult doctoral student, Shan-Estelle Brown, supervised by
Dr. Pamela I. Erickson, will undertake research on the relation between lay
medical knowledge, risk perception, and decision making regarding preconceptive
screening for recessive genetic diseases. Because carriers of recessive genetic
diseases may have no symptoms, failure to access screening can result in the
persistence of otherwise avoidable conditions. Brown hypothesizes that the
decision not to seek testing is influenced by cultural factors, including
understandings of genetic risk and perceptions of
screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in Guadeloupe,
the Caribbean department of France. Guadeloupe has a high prevalence of sickle
cell disease, yet few residents of Guadeloupe seek testing to know their carrier
status. To understand the sociocultural factors that may influence people's
decisions to seek testing or not, Brown will conduct the research in
neighborhoods near a sickle cell disease clinic. She will gather qualitative
data through participant observation and semistructured and structured
interviews, exploring factors that affect decision making about genetic testing
such as kinship, religion, discrimination, and personal experience with sickle
cell disease, as well as ethnomedical knowledge and perceptions of genetic
screening. To determine the cultural models of the disease, she will use
cultural consensus analysis (a form of principle components analysis) in a
cross-sectional design that compares people who have been tested, who plan to be
tested, and who do not plan to be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
important because carrier status ignorance can result in future generations of
chronically sick children with an additional burden of care to families and the
state. This research will assist genetic counselors by providing insight into
how individuals make decisions about their own health and their children's
health. It can help counselors aid clients in overcoming hesitance to share
newly identified carrier status with relatives and partners. The project
contributes to the education of a social scientist.