* 0961831
* Production and Fate of Acrylate in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* David Kieber, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2014
* USD 448,000.00

For more than thirty years, oceanographers and atmospheric scientists have
studied dimethylsulfide (DMS) and dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) because they
form the basis of a biogeochemical system that transfers sulfur from the oceans
to the atmosphere, affecting the Earth?s radiation balance and climate. Through
these studies, we have learned that DMS and DMSP also significantly impact the
ecology and chemistry of the oceans. The intensive effort to understand the
marine biogeochemistry of DMS(P) has revealed that their cycling is much more
complex than first imagined, but it has also caused us to largely overlook a
highly interesting and important component of the DMS(P) cycle, namely acrylate,
a product formed from the degradation of DMSP via DMSP lyase. Surprisingly
little is known about acrylate concentrations, fluxes, or impacts in the oceans,
even though concentrations and fluxes should at times be substantial, especially
during blooms of DMSP-rich algae that are common throughout the world?s oceans
and often harmful or toxic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers at
the SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry will conduct a three-year
laboratory and field study to examine several fundamental aspects of the marine
acrylate cycle. The main objectives of the proposed research are: (1) to
determine the kinetics and wavelength dependence for the photolysis of acrylate
in contrasting oceanic waters; (2) to determine cellular and dissolved acrylate
concentrations in axenic algal cultures and evaluate how these concentrations
change in response to nutrient or light stress and growth stage; and (3) to
determine dissolved and particulate acrylate concentrations, photolysis rates,
and biological loss rates in contrasting oceanic water through participation in
two Gulf of Mexico research cruises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Results from this study are expected to significantly improve our fundamental
understanding of the marine acrylate cycle and its impact on the biogeochemistry
of the upper oceans. The project will establish and foster research and
educational collaborations for these students, especially the graduate students,
through several avenues including participation at national and local meetings,
mentoring, preparing for and delivering college-level lectures, and
presentations made to the general public at forums such as Syracuse?s Milton J.
Rubenstein Museum of Science. Two graduate students and a visiting Chinese
scholar will be trained as part of this project, along with several
undergraduates. Finally, the PI will participate in several activities to
promote and foster education including serving as an NSF STEM mentor, co-
coordinating Chemistry Day at the NY State Fair, giving oral presentations at
local K-12 schools, and mentoring SUNY ESF Environmental Science and Chemistry
students.