* 0961351
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES - Application of 210-Pb and 210-Po distribution at North Atlantic interface regimes
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Mark Baskaran, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2014
* USD 101,284.00

Trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) in the natural U-Th radionuclide series are
central to the goals of the U.S. GEOTRACES during its funded North Atlantic
phase over the next three years. The radionuclide 210Po-210Pb pair is designated
as one of the priority TEIs by the U.S. GEOTRACES Zonal North Atlantic Survey
Section Implementation Plan. The pair has seen application since GEOSECS for
quantifying particulate scavenging and carbon flux within the ocean, but
processes are still poorly understood at oceanic interfaces. The atmospheric
source and half lives of the two isotopes (138 d and 22.3 y) present time frames
uniquely suited to trace interface (air-water, bio-water, and sediment-water)
processes in the North Atlantic sections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this
award, researchers at the University of Delaware, Wayne State University, and
Queens College will participate in the U.S.GEOTRACES North Atlantic campaign to
study the relationships between these two radioisotopes and the other trace
elements and isotopic tracers that will be surveyed. Their work will center
around a set of hypotheses. At the air-sea interface, they hypothesize that as
the primary input of 210Pb into the surface ocean, levels will be source
dependent on the continental input mixtures, in the western temperate and
easterly sub-tropical sections. At the biotic-water interface, they hypothesize
that different biogenic particle types encountered in the upper waters will
affect the fractionation and remineralization depths of 210Po and 210Pb. At the
particle-water interface, they hypothesize that interfaces between intermediate
lithogenic nepheloid layers (INL) or hydrothermal plumes will be zones of
enhanced 210Po and 210Pb scavenging from the surrounding waters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test these hypotheses, they will sample and analyze
several hundred dissolved and particulate (large and small) samples for 210Po
and 210Pb along the GEOTRACES North Atlantic section. About two thirds of the
samples will be focused at the six designated "super stations", half above the
main thermocline and the other half down across the BNL. The depths will be
chosen according to regional atmospheric input, ecosystems, and coordinated TEI
sampling. The other third will be detailed across INL detached plumes from
coastal waters, across the BNL, and within hydrothermal plumes. The data will be
synthesized according to interface scavenging models by particle types (e.g.
fine/colloidal, lithogenic and biogenic). As such, the proposed work will be
closely coordinated with GEOTRACES PIs already funded to for other particle-
reactive (e.g. Th, Pa) or dissolved (e.g. Ra) radionuclide isotopes in the
Atlantic Survey Section of GEOTRACES. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
broader impacts are closely linked to the GEOTRACES Program as a whole to
enhance (1) research infrastructure by providing a broad array of 210Po and
210Pb data useful for biogeochemical scavenging models, (2) education by
mentoring graduate and undergraduates, teaching by example from proposed
research, (3) participation of under-represented students careers in the
geosciences, (4) research training of graduates in marine radiochemistry, and 5)
broad dissemination of results through publications, presentations, and on
dedicated public UD websites (www.ocean.udel.edu) and at GEOTRACES
(www.geotraces.org).