* 0961117
* Righting Unrightable Wrongs: Legacies of Racial Violence in the U.S. South
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,09/30/2010
* Joshua Inwood, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2010
* USD 164,770.00

The United States of America has a history of violence directed towards persons
of color. This project will investigate the ways that grassroots community
organizations have tried to address long-standing impacts of racial violence in
their communities through a focus on the Greensboro (North Carolina) Truth and
Reconciliation Commission (GTRC). The GTRC was formed in 2000 in response to the
shooting of labor activists by individuals associated with the Ku Klux Klan in
November 1979. Those shootings occurred when labor organizers were holding a
rally and conference at a local public housing project to protest Ku Klux Klan
activities in the area. As the rally progressed, some members of the local Klan
arrived, and during the ensuing violence, five labor activists were killed and
several more were wounded. Despite the efforts of local prosecutors and
extensive video evidence of the events, no one was ever held criminally liable
for the deaths. In 1999, local community organizers began advocating formation
of a truth and reconciliation process modeled after commissions in South Africa
and Peru. The GTRC was assembled through a grassroots democratic process that
sought to integrate a diverse community perspective. In 2006, the GTRC released
its report to the citizens of Greensboro. Through a broadly conceived
qualitative approach that will use open-ended interviews, archival research, and
discourse analysis, this research project will explore the results of the GTRC,
focusing on the ways that community members addressed the legacy and memory of
violence and how violence continues to undergird racial exploitation and frame
an understanding of difference in North America. The majority of relevant
research projects focusing on truth processes have examined them outside of a
North American context. The U.S. South is home to a nascent but growing movement
to address inequality and legacies of violence through truth and reconciliation
commissions, and the Greensboro example may serve as a model for other
communities to follow in North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore the connections between the legacy of violence, race, and the
construction of space to wider academic scrutiny. It will assist in more fully
examining the legacies of violence and race in North America. The results of
this project will contribute to larger discussions surrounding the impact that
violence and race have in North American communities. For example, the GTRC
process may serve other communities who are grappling with the legacies of
violence and who wish to create the geographic conditions necessary to
accomplish racial reconciliation. This project therefore will address the issue
of racial violence at local, regional, national, and international scales and
will contribute broadly to scholarship on race, violence, and space.