* 0961709
* Research in Chemistry: Lab Renovations for Faculty and Undergraduate Women
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Christian Rojas, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,843,610.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable Barnard
College, a liberal arts institution for undergraduate women, to modernize the
research infrastructure of nearly one entire floor of Altschul Hall, its main
science building. The result of this project will be three times as much wet
laboratory research space as is now available. In addition, the floor will
include a completely reconfigured layout to accommodate an array of shared
equipment and instrumentation, a key improvement that will foster greater
opportunities for interdisciplinary interactions among faculty and the students
they advise and mentor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty and undergraduate students
in the chemistry department, with allied users from biology and environmental
science, will be the principal beneficiaries. Their research programs include
bioinorganic, biological, synthetic organic, physical organic, environmental,
and biophysical chemistry. Barnard science faculty already have a strong record
in garnering external grant support; this project will allow them to further
leverage these funds, generating even more research and publishing activity with
the undergraduates working in their labs. This project will give Barnard College
the modernized resources necessary to build an even stronger program. Further,
it will provide infrastructure vital to the chemistry department's growth,
allowing it to add two tenure-track faculty positions over the next several
years. Enlarging the department will promote an increase in the number of
research opportunities for undergraduate students and the number of science
majors at Barnard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening participation in
undergraduate research is at the core of Barnard?s science enterprise. Faculty-
directed research with undergraduates is central to this mission. These research
experiences allow students to participate in the process of scientific discovery
and to acquire the skills necessary to advance knowledge in science. The
proposed renovations will markedly increase the ability of Barnard faculty and
research students to make cutting-edge scientific contributions in the areas of
chemistry, biology, and environmental science. Participation in undergraduate
research gives women, members of a group traditionally underrepresented in
science, a strong foundation and powerful impetus to pursue scientific careers.
This contributes significantly to building the nation's science infrastructure.