* 0961156
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Digital Politics: Technology, Communication, and Changing Political Participation
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2010,07/31/2011
* Alan Klima, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2011
* USD 19,996.00

Doctoral student Charles Pearson, under the guidance of Dr. Alan Klima
(University of California, Davis), will undertake research on the development
and effects of the new social media structures that support contemporary
political movement building. Centralized broadcast media models, once a key
strength of political movements in many countries, are now in flux. The models
emerging to replace them appear to be both more collaborative and more focused
on bottom-up, or "grass-roots," communication. The nature and consequences of
this important shift in political participation will be the focus of this
research. A study of digital politics provides a rich conceptual site for
understanding: a) current shifts in communication and political engagement; b)
logics of participation and regulation in emerging open systems; and, c) the
increasing intertwining of the technical and the social.

The research will be carried out in the United States in both online and offline
settings. The researcher will employ a mix of qualitative research methods,
including ethnographic fieldwork and targeted qualitative interviews with key
participants and media experts distributed nationally. He will also track and
analyze the movement of specific messages in order to gauge the effectiveness of
particular Internet-based distributed structures for managing information flows
and alignments.

The research is important because it will help social scientists to understand
how new technologies are affecting contemporary democratic politics. More
generally, the research will contribute to theories of the relation between
media and message. Funding this resarch also supports the education of a social
scientist.