* 0961218
* Estimating and Analyzing the Southern Ocean State
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Matthew Mazloff, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 04/30/2015
* USD 350,205.00

Intellectual Merit The central purpose of this project is to attain an estimate
of the state of the Southern Ocean from January 2005 through December 2009. The
resulting estimate will be more consistent with observations than the previous
solution, and will also include the IPY time period, making it useful to many
researchers spanning multiple disciplines. The time-varying, eddy-permitting
estimate will be dynamically realistic (i.e. no unphysical nudging or relaxation
terms will be implemented), and thus a justifiable tool for quantifying the
circulation and investigating dynamical balances.

Using the Southern Ocean state estimate the volume and potential vorticity (PV)
budgets will be analyzed in order to answer the following two questions. Where
is diapycnal mixing significant in the Southern Ocean? What is the three-
dimensional potential vorticity (PV) budget? The volume budget analysis involves
diagnosing the continuity equation in isopycnal space. Terms in this budget will
reveal transport pathways (via the along-isopycnal thickness advection terms),
the buoyancy budget (via the air-sea flux source term), abyssal mixing (via the
diapycnal transport term), and the PV budget (via the thickness tendency term).
All four phenomena are worthy of investigation, though in keeping with the
science questions posed, the analysis will primarily focus on the latter two
terms. Maps of the diapycnal mixing rate will highlight regions of increased
ocean turbulence and water mass evolution. Local process studies will provide
information regarding uncertainty in the proposed work, while our results will
put the localprocess studies in a larger context.

Mapping the PV distribution in isopycnal space will shed light on water mass
transport pathways, and analyzing the PV budget will illuminate the dynamics of
these pathways. This project intends to evolve the present vertically-integrated
understanding of the Southern Ocean PV budget into three-dimensions. PV exchange
through vortex stretching is believed to be the mechanism allowing the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current system to pass over ocean-ridges and maintain its massive
zonal transport. A key goal of the project is to determine the partitioning of
this stretching amongst density levels.

Broader Impact Collaboration with International Polar Year (IPY) programs will
enhance this project. Likewise, making a Southern Ocean state estimate available
to the scientific community will add value to many other funded projects. For
example, use of the Diapycnal and Isopycnal Mixing Experiment in the Southern
Ocean project tracer release observations will benefit this project by better
constraining the estimate, and also by allowing the determination of a reference
tracer diffusivity. In return, the state estimate will provide researchers in
the DIMES program with a constrained background state for their analysis.
Determination of an accurate background mean state is vital to the DIMES project
goal of determining local diapycnal and isopycnal mixing. Synthesizing sparse
and distinct observations into an eddy permitting state estimate is a great
resource for growing understanding of the Southern Ocean.