* 0961810
* Collaborative Research:  Benthic Exhange Events and Near-Boundary Mixing on the Continental Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Erika McPhee-Shaw, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2015
* USD 489,328.00

An innovative field study examining the dynamics of boundary-interior exchange
events on the Monterey Bay shelf will be conducted in Monterey Bay. The main
focus is on boundary layer intrusions, often seen in the form of intermediate
nepheloid layers (INLs) detaching from the continental margin. The objectives of
the project are to (1) identify processes responsible for resuspension of
benthic material on the mid- to outer-shelf, (2) improve our understanding of
intrusion formation mechanisms, (3) investigate the fate of material transported
in intrusions, and (4) investigate event-scale and seasonal variability in
intrusion dynamics. The driving hypothesis is that gravitational collapse after
internal-wave-forced mixing drives intrusions; however, the experiment is
designed to resolve benthic exchange generally, including advective mechanisms
such as eddies, shelf currents, or convergent bottom Ekman
fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements will include a central benthic
station, an offshore moored profiler station and cross-shelf autonomous
underwater vehicle (AUV) surveys spanning the fixed stations. The observational
strategy is to directly observe benthic exchange: from the seafloor interface
through the stratified outer boundary layer, across the entire water column, and
then into the cross-shelf dimension. New "hybrid" turbulence packages designed
to measure turbulence via both scalar dissipation and eddy correlation
techniques will be deployed on each of the measurement platforms. High-
resolution boundary layer measurements, including bottom shear stress, turbulent
dissipation rate, suspended particulates, and erosion events, will be made from
a benthic tripod and mooring. Offshore of this platform, a moored profiler will
continuously measure, over the entire water column, CTD, optics, and turbulence.
Both fixed stations will include full-water-column velocity profiles, from which
we will quantify internal wave energy density flux and estimate lateral
transport of intrusions/INLs. A long-ranging AUV, newly developed by PI
Bellingham, will map both turbulence and intrusions in cross-shelf sections,
resolving diapycnal and isopycnal transport processes. Two deployments, one in
the late spring upwelling season and the other during stratified fall
conditions, will provide unprecedented temporal coverage of full-water-column
mixing, internal wave energy, benthic response, and INLs at both event and
seasonal scales. The fixed instrumentation will be deployed for one-month-long
periods during which the AUV will operate continuously for two
weeks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Fundamental questions about the
dynamics of boundary-interior exchange motivate this project. On deeper
continental slopes this process has important consequences for global abyssal
mixing. On continental shelves, particularly those of eastern boundary upwelling
coasts, benthic exchange plays a crucial role in ecosystem functioning by
providing benthic iron (a limiting micronutrient) and, potentially, benthic
resting cysts to the interior and upper water column. Benthic exchange events
may explain some of the paradoxical decoupling between upwelling and coastal
blooms at the event level. Intrusions/INLs are commonly observed, yet very
little is known about their temporal variability, dispersal rates and duration,
or forcing. There is ample evidence for an association between INLs and internal
wave interaction with topography. Yet, to date there has been no study directly
testing the relationship between mixing and boundary intrusion dispersal on a
continental margin. This study is focused on the shelf but the findings will be
transferrable to deeper continental margins. Better understanding of these
dynamics may improve parameterization of boundary mixing in global circulation
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. A valuable, innovative technique
that will be developed as part of this collaborative work is the incorporation
of turbulence instrumentation into the payload of the Monterey Bay Research
Institute (MBARI) long-range Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV). The transfer
of this technology to a cutting-edge, and routinely operated, AUV system means
it will be used in years to come in investigations of fine-resolution fluxes and
transports of coastal biological systems. Un-funded collaborator John Ryan will
investigate potential links to surface blooms. The project will include training
and mentoring of a postdoctoral researcher and two graduate students, and the
research findings will be incorporated into the graduate curricula at Moss
Landing Marine Laboratory (MLML) and the Naval Postgraduate School. Public
outreach and education will benefit from the established MLML Teacher
Enhancement Program and MBARI's summer internship program.