* 0961867
* Advanced Theory and Methods for Radio Spectral Diagnostics of Solar Flares
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Dale Gary, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 04/30/2013
* USD 478,107.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) will study thermal and nonthermal radio emission
from solar flares through a combination of high resolution radio observations
and sophisticated theoretical modeling. The PI's project team intends to develop
new analytical methods and software tools for processing imaging radio
spectroscopy data, in order to enhance the scientific output of existing radio
observatory instruments (which are currently being actively upgraded), as well
as the output of future instruments. The PI plans to develop a number of new
models to exploit the latest observations and theories, and to create new
methods for forward-fitting of radio spectroscopic imaging data and for
measuring the diagnostics of high-energy electrons and plasma parameters in
solar flaring regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's forward-fitting inversion
methods, when combined with high-resolution imaging spectroscopy data, will
enable the solar community to derive the key physical parameters of flares on
dynamic time scales with unprecedented spatial resolution. Such investigations
will directly address the fundamental questions of magnetic reconnection and
particle acceleration processes in solar physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
activity will include enhance scientific understanding throughout the discipline
of astrophysics, since the processes of energy release and charged particle
acceleration are common to most astrophysical systems. An increased
understanding of the physics of energy release, transformation, and transfer in
the solar atmosphere is directly applicable to space weather forecasting. The
user-friendly software developed by the project team will be made widely
available to the solar and space weather communities through the internet-based
"SolarSoft" repository. The team will be actively involved in teaching,
training, and learning through the Center for Solar-Terrestrial Research (CSTR)
at the New Jersey Institute of Technology. The software tools created in this
project will be widely used in graduate courses taught at CSTR in solar physics,
radio astronomy, and plasma physics.