* 0961357
* ETBC:  Global 3-D Modeling of Atmospheric Mercury and its Coupling to the Ocean and Land: Impacts of Past and Future Anthropogenic Emissions
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2010,11/30/2014
* Elsie Sunderland, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2014
* USD 550,306.00

This project will improve understanding of the global biogeochemical mercury
cycle and its link to oceanic methylmercury, which bioaccumulates through the
food chain and causes human health risks. It will use a global three-dimensional
model (GEOS-Chem) driven by assimilated meteorological data and will include
mechanistic representations of mercury speciation and transfer between the
atmosphere and terrestrial and oceanic reservoirs. The model will improve on the
existing version of GEOS-Chem, most notably through the incorporation of a
detailed process-based terrestrial model. Although many processes are still
uncertain, the work will develop a first capability to model how rapidly changes
in anthropogenic mercury emissions are reflected by terrestrial inorganic
mercury concentrations. The coupled land-atmosphere-ocean modeling framework
will be evaluated and constrained using a large body of observational mercury
data from the atmosphere (ships, aircraft, land sites), oceans (air-sea
exchange, mercury speciation, correlations with environmental variables), and
soils.

This research will provide a platform for future work examining (1) the
potentially large impacts of climate change on the global mercury cycle, (2) the
link between the global cycle of mercury and that of methylmercury, which is the
bioavailable species that accumulates in food-webs. This will lead to a unique
resource for the development of national and international policies targeted at
reducing environmental mercury levels through control of anthropogenic
emissions. The multiphase, three-dimensional modeling framework will have
application to future modeling of other contaminants such as persistent organic
pollutants. The project will train a graduate student in interdisciplinary
environmental modeling.