* 0961652
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Politics and Belief of Religious Conversion
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2011
* Ann Stoler, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 09/30/2011
* USD 14,210.00

New School University doctoral student Diego Caguenas, supervised by Dr. Ann
Stoler, will undertake anthropological research on the phenomenon of indigenous
politicization in Latin America. The lens through which he will view these
changes is the movement away from world religions introduced by colonial powers
and back to revived local religions. Such movements in Latin America echo a
broader rejection of secularism in many parts of the contemporary world, which
makes them of social scientific as well as social policy interest.

The research will be carried out in Tierradentro, Colombia, where a 1994
landslide prompted the indigenous Nasa people to return to traditional religious
practices. The researcher will investigate redefinitions of personhood that
characterize this radical Nasa revivalism called Cosmovision. Nasa activists
have been working to recast Nasa spirituality as an autonomous belief system,
which precludes the melding of native and Christian philosophies. Their aim is
to produce a "true Nasa" who would be attuned to a broader spiritual universe
and set of native beliefs. The researcher hypothesizes that local actors take up
conversion to Catholicism or to Cosmovision as strategies of personal re-
identification in an increasingly secular society as part of the active
formation of an ethnic self-awareness. Research methods will include long-term
participant observation, structured and semi-structured interviewing, and
analysis of archival documents.

The findings of this research will contribute not only to the study of an
underrepresented geographical area, but will also address a broader topic: the
historic and ongoing impact of Catholic evangelization on indigenous beliefs and
political activism. The research is important because it will contribute to
theoretical understanding of a worldwide trend away from secularism. Funding
this research also supports the education of a social scientist.