* 0961167
* Collaborative Research: Enclaves, Labor Markets, and the Locational Choices of U.S. Immigrants in Economic Boom and Bust
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2015
* Richard Wright, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2015
* USD 110,758.00

The foreign-born share of the U.S. population has risen to almost a record
proportion, 12.6 percent in 2007. Immigrants to the U.S. increasingly are
settling outside California and other traditional gateway states. In the last 20
years, immigrant populations have grown rapidly in the South and Midwest,
regions that previously had been relatively untouched by the upswing in
immigration that began half a century ago. Population growth in these areas
stemmed from natural increase but more importantly from the in-migration of the
native born. The credit-fueled boom that drew many immigrants to these new
locations now has fizzled. Migration behavior also has changed. Fewer people
(both immigrants and native-born) are migrating across state lines. Immigration
also has slowed. Some states that had experienced rapid population growth now
are facing population declines. This research project will document the
settlement patterns of foreign-born immigrants within the country and compare
them to the native-born population. The investigators will look specifically at
US-born and foreign-born migration systems within the U.S. and are especially
interested in analyzing how these two systems change over time, with a
particular emphasis on the economic crisis of 2008-2010. They will compare the
movement of immigrants within the US with movements of U.S.-born people in the
context of the recent recession, with special emphasis given to determining
whether foreign-born and U.S.-born workers respond to labor market signals in
the same way. The investigators will test the hypothesis that immigrants will
migrate within the U.S. in response to local economic crises in ways much like
U.S.-born workers, leaving areas of high unemployment for areas with better job
prospects. They also will seek to determine whether immigrants will be more
reluctant to leave immigrant enclaves and that they will be drawn to these
enclaves when they do move.

By examining how migrants respond to the pull of enclaves of people from the
same ethnic group and the geography of employment opportunities, by considering
how these responses vary by skill and education level as well as by ethnic
group, and by considering how migration behavior may differ in more recent
economic hard times from what occurred in the generally prosperous era of the
1990s, the investigators will address a core theoretical tension between the
geography of labor markets and ethnic enclaves as drivers of migration systems.
The project's intellectual merit of this research will result from the
measurement of their effects on immigrant internal migration across the economic
cycle. Positive broader impacts will include the frequent and timely release of
information on the evolving settlement geography and employment of immigrants
during this recession and its aftermath through both scholarly and more applied
media. The project also will provide education and training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher.