* 0961868
* Collaborative Research:  Do Institutions Affect the Attitudes and Behavior of Constituents? Evidence from an Environmental Management Program in India.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Elisabeth Gerber, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The proposed research will investigate some of the most basic puzzles in the
social sciences: How and to what extent do institutions affect individual
attitudes and behavior? Specifically, this project will examine how individuals'
exposure to and involvement in a new local resource governance program affects
their environmental attitudes and behaviors. The geographic location of the
research is the Indian Himalaya. The research will use changes in community-
level environmental institutions in the Indian state of Himachal Pradesh as the
causal variable of interest. These new institutions were introduced as part of
the Mid-Himalayan Watershed Development Project by the Himachal Pradesh state
government with support from the World Bank in late 2006. The Project created
Village Watershed Development Committees to design and enforce new rules for
using and managing village forests. This research will attempt to explain how
the implementation of and participation in the program's new institutions
changed villagers' attitudes about and activities related to forests and the
environment. The proposed research will compare pre- and post-treatment measures
of institutions, attitudes, and behavior between people in treatment villages
(i.e., those part of the Project) and comparison villages (i.e., similar
villages that were not part of the treatment). The project's data collection
efforts involve surveys of villagers in treatment and comparison villages in two
time periods, questionnaires completed by village officials, and collection of
available official information about the study sites. The resulting dataset will
include information about respondent characteristics (demographics, household
location, economic circumstances, network ties, environmental attitudes,
institutional participation, activities in forests) and village characteristics
(population size, market penetration, forest conditions, civic institutions,
spatial data). The research design involves interviewing the same individuals at
two points in time. The investigators conducted baseline surveys in early 2006
for 2224 respondents across 60 villages before the Project was implemented in 30
of these villages. The current project will collect and analyze a second wave of
data to measure (changes in) post-treatment institutions, attitudes and
behavior. Collectively, these data will permit make powerful inferences about
the extent to which new institutions caused attitudes and behavior to change,
and about what factors were most important in bringing about those changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Questions about how and whether institutions affect
individual attitudes and the relationship between attitudes and behavior have
deep theoretical implications that divide many scholars in the social sciences.
Whereas some believe attitudes to be largely fixed and determined by structural
context, others see attitudes as highly malleable. Each view implies a very
different causal mechanism relating to political behavior. How attitudes and
behavior are connected is another question on which scholars are divided. Within
political science, there is a healthy debate on the related question of
preference formation and change. The proposed research will contribute to these
theoretical discussions by empirically demonstrating the extent to which a
particular set of institutions change an important class of attitudes and
related behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individuals' views about the
environment and variations in their willingness to protect and conserve natural
resources can have a significant impact on the success of conservation policies
and the enforcement costs related to institutions for environmental management.
In a global context where numerous developing countries claim they are
decentralizing decision making and enforcement institutions related to
environmental resources such as forests and water, as well as development
domains such as health and education, knowledge about the drivers of individual
attitudes and behavior is crucial to the success of decentralization policies.
The study will also address policy issues such as how to design and target
institutions to produce significant impacts on attitudes and behavior; generate
a panel dataset that can be used to test a range of hypotheses about the
efficacy of policy interventions, attitude change and the political economy of
development and environmental conservation; and produce substantive knowledge
about a common and increasingly popular class of local governance institutions.
Finally, the research project will strengthen collaborations between scholars
and organizations in India and the United States and will contribute to the
training of graduate students through their participation in the research
project at the University of Michigan, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign,
and the KLB DAV College for Women, Palampur, India.