* 0961242
* The quality control of oceanic carbon dioxide measurements: preparation and distribution of reference materials.
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Andrew Dickson, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2014
* USD 414,439.00

In this project, researchers at the Scripps Institute of Oceanogrpahy will
continue to provide a mechanism for the quality control of the oceanic carbon
dioxide measurements, in particular those that are made as part of international
global programs. This will help to ensure that such measurements are comparable
and accurate although made in different laboratories at different times; and
will be an important factor in the design of a Global Ocean Observing System.

As they have done under previous NSF awards for this activity, they will prepare
and certify reference materials for the parameters of the oceanic carbon dioxide
system: total dissolved inorganic carbon, total alkalinity, and hydrogen ion
concentration, pH for a sample of sea water. The reference materials for total
dissolved inorganic carbon and for total alkalinity will be based on natural
seawater, sterilized, bottled, and analyzed using appropriate reference methods
for these parameters. Reference materials for Tris will be based on synthetic
seawater and analyzed using classical Harned cells.

These reference materials will be distributed to US and to international
investigators to assist in the quality control of oceanic CO2 measurements.
During the course of this project, they expect to distribute at least 15,000
bottles of reference material. These materials will also be used to provide test
samples for use in collaborative studies of the analytical methods used to
determine these various parameters.

An important part of the project involves planning for the future. It is
essential to assure a long-term supply of reference materials for future ocean
science research, and it will be necessary to identify an agency or company that
will take on this responsibility. To encourage this, the principal investigator
will interact with the US National Institute for Standards and Technology, the
European Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements (IRMM) in Geel,
Belgium as well as with Ocean Scientific International (the IAPSO Standard Sea
Water Service), and with various Japanese investigators to assess and recommend
a plan for the future.

Broader Impacts: Infrastructure: The provision of reference materials to the
international community of carbon cycle researchers helps to improve the overall
quality of oceanic carbon data around the world both for field studies of the
distribution of oceanic carbon, as well as for studies related to ocean
acidification. Thus it is a significant contribution to research infrastructure
in this field. Education: The existence of such a laboratory at a major US
Oceanographic Institution, ensures that undergraduate students and graduate
students that work in the lab alongside this reference material program benefit
from the education in high-quality analytical techniques that is part and parcel
of such a program, and also from the ancillary discussions associated with
quality control and quality assurance. It also provides a resource for other
students in the institution who are interested in making high-quality carbon
measurements as part of their research. The principal investigator is also
called on to instruct others in CO2 measurements, both by telephone or e-mail
conversations, and also in more formal courses. Outreach: The principal
investigator will be involved in a number of public outreach efforts related to
his research studies on the ocean carbon system. In particular, he expects to
make a number of public presentations in the area of ocean acidification, as
well as to work with Niijii Films (makers of A Sea Change) to develop materials
for use in education related to this topic.