* 0961555
* Collaborative Research - Taxon-Specific Variability of Organic Matter Production and Remineralization Potential
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2016
* USD 235,012.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The marine phosphorus (P) cycle is characterized by tight
coupling between the uptake and decomposition of dissolved inorganic P (DIP) and
dissolved organic P (DOP). DIP is incorporated into a broad range of cellular
compounds integral for energy storage, genetic material and cell structure. Cell
death and autolysis, exudation, viral lysis and grazing all lead to the release
of DOP into the environment where it can be depolymerized, hydrolyzed,
reassimilated, removed by absorption onto sinking particles or accumulate in the
surrounding environment. In this manner, the form and composition of P in the
marine environment is largely controlled by the metabolic activity of
microorganisms and is intimately linked to the cycling of carbon (C) and
nitrogen (N) as particulate organic P (POP) and DOP is bound to C and N in
multiple forms, including esters, phospholipids and phosphonates. Thus, a
consideration of marine P cycling is most relevant when P transformations are
viewed as part of the nutrient and energy flow in the oceanic water column. At
the ecosystem scale, the balance of productivity and respiration in the open
ocean is regulated by the availability of potentially limiting nutrients such as
C, N and P. Therefore, understanding the coupling of C, N, and P cycles is
central to the determination of the long-term controls of the magnitude and
variability of primary production and particle export. Nonetheless, a paucity of
simultaneous measures of dissolved organic carbon (DOC), dissolved organic
nitrogen (DON) and DOP and a relative lack of information on production and
decomposition processes have hindered progress in understanding the coupled
dynamics of these pools. Recent studies of dissolved organic matter (DOM)
dynamics show large departures from Redfield trajectories driven by alterations
in phytoplankton species composition, the stoichiometry and chemical composition
of organic matter production, differential lability of organic compounds and
preferential remineralization of N and P by heterotrophic bacteria. Furthermore,
there is mounting evidence of the potential liberation of greenhouse gases
occurring via DOP hydrolysis.

In this research, the investigators will characterize the composition, lability
and remineralization stoichiometry of organic P-C-N produced by ecologically
significant photosynthetic genera. They will conduct a series of in situ and
laboratory-based bio-assays where particulate (POM) and DOM isolated from
Prochlorococcus and phosphonate-containing strains of Trichodesmium are added to
natural microbial populations and incubated in the laboratory and at sea.
Hypothesis driven experiments will address the following objectives:

(1) Determine the elemental (P-C-N) stoichiometry and biomolecular alterations
(31P-nuclear magnetic resonance) occurring in response to exogenous additions of
Trichodesmium and Prochlorococcus POM and DOM to natural populations of
heterotrophic bacteria, estimate the labile and semi-labile fraction of organic
material generated by ecologically significant genera and measure potential
aerobic production of select greenhouse gases (methane and ethane). (2) Initiate
decomposition experiments in the NPSG at opposing phases of the seasonal cycle
(summer/winter) in order to capture varying microbial assemblages having
different initial metabolic status and community structure.

BROADER IMPACTS: Implementation of the research objectives will serve to build
collaborative networks through data sharing and critical discourse. Broader
educational impacts include the provision of extensive interdisciplinary and
inter-laboratory training for the young scientists included in the project and
opportunities for the advancement of women in science. Research highlights will
be incorporated into courses taught, including Communicating Ocean Science and
scientific findings will be shared via publications, participation in
conferences and workshops and maintenance of a research blog. Partnering with
education staff at the NSF-funded Center for Microbial Research and Education,
the investigators will develop a science kit to illustrate the role of biology
in elemental cycles. The kit will be made available for distribution to all
partner institutions. The broader societal benefits of the research are an
increased understanding of the role of key biota in elemental cycling and the
regulation of primary and export production in a fundamental oceanic habitat.