* 0961234
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Smart Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Diane Cook, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2015
* USD 326,770.00

CNS - 0961234 Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Smart Environments
Cook, Diane J. Washington State University

The goal of this REU Site program is to offer a unique training opportunity for
undergraduates to conduct research in the multidisciplinary area of health-
assistive smart environment technologies. The population is aging; therefore
research is needed to understand the effects of aging and to find ways of
allowing older adults and individuals with disabilities to lead independent
lives at home. Our proposed REU program facilitates research and training in the
complementary disciplines of computer science, electrical engineering,
psychology, and health care. This program will partner with other REU programs
both locally and in other geographic areas. Students will also interact with
graduate students from a related IGERT program on campus. The REU program will
continue to place emphasis on targeting involvement with women and students from
underrepresented groups. The program is designed to enable high quality
interdisciplinary research that links technology design with health-based
applications. The topics addressed are highly interdisciplinary and will require
interaction with faculty and mentors from a number of disciplinary areas. The
program will create new opportunities for undergraduates to study health and
human behavior using the technology.