* 0961060
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Juror Perceptions of Juveniles Transferred to Criminal Court: The Role of Generic Prejudice and Emotion in Determinations of Guilt.
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Richard Wiener, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 02/29/2012
* USD 11,873.00

As increasing numbers of juveniles are tried as adults in criminal court,
researchers have begun to examine how jurors perceive these juveniles. Results
of several studies suggest that jurors may judge a juvenile tried as an adult
more harshly than an adult charged with the same crime; however, other research
suggests that jurors show no bias against juveniles tried as adults. The present
research aims to clarify this issue by examining the roles of generic prejudice
and emotion in jurors' judgments of juveniles tried as adults.

Generic prejudice is prejudice that is not specific to the defendant or other
parties associated with a trial, but rather prejudice about a category of
defendants or crimes. Jurors may judge a juvenile tried as an adult more harshly
than they judge an adult charged with the same crime because of generic
prejudice toward all juveniles tried as adults. Furthermore, the experience of
certain emotions may facilitate this generic prejudice. According to the
Appraisal-Tendency Framework, sadness and fear lead to greater systematic
cognitive processing, while anger leads to greater heuristic processing, and in
turn, greater reliance on stereotypes when making decisions. Study 1 of this
project will assess which stereotypes people associate with juveniles tried as
adults compared to juveniles tried in juvenile court and adults tried in
criminal court. Study 2 of this project will examine to what extent angry,
fearful, sad, and neutral mock jurors use these stereotypes to make judgments of
guilt when presented with a juvenile tried as an adult, or an adult charged with
the same crime.

The present research will have implications for ensuring that juveniles
transferred to criminal court receive a fair trial. Adjudication in criminal
court can result in more severe punishment than adjudication in juvenile court,
thus it is important to ensure that juveniles tried as adults are not judged
more harshly than are adults charged with the same crimes.