* 0961755
* The Emergence of Latino Street Gangs in Indianapolis: Migration or Emulation?
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2011
* Mike Tapia, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 04/30/2011
* USD 30,667.00

Like many medium to large Midwestern cities, Indianapolis, Indiana, has
witnessed the growing presence of Latino street gangs over the past decade. This
recent development is clearly linked to a substantial Latino population influx
to the region that began in the early 1990's. Seizing on the opportunity to
analyze the early stages of gang emergence, this study seeks to advance
theoretical understanding of gang formation. The project is guided by two
competing perspectives on how and why these gangs are emerging in the Midwest.
Most research on gang emergence in new locations claims it is a "homegrown"
problem, a function of increasing local poverty and human adaptation to
deteriorating social conditions. An alternate view, common among law enforcement
officials, suggests that gang members strategically migrate from other places in
the U.S. or Latin America as a way to expand their criminal operations. The
researchers will conduct extensive fieldwork to investigate the issue in a large
Midwestern city and determine which of these processes best explains the Latino
gang growth phenomenon.

The research team began interviewing gang officers, school personnel, and
members of Latino street gangs in the summer of 2004 and have followed
developments there ever since. The evidence gathered to date slightly favors the
migration explanation over the homegrown thesis. Many gang members claim direct
or indirect gang ties to California, Chicago, New York, and several Latin
American countries. The gangs they claim affiliation with are well-known street
organizations with branches or "sets" across the nation. This research continues
to interview former and current gang members about their reasons for migrating
to the Midwest and whether they brought their gang affiliations with them or
joined locally-formed groups. Upon completion, this research effort will yield
the most thorough understanding of domestic and international migration as a
cause of Latino gang formation in U.S. cities historically devoid of such
groups.