* 0961545
* Collaborative Proposal:  Multi-Scale Modeling:   Assessing the role of eastern boundary upwelling regions and their ecosystems on climate variability using a fully coupled model
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Enrique Curchitser, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2016
* USD 853,737.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;This is a multi-institutional research project to
study the regional atmosphere-ocean interactions, and the global ramifications,
that result from a more accurate treatment of the eastern boundary coastal
upwelling regions of California, Peru-Chile and Benguela, their ecosystems and
biogeochemistry in a fully coupled global multi-scale climate model. The novel
computational development provides the ability to selectively increase the
resolution of the ocean component in desired regions while keeping the two-way
coupling to the atmosphere. This project will address the question of physical
and biological mechanisms affecting the CO2 air-sea exchange and export in these
regions and the climate variability in the present, and under future scenarios,
for the selected regions from physical, ecosystem and biogeochemical
perspectives. As a study of the role of continental shelves in the climate
system, and by addressing known biases/deficiencies in current climate models,
it will contribute to our understanding of the climate system and improve
projections of climate change. By directly including a biogeochemical model,
this study can begin to address climate change impacts on the ecosystems of
three of the most productive oceanic regions, and the ecosystems interaction
with climate&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research has significant impacts to many communities on several levels. By
studying regions that are commercially significant, this project will contribute
to the knowledge that is needed for future ocean resource management. The
inclusion of an ocean model (ROMS) that has been extensively used for ecosystem
studies, brings the climate, biogeochemical and ecosystem communities closer
together and will permit the study of the role of climate change on ecosystems
including higher trophic levels all the way to human activity. The project also
contributes significant technical developments to the climate modeling
community. The results will lead to the availability of a regional ocean model
fully embedded within a global climate model and linked to all its components,
including a multi-resolution atmosphere, land surface and sea ice models. By
working within the NCAR Community Climate System Model framework all the
technical developments will become part of the model that is accessible to the
scientific community and can benefit emerging interdisciplinary programs. This
project includes the training of three post-doctoral scientists one at
University of Maine and two at U.C. Santa Cruz. All the academic institutions
involved have a significant track record in teaching of both undergraduate and
graduate students and outreach activities. Outreach and teaching activities are
also an important part of the mission at the National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR) where regular summer colloquia (organized by the advanced
studies program) educate graduate students on various aspects of the climate
system and its modeling, and well-visited websites are maintained for both the
scientific community and the public.