* 0961679
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interreligious Violence, Civic Peace, and Citizenship: Christians and Muslims in Indonesia's Moluccan Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Robert Hefner, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2011
* USD 17,010.00

Boston University doctoral student F. N. U. Sumanto, supervised by Dr. Robert
Hefner, will undertake research on interreligious violence, citizenship, and
post-conflict peace in the Christian-Muslim conflict zone of Maluku, Eastern
Indonesia. The project proposes to investigate first, factors underlying
interreligious violence, and, second, factors shaping the post-conflict truce
and efforts to rebuild an operative structure and public culture for multi-
religious citizenship in the region. More specifically, the project aims to
examine the role of religious networks, organizations, discourses, and practices
before, during, and after the violence, investigating which social resources
aggravated local tensions, and, conversely, which contributed or is contributing
to the creation of a public culture capable of mediating ethnic and religious
divisions. The central focus of the project, then, is to explore the dynamics of
Maluku's religious groups and civic organizations in responding to violence and
the post-conflict truce, and to examine the implications of religious networks,
associations, and discourses for the peace and for local understandings and
practices of national citizenship. The research will utilize (1) ethnographic
fieldwork, (2) network and associational analysis, and (3) the study of
historical and textual materials.

This project is important because it will contribute, first, to social science
theories of violence, conflict resolution, citizenship, and peacemaking in
multi-religious societies. Second, the project will contribute to the growing
body of theory and research on the role of religion in deeply divided societies.
More generally, this project will also be of direct relevance to the study of
violence and reconciliation in those parts of the world that have suffered the
ravages of mass violence.