* 0961513
* Collaborative Research: Economic Outcomes and Self-Selection in the Age of Mass Migration: A Micro Approach
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Leah Boustan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 04/30/2013
* USD 211,365.00

This project will create and analyze a novel data set following individuals who
moved to the United States and their siblings who stayed in Europe during the
period of mass migration in late nineteenth century. This analysis of individual
migration behavior contributes to the economic history of the US and European
sending countries and answers important questions in the economics of
immigration.

The PIs make use of newly-digitized Censuses from two sending countries--Norway
and Great Britain--as well as 100% samples of Norwegian and British migrants
compiled from US Census records available on the genealogy website Ancestry.com.
The PIs ask whether and to what extent migrants were positively/negatively
selected from their sending populations, how to estimate the returns to
migration while taking into account this selection, and how migrants and
children of migrants performed in the US relative to the native-born.

The fact that migrants may not have been randomly selected from the sending
population complicates the estimation of the "true" returns to migration. The
first project develops a method to estimate returns to migration and infer the
direction of migrant selection. The identification strategy relies on
comparisons between migrants and their siblings who stayed in Europe, as well as
the primogeniture laws in Europe that exogenously increased the propensity of
younger brothers to migrate.

The fact that migrants may be positively (or negatively) selected from the
sending population does not automatically imply that they will be more (or less)
skilled than the average worker in the destination. The second project follows
the career of European migrants from 20 sending countries and their children in
the US. The PIs compare the labor market outcomes of cohorts of first and second
generation immigrants with the outcomes of the native-born from 1900-1930. If
migrants' earnings eventually overtake those of US natives, one can infer that
migrants were positively selected relative to the US population.

Broader Impact: The sustained rate of high in-migration to the US during this
period was historically unprecedented at the time and has yet to be surpassed.
Understanding this large migrant flow has important implications for both US and
European economic history. In particular, the US growth take-off in the late
nineteenth century may have been reinforced by the human capital of positively
selected migrants (or, alternatively, was all the more impressive for taking
place while the country absorbed a negatively selected migrant flow).

This project will also facilitate comparisons between historical and
contemporary immigrant flows. Immigration was subject to few policy restrictions
in the late nineteenth century. While current migration patterns in part reflect
policy preferences for skilled workers or family reunification, historical
migration trends were driven by individual migration decisions alone. The
project will inform policy by shedding light on what types of migrant selection
could be expected in the absence of restrictive border policy.

Finally, a key goal of the effort to create a large linked data set of migrants
and their non-migrant siblings is to make these important data publicly
available for the benefit of the larger research community. These data are
likely to be widely used by scholars to address various questions in labor
economics, macroeconomics and economic history.