* 0961364
* Context-Dependency of Marine Biodiversity-Ecosystem Function Relationships
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Geoffrey Trussell, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2014
* USD 399,823.00

Because species mediate key biogeochemical processes and play unique ecological
roles, changes in the diversity and composition of species in an ecosystem can
alter how that system functions. A growing body of work has demonstrated that
changes in biodiversity can have profound effects on the functioning of marine
ecosystems. However, key unresolved issues remain with respect to relationships
between marine biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. In particular, few
studies have evaluated interactions between producer diversity and herbivore
diversity, especially in the field. Furthermore, the vast majority of
experiments have evaluated the consequences of biodiversity changes at only one
location, so there is very little knowledge of how diversity-function
relationships are modified by environmental context. This study will examine, in
the field, how environmental context shapes marine diversity-function
relationships and particularly the interaction between changes in consumer and
producer diversity in intertidal ecosystems at three sites spanning 500 km of
the New England coastline. These factorial experiments will manipulate seaweed
and grazer diversity at East Point, Massachusetts; Chamberlain Point, Maine; and
Quoddy Head, Maine. The research asks the following questions: 1) How does
seaweed diversity influence key marine ecosystem processes such as primary and
secondary productivity? 2) How does herbivore diversity affect the top-down
impacts of molluscan grazers on intertidal seaweed assemblages? 3) What are the
feedbacks between grazer and seaweed diversity in driving intertidal community
and ecosystem structure and function? And 4) How does environmental context
modify the top-down and bottom-up effects of biodiversity change on intertidal
ecosystem functioning?

This study will make important intellectual contributions to marine ecology by
considering feedbacks between diversity change at two adjacent trophic levels.
The work will be conducted at multiple sites which span a range of nearshore
oceanographic and climatic conditions, enhancing the generality of the work and
allowing for evaluation of the effects of environmental context on diversity-
function relationships. Biodiversity is changing at all scales, from local to
global, and it is essential to understand the consequences of these changes in
order to better predict and ameliorate their impacts on communities and
ecosystems. This research will provide a more holistic understanding of the
links between diversity, trophic interactions and ecosystem function that will
facilitate more effective conservation and management strategies in marine, as
well as other, ecosystems. It will provide training and research experience for
students at all educational levels. The investigators will involve graduate and
undergraduate students in all phases of the research and will also offer a
summer research internship each year to a high school student from the Coastal
Ocean Science Academy (COSA) that is taught by the Northeastern University
Marine Science Center's Outreach staff. COSA students are primarily from under-
represented groups in the greater Boston area. Finally, the results of the
research will be communicated to the public through the outreach and public
education program at the Center.