* 0961044
* Cyberinfrastructure for Accelerating Physics & Astronomy Applications With Many-core and Accelerator-Based Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Horst Simon, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,579,006.00

The rapid increase of data rates and volumes (peta-operations/second, 15
petabytes/year) from physics and astronomy simulations, observations,
experiments and analyses are reaching critical computational impasse. To meet
the demands of petascale to exascale computing challenges, fundamentally new
energy efficient supercomputing architectures and solutions will have to be
researched and developed. The uniqueness of this work is in adopting
science/application-driven approach where the key application-drivers are
identified up-front to assess the efficacy of this new approach. With wide
appeal, the new period of energy efficient science with new performance metrics
such as operations-per-watt presents a great opportunity to lead the progress of
scientific research.

We will build a cyberinfrastructure of comprehensive software libraries, tools,
frameworks, easy-assembly common hardware modules and complete turnkey solutions
by leveraging emerging many-core architectures with emphasis on Graphics
Processing Units (GPUs). The three-year research plan will develop algorithms,
and hardware infrastructures for efficient scalable solutions directly
applicable to a broad range of compute-intensive scientific problems. The set of
applications are categorized into three separate domains - simulation,
instrumentation and data processing - covering specific real-case challenges in
cosmology, astronomy, optics, and image/data processing with potential of
interdisciplinary relevance. The developed cyberinfrastructure will be released
to the broader scientific community with methodologies for easy implementation.

Successfully harnessing the power of the parallel architectures such as GPUs for
compute-intensive scientific problems via the planned cyberinfrastructure will
open doors for new discovery and revolutionize the growth of science. The
infrastructure will actively identify interdisciplinary acceleration overlaps
and will alleviate adoption. Extremely high-speed massive simulations will cut
the overall execution times by several orders of magnitudes, thereby reducing
monthly time cycles, prone to malfunctions and delays, to hours and minutes.
Remote on-site handling of high data rates will make real-time imaging in radio
astronomy possible for the first time.

Partnerships have been established with international groups in National
Astronomical Observatories of China, and University of Heidelberg, Germany. The
proposed research will engage and enable students. The combination of low cost
devices and cyberinfrastructure will supply affordable high performance
computing for young researchers and students. The infrastructure will be
released to the broader community in yearly cycles with open source license
punctuated with workshops to widen the scope of the research.