* 0961693
* Collaborative Research: Studies of Property Rights and Merger Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Ilya Segal, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 278,282.00

This award funds work on two distinct projects. The Cose Theorem instructs that
the allocation of property rights is irrelevant for economic outcomes; as long
as all parties affected by a decision can engage in efficient bargaining, the
allocation of property rights will not matter. While a sueful benchmark,
economists have long recognized that in many circumstances such bargaining is
not possible. The first project focuses on one reason: inefficient bargaining
due to asymmetric information. Put simply, when bargaining is imperfect because
the parties do not have the same information, the status quo position of the
parties may matter for the final agreements reached. This research works to
analyse how property rights should be be distribued to maximize economic welfare
under these circumstances. The project expands on previous results by
investigating issues such as the nature of second best property rights when
efficiency cannot be achieved, the benefits of options-to-own over simple
property rights, the effects of alternative bargaining procedures, and optimal
property rights in dynamic settings. This would may improve our understanding of
issues as diverse as the optimal assignment of of intellectual property rights,
the benefits of liability rules versus property rules in law, the efficienciy of
alternative mthods of allocating spectrum, and the organization of productive
partnerships. The intellectual merit of the project is that it seeks to expand
our understanding of how the proper allocation of property rights can increase
effciency by facilitating trade. The broader impacts are that the allocation of
property rights plays an important role in numerous practical economic
progblems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project examines the nature of an
optimal horizontal merger policy, one fo the central pillars of antitrust
policy. The project characterizes an optimal dynamic merger policy in a setting
with stochastically arriving merger possibilities and ex ante uncertain levels
of synergies in which the firms decide each period which mergers to propose to
the antitrust authoirty. It identifies conditions in which this difficult issue
has a strikingly simple resolution: an antitrust authority who wants to maximize
consumer welfare can accomplish the objective by using a completely myopic
merger review policy; that is, one that approves a merger today if and only if
it deos not lower consumer surplus given the current market structure. New work
on this project includes the relaxation of an important assumption, that the set
of firms involved in one possible merger does not overlap with those in any
other possible mergers. The broader impacts of this project include developing
better-informed antitrust policies.