* 0961702
* Collaborative Research: A molecular biological sensor for AUVs
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Clement Furlong, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

Application of molecular analytical techniques for identifying marine microbes,
viruses, specific genes, and gene products is central to oceanographic research,
monitoring and resource management practices, but generally such methods require
transporting samples to a laboratory for processing. This requirement typically
results in delays ranging from many hours to days between collection of material
and its analysis. Hence, development of instrumentation that overcomes this
impediment is seen as a priority. Previously, the PI's approached this problem
through development of the Environmental Sample Processor (ESP). The ESP is a
field-deployable system that allows for application of molecular probe
methodologies remotely in situ, including DNA and protein probe arrays, as well
as real-time PCR. Applications of the ESP are currently restricted to moorings
or benthic installations that can be embedded within a larger observatory
framework. Since the number of moorings that can be deployed at any given time
is limited and because they are fixed geographically, the ability to interrogate
the "patchiness" of target communities and to assess their dynamics in response
to changing environmental conditions from a remote perspective is limited. The
PI's propose to overcome this limitation and compliment existing ocean observing
technologies by modifying the ESP to fit on mobile platforms.

The primary goal of this project is to fit the instrument on a 12" diameter
propeller-driven AUV, though the same device could also be integrated on other
platforms as well (e.g., profiling mooring or float, drifter). This can be
accomplished by repackaging and eliminating some elements of the current ESP,
and by combining that device with a field deployable, multi-channel surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) sensor. Like the current ESP, the new instrument will be
suitable for use with nucleic acid and protein-based assay chemistries, and
support sample archiving so that material can be brought back to a laboratory
for later analyses. However, its configuration will be aimed at fewer target
species/metabolites for a given deployment, consistent with focused AUV
reconnaissance operations. Such real-time detection capability will create
unique opportunities for oceanographers and resource managers, particularly when
placed within an integrated ocean observatory network.

Broader Impacts

The educational and outreach benefits from numerous undergraduates, graduate
students, post docs, technical staff, and senior faculty working with the ESPs
through various projects; various summer internship programs provided by WHOI
and Biosecurity, Inc. for undergraduates including minority students; Monterey
Bay Aquarium has included the ESP in a program that runs twice a day reaching
almost 300,000 people a year. Although one reviewer described the broader
impacts as somewhat predictable, the PI's have a broad base of resources
available to them and their ability to utilize these has been demonstrated in
the past.