* 0962370
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Paleobiology of Theropithecus brumpti from the Turkana Basin, Kenya and Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Stephen Frost, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 03/31/2011
* USD 5,075.00

The fossil representatives of the baboon genus Theropithecus are often used as
indicators of past environments and as analogues for human evolution. However,
data are essentially limited to one species, the grassland adapted T. oswaldi,
masking potential morphological and ecological breadth within the genus. New
fossil material of the putatively forest adapted species, T. brumpti, is now
available. This project presents a detailed description of the paleobiology of
T. brumpti including postcranial functional morphology and locomotor mode, and
documents morphological correlates of cercopithecine locomotor behavior. Linear
measurements collected from all available T. brumpti postcranial material and an
extensive comparative sample are used to examine both general size and
postcranial features that are thought to be related to locomotor mode. These
features vary significantly among known cercopithecids. These measurements are
analyzed using qualitative as well as univariate and multivariate quantitative
approaches to test the hypotheses that (1) contrary to the current literature T.
brumpti is actually relatively terrestrial (compared to most cercopithecids)
even though associated with forest habitats, (2) yet, has more arboreal
adaptations than other Theropithecus species, and (3) was a dexterous manual
forager. This project is the first comprehensive postcranial functional analysis
of T. brumpti. These data, along with the comparative sample, can be used to
further explore (1) how climatic changes influence Theropithecus anatomy and
behavior, (2) patterns of species occurrence and evolution in specific
environmental contexts and (3) the interpretation of additional fossil taxa in
future studies and (4) the paleoecological context of human evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will add new morphological data to be
disseminated widely through shared databases (i.e. PRIMO) and publications, as
well as strengthening ties between American, Ethiopian and Kenyan researchers.
In addition, the project supports the research of a female graduate student.