* 0962504
* Understanding Education Markets: Experimental and Observational Evidence from Pakistan
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Asim Khwaja, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 05/31/2013
* USD 409,399.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The PI's propose three studies to better understand
the educational market in developing countries. Increasingly, these markets are
characterized by substantial and varied school choice, even for children from
poor backgrounds. The studies combine a unique dataset with non-experimental and
experimental variation to isolate supply and demand factors. The dataset is a
four-year, matched panel (the "LEAPS" data) collected by the PIs that uses
multiple surveys and exams to cover the educational universe - schools,
teachers, parents, and children - for over a hundred distinct educational
markets (villages) in Pakistan. The first study examines how the education
market, especially schools, is affected by the introduction of report cards on
relative school and student performance. It takes advantage of an experimental
intervention that provided learning quality information via school and child
standardized test scores to parents in half of the villages in the LEAPS sample.
The extensive data permits separate examination of school, teacher, parent, and
child responses to the intervention in a general equilibrium context, allowing
for an investigation of the effects of the information provision on the entire
market and its actors. Moreover, exploiting (non-experimental) variation across
school quality and type provides more general insights into the underlying
economic responses of these actors.&lt;br/&gt;The second study investigates the
market-wide impact of making public providers more responsive to parental
demand. The study utilizes an intervention carried out by the government that
reorganized public school councils in a partially randomized subset of the LEAPS
villages, making them more representative of the parent body and providing them
with additional resources. An additional survey round is proposed to examine the
medium-term impact of the intervention. The study will examine both the impact
on public school outcomes and, given that private schools did not receive this
support, the potential crowding-out effects of increased public subsidies. The
third study examines parental decision-making and educational investments for
children. An initial examination of the LEAPS data shows parents invest
significantly more in children they perceive to be more able. This study
combines novel ability perceptions and educational investment data for each
child over the four-year period of the survey with exogenous variation in
perceptions due to the child-level report cards. The study examines the extent
and nature of parental investment reallocation from children revealed
(through&lt;br/&gt;the report cards) to be more or less able than what parents
initially believed.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies
contribute to our understanding of the workings and evolution of the educational
markets in developing countries. The combination of feasible and scalable
experimental interventions, which allow for improved empirical identification
while remaining cognizant of external validity, and comprehensive longitudinal
data, which permit an examination of all salient actors in the education market,
makes these studies unique and valuable. While we focus on one developing
country and specific interventions, the broader goal is to generate insights and
uncover economic behaviors that are generalizable to other settings. Each study
contributes to specific research areas, in particular to a growing literature on
using information to improve service delivery, the efficacy of systems that
directly empower beneficiaries of public services, and within-household resource
allocation.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;All three studies directly
address questions of policy import. Information-based accountability and the
empowerment of communities to manage local public goods have been prominent in
recent development policy. Moreover, the design of increasingly popular public
redistribution policies depends crucially on the structure of family allocations
and parental decision-making. The researchers plan to disseminate the broader
findings of these studies through opinion pieces, policy briefs, and conferences
that engage policy-makers. Also, in order to facilitate further research,
particularly by students and policy analysts, the novel and comprehensive data
gathered will be made publicly available. The first year of the data is already
accessible on the project website, and the researchers plan to make subsequent
rounds available along with detailed documentation to facilitate outside use.