* 0962107
* The Spatio-Temporal Response of the Water Surface to Rainfall and its Effects on Radar Signature
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* James Duncan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 02/28/2015
* USD 720,735.00

Funds are provided to support a series of laboratory experiments the objective
of which is to explore the physics of the water surface response to rainfall and
the relationship between the surface response and radar backscatter. The surface
response includes splashes and ring waves generated by the spatial and temporal
distributions of drop impacts in the rain zones. Experiments with various rain
rates, rain drop diameters and spatial distributions of rain on the water
surface will be carried out in a wind-wave tank (12.8 m long, 1.15 m wide with a
water depth of 0.91 m) with and without wind and surfactants. Experiments with
salt water will be performed in a smaller tank. Measurements will include
surface profile histories at the center plane of the rain field using a
cinematic laser induced fluorescence technique, rain and secondary drop size and
trajectories using a cinematic shadowgraph technique. Additional measurements of
the turbulent flow fields several centimeters below the mean free surface will
be made using Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV). Measurements of radar
backscattering from the water surface in and around rain zones will be made with
a pulsed ultra-wide band radar system. In cases with surfactants, water surface
properties including surface pressure isotherms and surface viscoelasticity will
be measured using a Langmuir trough/longitudinal wave propagation device and a
maximum bubble pressure measuring device will be used to determine the in-situ
diffusion constants and surface tension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Air-sea transfer
of mass, momentum, energy and heat are important components of the dynamical
system controlling the local and global climate. Since rainfall over the ocean
makes an important contribution to these transfer processes, the results of this
project will inform understanding of climate variability. The radar measurements
will provide understanding of the information content of remotely sensed
measurements of the sea surface using microwaves.