* 0962970
* Quantifying Particulate Matter Emission Factors from Prescribed Burning with Application to Mitigating the Impact on Air Quality
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Yuch-Ping Hsieh, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2014
* USD 399,396.00

The objectives of this project are to improve the PM2.5 (particles smaller than
2.5 micrometer diameter) emission factors (EFs) for burning of common
southeastern U.S. vegetation types, test for effects of fire conditions on EFs,
and evaluate improvements in the method for estimating EFs. The hypotheses to be
tested are that current methods over-estimate EFs and that climate and fire fuel
conditions are major factors controlling PM2.5 EFs. The methodology will involve
collection of PM2.5 samples followed by measurements of composition using a
Multi-Element Scanning Thermal Analysis (MESTA) technique developed recently by
one of the principal investigators that can be used to distinguish biomass
burning aerosol (BBA) from background aerosol. The BBA mass measurements will be
combined with measurements of the stable carbon isotope composition of carbon
dioxide generated by the fire. The carbon isotope ratios can be measured in
real-time using a commercially available laser-based system and can be used to
quantify carbon dioxide emitted by the fire. The ratio of BBA to fire carbon
dioxide is the EF.

The results will be used to assess the validity of the current fire PM2.5 EF
database, which is the basis for all fire PM2.5 emission prediction and
modeling. The research will likely establish a new standard for future PM2.5 EF
measurement, which would improve calculation of EF and estimates of PM emission
nationally and globally. Products generated from the project will be delivered
directly to other scientists and to state and federal regulators, which will
lead to improved prescribed fire application and air quality policy in order to
protect the health and safety of the general public. At least two workshops will
be held to provide direct training and information transfer regarding the
developed methods of PM2.5 and fire carbon dioxide emissions and calculation of
improved EFs. A post-doctoral associate and minority graduate and undergraduate
students from Florida A&M University, a Historically Black University, will have
the opportunity to be trained and mentored in areas of air quality research.