* 0962526
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Politics of Participation: Hydropolicy, HIV/AIDS and Women's Health in Lesotho
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Nancy Romero-Daza, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2012
* USD 17,758.00

Doctoral candidate Cassandra Workman-Whaler (University of South Florida), with
the guidance of Dr. Nancy Y. Romero-Daza, will conduct research on how multiple
crises may combine to affect human lives. The particular focus of this project
will be on the combined epidemics of water insecurity and HIV/AIDS. These
apparently separate crises develop synergy because safe and reliable water is
necessary to prevent infections among people with HIV, to grow household gardens
to maintain adequate nutrition, and to ensure anti-retroviral drug adherence.
Since women are the ones primarily responsible for the procurement of water,
water insecurity impacts their ability to effectively provide care for both
healthy and ill family members and, as a result, creates additional work and
stress. Presently, gender considerations are being written into policy and
programs throughout southern Africa. Researchers and policy analysts question
the efficacy of these approaches and note the need for a grounded understanding
of their impact. This project will address that need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be carried out in Lesotho. The researcher will document and
analyze the combined impacts of water insecurity and HIV/AIDS on women, as well
as women's coping strategies. The researcher will employ a mixed methods
approach using both quantitative methods from the field of public health and
qualitative methods from the field of anthropology. The researcher will measure
water insecurity and contributing factors such as food insecurity and poverty.
The effects of water insecurity and illness such as HIV will be assessed through
surveys, interviews, observations and focus groups. Finally interviews with
people working in development and with local women will explore the efficacy of
programs targeted at ameliorating both water insecurity and the effects of
HIV/AIDS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is critically important because
mutually reinforcing crises are common but are under-theorized by social
scientists. The methodology employed in this project offers a holistic approach
to this understudied phenomenon. The research will have policy impacts because
access to safe and reliable sources of water is crucial for individuals and
families affected by the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Funding this research also supports
the education of a social scientist.