* 0962209
* The Oceanography of B-Vitamins: evaluating how nutrients and trace metals influence their synthesis, cycling, and biogeochemical impact
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Sergio Sanudo-Wilhelmy, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2013
* USD 819,448.00

It is well known that the B-vitamins are important growth factors involved in a
large number of metabolic pathways. However, to date, very little work has been
done regarding the importance of those growth factors in regulating biological
activity in marine systems. Genomic data indicates that the supply of B-vitamins
in marine systems depends mainly on biosynthesis by prokaryotes. In contrast,
half of the currently tested eukaryotic phytoplankton have been determined to be
auxotrophic for at least one vitamin. Therefore, the lack of an exogenous source
of these growth factors from prokaryotic cells may strongly impact the
efficiency of the so-called biological pump, which is dominated by large
eukaryotic cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the
University of Southern California will carry out the first in-depth evaluation
of the sources and cycling of arguably one of the most important growth factors
in the ocean, the B-vitamins (B1, B7, and B12). This will be accomplished by
combining field studies in three different oceanographic regimes (San Pedro
Ocean Time Series site (SPOTS) off Southern California, The Hawaii Ocean Time-
Series (HOT) station ALOHA, and a cruise of opportunity to the East Tropical
South Pacific (ETSP) with lab manipulation experiments of cultures of different
marine prokaryotic species. The field study sites are selected to give the
maximum amount of information about the cycling of vitamins in a broad range of
marine environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on preliminary results, the
research team hypothesizes: (1) that there are several potential producers of
B-vitamins in the ocean: non-diazotrophic cyanobacteria and heterotrophic
bacteria in the upper euphotic zone of the world ocean, and that the
availability of B-vitamins is further augmented by diazotrophic cyanobacteria in
subtropical-tropical LNLC regions of the world ocean; (2) that the synthesis of
some B-vitamins is controlled by the availability of specific dissolved trace
metals such as Co (for B12) and Fe (for B2 and B7) and organic and inorganic
nutrients; and (3) that the balance between B vitamin production (found in the
particulate phase) and release (found in the dissolved phase) dictates vitamin
availability and environmental cycling, and that this balance is set by three
factors: the activity of a subset of the pico and microplankton, physical
transport, and uptake by auxotrophic plankton. In order to test these
hypotheses, they developed a new method, using a triple quadrupole mass
spectrometer coupled to a liquid chromatographer, which allows them to measure
directly all B-vitamins simultaneously in less than a liter of seawater as well
as in the intracellular and particulate pools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The scientific and societal impacts of this project include elucidating
the cycling of B-vitamins, without which we will never have a complete
understanding of all of the essential substances needed to sustain major
biological processes such as primary production and nitrogen fixation in the
ocean. Both graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this
project. The principal investigators are active participants in the COSEE-West
program, which involves a network of marine scientists, K-12 educators, and the
general public.