* 0962674
* RIG: The Role of Long 3' -UTRs in Targeting Normal Cellular mRNAs for Decay by Nonsense-mediated mRNA Decay
* BIO,MCB
* 06/30/2009,05/31/2010
* Bessie Kebaara, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Neocles Leontis
* 05/31/2010
* USD 8,144.00

mRNA decay is important for regulation of gene expression. The amount of a
particular mRNA present at a specific time in a cell is dependent on its rate of
synthesis and decay. The nonsense mediated mRNA decay pathway (NMD) is a
specialized mRNA decay pathway that recognizes and rapidly degrades mRNA with
premature stop codons and some wild-type mRNAs. Wild-type mRNAs degraded by NMD
have been identified in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Drosophila melanogaster and
humans. 5-10% of the S. cerevisiae transcriptome is affected when NMD is
inactivated. Thus NMD has a significant impact on wild-type gene expression.
Long 3'-untranslated regions (3'-UTRs) target mRNAs for NMD. Normal S.
cerevisiae cellular mRNAs have 3'-UTRs ranging in size from 50-350 nucleotides,
with most approximately 100 nucleotides long. mRNAs containing mutations that
generate aberrant extended 3'-UTRs are degraded by NMD. A subset of wild-type
transcripts from S. cerevisiae have naturally extended 3'-UTRs. However, the
impact of these extended 3'-UTRs on the decay of these mRNAs has not been
examined. Preliminary data shows that some wild-type mRNAs with long 3'-UTRs are
degraded by NMD while others are immune to NMD. The long-term goal of this
project is to understand the targeting and recognition of wild-type mRNAs with
long 3'-UTRs for NMD. The overall objective for this project is to determine the
extent to which long 3'-UTRs target wild-type mRNAs for degradation by NMD. The
central hypothesis, based on the faux 3'-UTR model, is that wild-type mRNAs with
longer than normal 3'-UTR are targets for NMD. Further, additional cis-acting
sequences are required to protect wild-type mRNAs with long 3'-UTRs from NMD.
The central hypothesis will be tested by determining the role of longer than
normal 3'-UTRs in mRNA degradation by NMD and in parallel determine why one mRNA
with a longer than normal 3'-UTR is immune to NMD. This project will define the
role of long 3'-UTRs in the degradation of wild-type mRNAs by NMD in S.
cerevisiae. This knowledge will advance the field's understanding of the
recognition and targeting of wild-type mRNAs by specialized mRNA decay pathways.
The project involves a bioinformatics-based approach that will enhance the
skills of the principal investigator who is African, an underrepresented
minority in sciences. Furthermore the project will involve mentoring an
undergraduate African American student.