* 0962198
* Spatial Autocorrelation and Species Distribution Models: Analyzing the Effects of Spatial Structure, Sampling Strategy, Statistical Methods, and Scale Using Simulated Data
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Jennifer Miller, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 266,863.00

The use of species distribution models (SDM) to map and monitor animal and plant
distributions has become increasingly important in the context of awareness of
environmental change and its ecological consequences. Although increasingly
sophisticated statistical methods are being used in SDM, the vast majority has
been developed without considering spatial autocorrelation in the data. When
spatial autocorrelation is ignored and nonspatial statistical methods are used,
coefficient estimates are less precise and overall the models can be poorly
specified. Explicitly spatial statistical methods not only can improve upon
these model calibration issues, but they also can incorporate information on
spatial processes such as competition, dispersal, and disturbance. Although
there has been a recent increase in SDM studies that address explicitly spatial
statistical methods, results have been incongruous and difficult to synthesize.
The location- , data-, or scale-specific nature of these studies has impeded
efforts to disentangle the effects of spatial structure in the data, sampling
strategy, the scale of the study, and statistical methods used. This project
addresses each of these issues specifically with the general research question:
how does spatial autocorrelation affect species distribution models? The
research focuses on using multi-resolution simulated distribution maps and novel
assessment measures in order to analyze how differences in each of the four
issues- spatial structure, sampling strategy, scale, and statistical methods-
impact SDM both separately and in concert. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
outcome of this project will be a framework that can be used to guide all
aspects of model conceptualization and development (sampling strategy,
statistical method(s) used, and appropriate spatial scale) when using binary
data with spatial autocorrelation. The research will make an important
contribution to a greater understanding of how spatial autocorrelation affects
inductive models used with binary response data. Beyond predicting species
distributions, these models have become an important and widely used decision-
making tool for a variety of biogeographical applications, such as studying the
effects of climate change, identifying potential protected areas, determining
locations potentially susceptible to invasion, and mapping vector-borne disease
spread and risk. Outside of biogeography, similar binary response models are
used in medical/health applications (e.g., diagnostic tests) and to address
economic and social science questions (e.g. labor market status, credit scoring,
and voting behavior).