* 0962054
* Optimizing the utility of satellite altimetry for diagnosing  lateral stirring and mixing in the upper ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2010,11/30/2015
* Kendall Smith, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 11/30/2015
* USD 643,325.00

The project will assess the significance of model error for mixing diagnostics
deduced from satellite altimetry products, develop strategies for ameliorating
its impact, and expand understanding of the theoretical relationships between
measures of mixing. The sensitivity of mixing diagnostics to noise and spatial
and temporal sampling resolution will be determined using high resolution
primitive equation ocean models. A Lagrangian stochastic parameterization scheme
for the unresolved flow will be developed and coupled to the observed flow
calculated from satellite altimetry. Mixing diagnostic parameters will be
averaged over ensembles of particles to provide statistically meaningful
averages and confidence intervals. Data assimilation methods will be exploited
to dynamically estimate stochastic parameters based upon successive observations
of the flow field. Finally, the research will develop interrelationships among
mixing diagnostics and between diagnostics and large-scale features of the flow
using analytical techniques, simple kinematic flows, and idealized geophysical
turbulence models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to optimize the utility
of satellite altimetry products and develop an extensively documented algorithm
that can be utilized with any given gridded altimetry-derived velocity time-
series. The results of this research will improve understanding of mixing in the
ocean and our ability to model the transport of ocean-borne material with
applications to a wide range of marine-based human activities.