* 0962191
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Voter Behavior And Seniority Advantage In Congress
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* David Cooper, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 01/31/2011
* USD 5,025.00

This project investigates voter behavior due to seniority advantage in Congress.
It is possible that voters compete for pork barrel funds by reelecting
incumbents to maintain seniority. This leads to a transfer of tax dollars from
districts or states with junior legislators to those with more senior ones.
Primary interest lies in discovering whether voters respond more to monetary
rewards or visceral stimulation caused by policy representation. Term limits are
also considered as a mechanism to reduce the cost of electing a challenger as
well as reducing the asymmetry in pork barrel distribution. Controlled
laboratory experiments are utilized where subjects are divided into districts
and act as legislators and voters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
There are no previous experimental studies that test subject reactions to
monetary payoffs against reactions to visceral stimulation, let alone in a
setting as relevant as voting. Much of the existing literature on seniority
advantage proposes that voters prefer&lt;br/&gt;monetary benefits to policy
representation, but this is the first attempt to test that belief. The
experimental design is novel in its use of visceral stimulation via political
issues as well as the method by which subjects express policy support through
donations to foundations that support particular sides of the featured political
issue. Finding that voters weigh monetary benefits less heavily in the voting
decision than policy representation will impact the way economists and political
scientists view vote choice. Such a finding would also lead naturally to
investigating the evolution of voting behavior and whether this result is a
natural response to incentives or whether voters have been conditioned by
current institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If term limits are
found to be effective at reducing disparity in tax benefits as well reducing the
cost of searching for better policy representation, serious consideration should
be given to changing the internal institutions of Congress.