* 0962079
* Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Measurement, Theory, and Policy
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Nir Jaimovich, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 182,000.00

Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Measurement, Theory, and
Policy&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;What is the impact of economic
uncertainty on business cycle fluctuations? This long-standing question has
achieved increased prominence during the current economic downturn, which has
been accompanied by a surge in uncertainty. At the height of the crisis, most
measures of economic uncertainty had reached unprecedented levels and key policy
makers, such as Larry Summers, Christina Romer, Olivier Blanchard and Ben
Bernanke have all repeatedly commented on the damaging impact of economic
uncertainty on the US economy. The research described in this proposal focuses
on the interaction between time-varying uncertainty and the business cycle. It
concentrates on the direct effect of uncertainty on aggregate economic activity,
through the option value of delaying projects on firm decisions, and its
implication for the effectiveness of government policy. Specifically, the PI's
intend to address the following questions, both from empirical as well as
theoretical grounds.&lt;br/&gt;1. What is the empirical behavior of uncertainty
over the business cycle? The PI's build various proxies for uncertainty and
preliminary results suggest that these proxies are strongly
countercyclical.&lt;br/&gt;2. What is the role of time-varying uncertainty as a
driver of business cycle fluctuations? To quantify the potential effects of the
mechanism, the PI's develop a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model with
second-moment shocks. According to the preliminary simulations, variation in
uncertainty can lead to significant fluctuations in economic
activity.&lt;br/&gt;3. What is the effect of time variation in uncertainty on
policy effectiveness?The PI's intend to analyze the effects of government policy
in the context of the model. Preliminary evidence suggests that the effect of
stimulative policies is significantly mitigated in times of heightened
uncertainty. To address these questions the PI's propose a 3-year project
combining both micro-to-macro theory and empirics. The model has heterogeneous
firms in a dynamic general equilibrium economy. The data will combine macro,
industry, firm, establishment and product data from 1972 to 2010, allowing the
PI's to analyze six recessions including the current credit-
crunch.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
provide a better understanding of how economic uncertainty affects business
cycle fluctuations and a better understanding of the nature of business cycle
fluctuations in industrialized countries. Such knowledge is crucial for the
design of government policy that has the aim of stabilizing the economy. Given
the recent surge in uncertainty there is strong policy need to study the eÂ¤ects
of uncertainty. This is true both in terms of its direct impact on the economy,
as well as its impact on the effectiveness of a range of potential policies.
Preliminary results suggest that the time variation in uncertainty has a
significant effect on business cycle volatility and on the effectiveness of
policy as the presence of uncertainty mitigates the impact of such a policy
relative to its impact during low uncertainty times. The second broader impact
is empirical. The project aims to use the Census data to construct and make
publicly available time series indices of micro uncertainty. To date this has
not been done. Publicly available annual measures of establishment level
uncertainty will be extremely valuable to a wide range of researchers. As a part
of this project, the PI's will also develop a methodology for measuring
uncertainty in Census data that tackles issues over samples (e.g.,
manufacturing, retail or all establishments), preferred measures (sales,
employment or TFP) and concepts (realized outcomes versus prediction errors).