* 0962208
* Genomic and Transcriptomic Comparison of Iron and Light Physiology  in Coastal and Oceanic Diatoms
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Bethany Jenkins, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2015
* USD 700,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Diatoms are among the most important primary producers in
the ocean. Coastal species can respond to dynamic inputs of nutrients into the
surface ocean and form large biomass blooms. Phytoplankton growth in much of the
ocean is limited by one nutrient or another, and species that persist in these
environments must be able to function under these low nutrient conditions.
Oceanic diatom species have lower Fe requirements for growth and may have
evolved to subsist in low Fe environments by changing the composition of Fe-
demanding metabolic pathways. Iron and light responsive pathways are intimately
linked because of the large Fe requirement of photosynthesis and the potential
for both to limit growth and the efficiency of the biological carbon pump.
Physiological and field studies have shown that many diatoms are susceptible to
Fe/light co-limitation, but we lack information on the biochemical basis for co-
limitation and how this differs between diatom species. This project will use a
combination of genomics tools to investigate how coastal and oceanic diatoms in
the ecologically important Thalassiosira genus respond to differing conditions
of Fe and light. The investigators will compare the genome sequence of the
oceanic diatom T. oceanica, which has recently been sequenced by the PI in
collaboration with Illumina, Inc., to published diatom genomes to identify
potential differences and similarities in the Fe and light metabolism in oceanic
and coastal diatoms. They will use normalized libraries of Expressed Sequence
Tags (EST) to characterize the transcriptome of T. oceanica, an oceanic strain
of T. weissflogii, and the coastal diatom T. rotula grown in a matrix of Fe-
limiting and replete conditions and at low and growth-saturating light levels.
And they will quantify gene expression levels for the transcriptome-wide
response in these experiments using digital gene expression (DGE), and use the
EST data to map the DGE tags. Data from the DGE and EST experiments will be used
to compare how diatom metabolism responds to variable light and Fe
concentrations and to identify target genes for following limitation in natural
diatom populations. Expression of these genes will be monitored in time-course
experiments with additional manipulations of Fe and light levels to identify
gene markers indicative of different physiological states using quantitative PCR
(qPCR). The investigators will also design antibodies to a select number of
proteins to monitor protein expression, and they will use qPCR and antibodies to
follow responses in diatom communities in field samples collected from a cruise
transitioning between Fe-replete and Fe-limiting environments as part of other
funded research efforts. This work will further our understanding of how diatoms
are adapted to different environments and what the genetic basis for their
ecological success may be. Results from this work will help us predict how
diatoms may respond to changing light regimes as a result of increased
stratification due to climate change and help predict if species from different
habitats will have similar or varied responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The project will build genomic infrastructure for ecologically
important species. PI Jenkins teaches a course in genome sequence analysis and
the analysis tools developed and tested during the proposed work will be
incorporated into this course. Students in the course will participate in the
annotation of the T. oceanica genome. The project will support a graduate
student and a new female postdoctoral investigator. Video for outreach to high
school students will be developed. The investigators and students will record
video episodes on the importance of phytoplankton, how iron and light control
ocean photosynthesis, and how genomics tools can be used to understand
ecological questions. Content aimed at a high school audience will be uploaded
to their sites on SciVee
(http://www.scivee.tv/user/bjenkins,http://www.scivee.tv/user/dreuxchappell), a
site supported by NSF and others. The work benefits society because it will help
us understand how organisms that mediate carbon cycling in the ocean respond to
scenarios of changing climate and changing nutrient dynamics. Results from the
proposed work will provide us with a much better view of diatom metabolism and
further our understanding of their ecology