* 0962282
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Cross-Population and Longitudinal Predictors of Telomere Length Variation: Do Infectious Exposure and Catch-Up Growth Make a Difference?
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* Geoffrey Hayes, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 04/30/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Telomeres are DNA sequences at chromosome ends that shorten with age and are
required for proper cell division. This shortening is associated with diminished
cell proliferation capacity, which is believed to contribute to aging. Leukocyte
telomere length (LTL) is thought to reflect previous immune system activation
and current/reserved immune function. It has also been proposed that catch-up
growth accelerates telomere depletion. Despite the evolutionary and health-
related significance of telomeres, they have been little examined in non-western
environments or from an anthropological/evolutionary perspective. The
researchers are examining population variation in LTL in mothers and their
offspring across nine populations from around the world. They combine the
breadth of this cross-population data with 26 years of multi-generational
longitudinal data from the Philippines, providing complementary insights into
several related hypotheses. Specifically, they are testing hypotheses linking
infectious and nutritional stressors known to influence cellular proliferation
with LTL. This study will provide some of the first comparative data on LTL in
populations varying widely in ecological conditions, and will be the first to
our knowledge to use longitudinal data to link measures of early life immune
activation with adult LTL. By modulating expenditure on cellular and tissue
maintenance, telomere length may be an important life-history allocation
mechanism. By tracking the developmental responses of telomere lengths to
ecological stressors, the study contributes insights into a possible mechanism
linking early life environment with programming of later-life physiology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will be used to train a PhD student, while also
helping foster collaborations with Filipino researchers. Further, LTLs are
associated with cardiovascular disease, the number one global killer. By
clarifying developmental predictors of LTL using longitudinal data, this study
will contribute new insights into the rapidly-expanding literature linking early
life experiences with adult chronic disease in societies experiencing rapid
economic and lifestyle transitions.