* 0962350
* Collaborative Research - Incomplete Information in Dynamic Economies: Analytics and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Giacomo Rondina, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2014
* USD 148,035.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH &lt;br/&gt;INCOMPLETE INFORMATION IN DYNAMIC
ECONOMIES:ANALYTICS AND APPLICATIONS &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the rational
expectations revolution, solving for equilibria in dynamic macroeconomic models
relies on imposing the restriction that model dynamics are a function of
expectations of stochastic variables. Following the intuition of Pigou (1929) -
that structural features of the economy coupled with incomplete information may
lead to waves of pessimism and optimism -incomplete information played a
prominent role in the early macroeconomic rational expectations literature [see
Lucas (1972) and Kydland and Prescott (1982)]. Despite the potential for
generating an interesting set of results, informational frictions soon
disappeared from the literature, primarily due to the technical challenges that
emerge when solving for dynamic models with incomplete information. The PI's
research will return to paradigm of the early literature and examine how
incomplete information affects equilibrium outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;1. Intellectual
Merit &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed research is to fully
specify and characterize "information equilibria" in dynamic economies. The
proposed research will &lt;br/&gt;(1) Establish an information equilibrium
concept that provides existence and uniqueness conditions for dynamic models
with incomplete information. Preliminary results suggest that the PIs'
equilibrium concept overturns non-existence results once thought to be pervasive
in models with non-trivial informational dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Analytically
characterize the space of information equilibria for dynamic rational
expectations models. The proposed approach overcomes the technical challenges of
solving for equilibrium and achieves a closed-form characterization of the
equilibria by solving the model in the space of analytic functions.
&lt;br/&gt;(3) Characterize the dynamic properties of the class of information
equilibria for which endowed asymmetric information survives in equilibrium. The
PIs characterize higher-order belief dynamics in closed form and demonstrate an
important propagation effect due to incomplete information. &lt;br/&gt;(4)
Provide a novel informational interpretation of moving average representations
by deriving an equivalence between non-fundamental moving average
representations and dynamic signal extraction problems. &lt;br/&gt;(5) Examine
how incomplete information alters equilibrium dynamics in a variety of settings.
Preliminary results suggest that incomplete information can play a vital role in
assessing the sources of business cycle dynamics, determining optimal
information disclosure and stabilization policies, reconciling asset pricing
theory with data, and improving the empirical &lt;br/&gt;fit of macro DSGE
models; to name a few applications. &lt;br/&gt;2. Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;By
focusing on dynamic uncertainty in very general setups, the PI's believe the
contributions can have a broad impact in many areas of dynamic economics. While
the PIs research focuses on macro and finance, incomplete information and the
solution techniques can be applied more broadly. The proposed research will make
a concerted effort to make clear the advantages of the employed techniques by
providing an explicit connection between the concepts of the proposed research
and existing methodologies that are more familiar to the profession. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;