* 0962124
* The Economics of Social Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Debraj Ray, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 272,714.00

This project examines the connections between economic development, the
distribution of income and assets, and the emergence (or persistence) of social
conflict across ethnic, geographical or economic groups. The research is
informed by two basic stylized facts that characterize internal conflict in
developing societies. First, economics matters. Conflicts have strong
associations with economic variables such as per-capita income and natural
resource revenues. Second, classical "class conflicts" --- or conflict
demarcated along economic lines --- are rare: warring groups are often
delineated by noneconomic markers such as ethnicity, caste, geography or
religion.

This project takes these facts as points of departure. A central question
concerns the coexistence of economic motives and noneconomic group markers.
Noneconomic markers can be used to exclude certain groups from economic
progress. Indeed, the more (economically) similar the warring groups, the more
such a strategy is likely to be used. Accordingly, the first part of this
project constructs a theory of "group formation" in conflict, the idea being
that existing social markers (such as religion) can be used to create "insiders"
and "outsiders" in a variety of ways. In a world in which all sorts of
sidepayments can costlessly be made, each potential conflict can, in principle,
because all conflict destroys resources. However, with a multiplicity of ethnic
markers, any one of which may be invoked, it may be impossible to deal with
every potential threat at the same historical moment of time. It will be argued
that postwar institutions, such as progressive taxation or land reform, have
evolved well to deal with the specter of class conflict, but have left the door
open for threats from other noneconomic markers.

The second part of the project applies these ideas to an empirical study of
Hindu-Muslim violence in India. If one side is socially and politically more
able to use violence for economic ends, then an increase in the victim group's
income should have a positive impact on conflict, while an increase in the
aggressor group's income should have an insignificant effect. This sort of
prediction can be tested, and the project proposes to do so. Using National
Sample survey data along with a unique dataset on Hindu-Muslim conflict,
preliminary results indicate that Muslim incomes are positively associated with
future conflict, while Hindu incomes have no such effect. The project will build
on this foundation by using additional data sources and running several
different robustness checks.

The third part of the project develops a theoretical model, and establishes a
structural connection between conflict and well-known indices of social
distribution such as inequality, fractionalization and polarization. It is shown
that three particular indices determine conflict, and the relative weights on
them reveal the underlying values of structural parameters in the economy.

The PI also plans a full-length book manuscript on the Economics of Social
Conflict. Certainly, the results from this project will form an important part
of the book, but the intention is to put together, in a cohesive way, a large
literature from economics, political science and sociology on the topic of
conflict in developing countries.

Broader Impacts: this project uses economic theory to develop testable
predictions that reach beyond economic boundaries. For instance, the predicted
juxtaposition of noneconomic group markers with the possibility of economic
gains from conflict is a central theme. Likewise, the second part of this
project, which discerns aggressor identity from economic data, exemplifies the
attempt to go beyond economic boundaries. IPolitical scientists, sociologists
and ethnographers will find this useful and complementary to their own work. The
theory in part 3 generates a estimable relationship between conflict and various
distributional indicators which will inform future empirical research in the
area.

Finally, from a broader social and economic perspective, the questions asked
under this project are of first-order importance. Does economic growth stifle
conflict, or might it exacerbate it? What is the relationship between inequality
and conflict? Why might class conflict give way to ethnic conflict? Does ethnic
conflict stem from some primordial hatred and mistrust, or is it carefully
engineered? If so, how precisely might one write down a theory of conflict that
does not presume that participants are plain irrational? While the project is
firmly grounded in the logic of economic reasoning, these questions go beyond
economics.

