* 0962380
* Undergraduate Design Projects to Aid Persons with Disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Steven Barrett, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2016
* USD 124,855.00

PI: Barrett, Steven F. Proposal Number: 0962380

As part of the University of Wyoming, College of Engineering and Applied Science
(CE&AS) engineering curriculum, students are required to complete a meaningful
undergraduate design experience. On the other hand, there are over 73,000
individuals with disabilities in the state of Wyoming with diverse needs. This
program will provide a vital link between the University's talented students and
individuals with assistive technology (AT) needs. Students will create and
provide prototype, custom designed assistive devices which will enhance the
quality of life for the individual. Also, this program will educate new design
engineers on the special needs of community members with disabilities.
Furthermore, we believe this program will continue to attract additional female
engineering students. We will launch the following new initiatives in the next
increment of the program: - Establish a review panel of assistive technology
professionals, engineers, and project users to insure project meets the user?s
needs. The panel will meet several times during project development. -Expand the
project base regionally to include project requests from adjoining states. -
Assess engineering students grasp of concepts after the AT instructional module.
- Provide a web-based project submission site to ease the project request
process. - Advertise program via websites, WIND publications, and presentations
to appropriate groups. - Expand project technologies to enhance recipients'
independence (e.g. personal area networks, web-based safety monitoring,
autonomous wheelchairs, etc.). - Develop measurable set of program metrics to
assess program success annually. To accomplish program objectives the College of
Engineering and Applied Science has partnered with the Wyoming INstitute for
Disabilities (WIND). The PI Dr. Steven Barrett, Ph.D., P.E. will serve as the
coordinator for the College of Engineering and Applied Science to identify the
appropriate student expertise to accomplish a specific project. WIND has been a
part of the University of Wyoming (UW), College of Health Sciences since 1994.
As a member of the national network of University Centers of Excellence in
Developmental Disabilities Education, Research and Service (UCEDD), WIND
provides teaching, research, information, and community services to both the
University and Wyoming at large. WIND Associate Director, Sandy Root-Elledge,
M.A., will serve to identify specific AT projects for undergraduate engineering
students to design, build, test, and deliver to individuals with disabilities as
well as provide assistive technology and disability awareness training to all
engineering students. Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity: - The
proposed activities will allow the continued construction of projects for
individuals with disabilities in the area of developmental disabilities through
the Research to Aid Persons with Disabilities (RAPD) program at the NSF. This
project has a dramatic need throughout the state and the region. - These
projects will allow students to complete the required two-semester senior design
project in an interdisciplinary team approach. The team includes mechanical and
electrical engineering students, assistive technology professionals, caregivers,
and the intended users and family members where appropriate. This is highly
encouraged by the ABET, Inc. accreditation body. - The proposed projects will
educate new engineers on the special needs of community members with
disabilities early in their careers including those not participating in the NSF
sponsored projects. Broader Impacts of the Proposed Activity: - The proposed
design projects should contribute to the quality of life for disabled
individuals. Special emphasis will be placed on independent living technologies.
- Encourage students toward graduate school and employment in AT related fields.
- Encourage more participation by under-represented student groups (e.g. women
in engineering). - Provide engineering students with awareness about
disabilities and assistive technology.