* 0962179
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Service-Level Agreements and Supply Chain Coordination
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2010,06/30/2011
* Andrew Davis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 06/30/2011
* USD 10,000.00

As internet retailing increases in popularity, so does the use of pull
contracts; a group of contracts used in any setting where the supplier holds the
inventory and ships product directly to the retailer?s end customers. Retailers
adopting this method of satisfying demand are frequently presented with the
problem of constructing these contracts with their suppliers in a way that
maximizes profit. In this Doctoral Dissertation research, the co-PI examines the
issue of how pull contracts should be designed so as to allow retailers and
suppliers to make more informed decisions when choosing and structuring such
contracts.

The research will address the issue theoretically and experimentally, placing
emphasis on one subset of pull contracts called service-level agreements (SLAs).
SLAs are a type of supply chain contract where a retailer pays a bonus to its
supplier when its supplier satisfies a certain fraction of the retailer?s
demand. Though SLAs are very common in industry, their theoretical properties
and actual performance characteristics have not been extensively studied. This
work will determine if certain variations of SLAs seen in practice result in the
highest profit for the retailer and/or supplier compared to other pull
contracts.

The broader impact of this research is lies in its potential to improve supply
chain efficiency.

