* 0962473
* Collaborative Research: Identification, Estimation, and Inference of DSGE Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Ivana Komunjer, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2013
* USD 128,253.00

This project develops the theory for identification of dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium (DSGE) models and studies its implications for estimation
and inference. DSGE models have now reached the level of sophistication to
permit analysis of important macroeconomic issues. Whereas the parameters in
these models used to be calibrated, numerical advances in the last two decades
have made it possible to estimate models with as many as a hundred parameters.
Researchers are, however, aware that not all the parameters of interest can be
consistently estimated because of identification problems: that different
structural parameters can lead to indistinguishable outcomes. In spite of the
recognition of this identification issue, a procedure has yet to be developed
that tells us in a systematic manner how many parameters are identifiable, and
if so which ones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of this project is to
study conditions under which a DSGE model is identifiable. The analysis is
nonstandard as classical conditions for identification rely on assumptions that
do not generally hold in DSGE models. Our proposal is to use the tight structure
of DSGE models in order to establish new rank and order conditions for
identification. Such conditions have not yet been proposed in the literature. T
he focus is on covariance stationary process and the first step is to make
precise the sense in which two dynamical systems can have observationally
equivalent spectral densities. Adapting results from control theory, it is shown
that the Markov (impulse response) parameters and the error variance of
equivalent DSGE models must be related through a similarity transformation.
These restrictions are then used to establish conditions under which DSGE models
are identifiable from the spectrum of the observables. We will show that a DSGE
model is identifiable even when its reduced form parameters are not. Formal
identification conditions will be developed to explicitly handle the presence of
measurement errors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second goal of this project is to
study the estimation of DSGE model parameters. It is a well known fact that
parameters that are not identifiable cannot be consistently estimated. This has
important implications for both frequentist as well as Bayesian analysis as
local non-identification leads to strange behavior of posteriors when flat
priors are used. In spite of the importance of this problem, the literature on
full information estimation of non-identified DSGE models is relatively small.
The result that DSGE reduced form parameters are not identifiable from the
spectrum has important implications for limited information estimation which
uses only a subset of the autocovariances. The project will provide a complete
characterization of an 'identifiable reduced form' consisting of dynamic
equations and identities. The challenge for both full and limited information
estimation is an error variance of reduced rank. The project will develop new
estimation methods for singular systems without throwing away information or
adding stochastic errors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third goal of the project is
to focus on inference in DSGE models. Partially identified models pose
challenging problems for testing. The project focuses on two issues. First, how
to test statistical hypothesis in singular systems such as DSGE models when the
parameters of interest are point identified but the nuisance parameters are not.
Second, how to conduct inference in dynamic and possibly singular models when
the parameters of interest are themselves only set identified. These problems
are challenging, but are also relevant outside of the DSGE framework.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Currently, there exists no formal
identification results for DSGE models that allow for fewer shocks than
endogenous variables. This project provides easy to evaluate rank and order
conditions for identification that practitioners can check. Estimation and
inference of structural parameters when the reduced form parameters are not
identified, and set identification in singular systems are both new research
topics. The results will be a new contribution to econometric theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: DSGE models are increasingly used in
policy analysis, so the impact of this work goes beyond a better methodological
understanding of linear dynamical systems. The work is also relevant to
estimation and inference of other singular models such as demand systems.
Inference of partially identified dynamic models is of general interest. The
computer code will be made available to the scientific community for non-
commercial, research, and educational purposes.