* 0962623
* AHRC-NSF MOU: Art-Science Collaborations, Bodies, and Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Sallie Marston, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2014
* USD 349,855.00

The distinctions drawn between scientific and artistic endeavors have a long,
historical trajectory, punctuated by a series of debates on the relative merits
of each. T he apparent consensus regarding the impermeability of their
categorical boundaries has two roots. The first was the scientific revolution of
the Renaissance, predicated in large part upon the rise of Copernican cosmology,
empiricism, and the systematic development of modern mathematics, physics,
biology, and chemistry. The second was the gradual institutionalization of
disciplinary divisions in the faculties of the modern university, which in the
19th century culminated in the segregation of the European educational system
between classical studies and scientific and technical training. Despite the
legacy of a modern-day institutional compartmentalization that seeks to distance
the arts (and the humanities of which they are a part) from the natural
sciences, they revolve within a shared history characterized as much by
negotiation, mutual learning, and symbiosis as by pronouncements of fundamental
difference. The recognition of this shared history as well as a desire to draw
upon it as both intellectual resource and source material helps drive the
emergence of what has been termed the "new Leonardos" and "Renaissance teams," a
loosely held movement that thrives upon the collaboration between artists and
scientists. The participants in these collaborations have forged new
intellectual pathways, often articulating areas of study that combine insights
from the sciences and humanities. This international collaborative research
project will explore the institutional, political, epistemic, and technological
matrices that both allow for these interfaces to emerge and that shape their
development and wider impact. The investigators will conduct a multi-sited study
of contemporary collaborative projects involving diverse groups of scientists
and artists in the United States and the United Kingdom. Major questions that
the investigators address include: What sorts of resources (material, financial,
and regulatory) are marshaled for the collaborations? How and why do artists
engage with and reinterpret a range of scientific practices? Why are scientists
interested in artistic representations of their work? What new forms of public
access are created when scientists open their laboratories to artists? How do
such collaborations tackle the ethical and political dimensions of complex
problems? How do these collaborations allow for a shift to occur regarding how
participants and their various audiences understand the content and purpose of
art and science as well as their place within society? In pursuing these
questions, the investigators will employ participant observation, interviews,
focus groups, surveys, and visual interpretative methods in order to generate
detailed descriptions and analyses of the day-to-day activities and products of
five sites of art-science collaboration. In addition to previously used
approaches, the investigators will focus particular attention on geographic
aspects of the interactions among scientists and artists in order to recognize
the spatial situatedness of people, things and the relations that bind and
transform them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will make a substantial
contribution toward understanding how "lessons learned" can be transposed into
other contexts, thereby developing and realizing models for public outreach at
different sites. Because the examination of science-art collaborations often
entails the advancement of public knowledge about a number of contemporary
world-wide crises and discoveries, the project will serve as a study of the
development of innovative strategies for the delivery of popular education and
knowledge transfer devoted to timely, policy-related issues of the larger public
interest. The project will aid in the mapping of a broad network of emerging
resources for further collaborations across the humanities and social and
physical sciences, making it a resource for researchers and funding agencies
seeking to develop new directions in research collaboration. The project also
has the potential to have a transformative impact upon funding agencies. As
interdisciplinary, collaborative projects, funded by both public and private
foundations and occurring both inside and outside the bounds of the academy
become more widespread, projects like this one can help provide a model for
investigation and a baseline for assessing their effects and effectiveness.