* 0962755
* Collaborative Research: Causes and Consequences of Vocal Variation in a Howler Monkey (Alouatta spp.) Hybrid Zone: An Integrated Behavioral, Morphological and Genetic Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Dawn Kitchen, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2015
* USD 63,389.00

Hybrid zones typically encompass a variety of taxonomically and genetically
distinct individuals living under similar ecological and social conditions.
Thus, hybrid zones represent unique opportunities to separate intrinsic and
extrinsic causes of variation among animals. Furthermore, because a variety of
animals are in direct competition, hybrid zones are also ideal locations for
studies of competitive ability. This project focuses on two species of howler
monkeys, Alouatta palliata and A. pigra, with different vocalizationsthat
hybridize in a small region in southern Mexico. The research builds on previous
morphological and genetic sampling of the hybrid zone and addresses two main
questions: 1) what causes vocal variation among A. palliata, A. pigra, and
hybrids? and, 2) how do different vocalizations impact competitive ability in
the hybrid zone? To address these questions the project integrates molecular,
morphological, behavioral, and acoustic data with playback experiments. Sources
of vocal differences will be uncovered by comparing vocalizations among purebred
and hybrid males to their genetic background, morphology, location, and social
setting. The playback experiments involve both males and females and reveals the
types of calls that males find intimidating or females find attractive (or
both). The study examines the proximate and ultimate factors shaping primate
vocalizations, how sexual selection structures admixture and gene flow, and how
differences in vocalizations affect sexual selection.

The project is highly collaborative and will strengthen research ties at many
levels; between departments at the University of Michigan, between the
University of Michigan and Ohio State University, and internationally between US
universities and the Universidad Veracruzana in Mexico. In addition to providing
considerable training to Mexican and US students, the project will directly
benefit conservation through an educational workshop directed to school-age
children within the area of hybridization. Furthermore, the presence of a long-
term study in the region and the inclusion of Mexican researchers and students
will promote primate studies and conservation in Mexico, a country of high
biogeographic importance for primates and other Neotropical taxa.