* 0962118
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Kinship and Multi-level Groups:  Examining the genetic and social structure of the gelada (Theropithecus gelada)
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Robert Seyfarth, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/29/2012
* USD 19,415.00

Group living confers a variety of benefits to individuals within the group,
including predator detection, defense and high rates of food acquisition.
Animals that form groups with close genetic relatives may also benefit from
opportunities to help kin at minimal cost, thus increasing the helper's indirect
fitness. Individuals in kin groups also gain direct fitness advantages through
decreased within group aggression, lowered risk of infanticide, and coalitionary
support. However, much of what we know about the effects of kinship comes from
relatively simple, single level social systems. We know very little about how
kinship works in complex, multi-level societies like those found in modern
humans. Moreover, until recently only long-term studies have had the pedigree
data to map maternal relatives. Now, genetic techniques that combine non-
invasive sampling with PCR-based genotyping allow researchers to evaluate the
interaction between relatedness and social systems in species where relationship
data are lacking. This project applies these new genetic techniques and detailed
behavioral observation to the unusual, highly complex social system of gelada
monkeys (Theropithecus gelada). Geladas live in large, multi-level social
systems resembling those of many human hunter-gatherer societies. Gelada social
structure appears to be considerably more complex than that of their close
phylogenetic relatives, the well-studied baboons. Therefore this research
provides important new data on kinship-behavior interactions and the evolution
of complex societies in mammals.

This project, in collaboration with the University of Michigan Gelada Research
Project (UMGRP), offers both genetic and behavioral information on geladas,
which are listed as "rare" by the World Conservation Union. The project employs
Ethiopian scientists and rangers, and established both multi-intuitional and
interdisciplinary collaborations. The co-PI participates in community outreach
lectures to Ethiopian guides, tourists, and local K-12 students, as well as
giving presentations to elementary school students in the Northeast U.S.