* 0962668
* Doctoral Dissertation Research DRMS: Experimental Evidence and Measurement of Inter-Temporal Strategic Inefficiency
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2011
* Robert Russell, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 03/31/2011
* USD 8,242.00

This study considers efficiency from the perspective of repeated strategic
interaction. Namely, the study considers several types of games that are
simplified representations of more complex real world situations in which
interaction occurs at multiple periods over an arbitrarily long time horizon.
The researcher will examine how augmentation of the payoff structure in these
games can provide incentives for agents to tacitly collude at a more efficient
outcome over repeated play. The issues raised herein are important not only from
a mechanism design standpoint, but also have applications in repeated oligopoly
interaction. Primarily, we are concerned with how the relative magnitudes of
payoffs may make a particular outcome more attractive for agents to coordinate
upon in comparison to other outcomes, which may be socially
inferior.&lt;br/&gt;For each type of strategic situation studied, we assess the
relative and absolute efficiencies of experimental subject pairs in terms of
average per period payoffs to see whether or not agents can effectively
coordinate to extract as high a payoff as possible given the constraints of the
game. Knowledge of how to induce such efficiencies is important to both policy
makers, who may determine the strategic parameters of a game, and to agents
confined to a particular set of strategic parameters.&lt;br/&gt;