* 0962643
* From Wartime to Peacetime: War Experience and Post-conflict Resiliance
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Ellen Moodie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 121,680.00

Dr. Ellen Moodie (University of Illinois) and Dr. Arthur L. Binford (Benemerita
Universidad Autonoma de Puebla) will undertake anthropological research on the
effects of civil war on post-conflict societies. Anthropologists and other
social scientists have documented the negative effects of civil war on post-
conflict societies. In this project, the researchers will take a different
approach to ask whether or not the ideologies, social relationships, skill
development, and new forms of social organization developed during the war might
contribute positively to postwar reconstruction and check social disintegration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in northern Moraz√°n, El
Salvador, where the church, refugees, revolutionaries, and their supporters
actively promoted collective action during the duration of the Salvadoran
conflict (1980-1992). This study proposes to find out what remains of these pro-
social, collectivist sentiments and practices, and whether or not they aid
reconstruction. The research will focus on three organizations: the Ecclesial
Base Community of El Salvador, the January 16th Cooperative, and a for-profit
tourism business, which engage former refugees, demobilized rebel combatants,
civilians and lay catechists. The researchers will employ a combination of
archival work, surveys, life history interviews, organization histories, and
participant observation with active members of the three organizations in order
to gather information on pre-war, wartime, and post-war beliefs, relationships,
and experiences. The investigators hypothesize that post-insurgent individuality
will vary with the period of mobilization (early vs. late), level of wartime
responsibility, and relative success in postwar reinsertion into civilian life.
The study of individual subjects will be complemented by research on the
organizations to which they belong, as the researchers will seek to measure the
degree to which the church, cooperatives, and tourism promoters continue to
promote communitarian values, even as the region is increasingly affected by
social fragmentation and individualization brought on by incorporation into
international circuits of migration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
significant because post-conflict situations are found throughout the world. The
common assumption is that carryover from wartime is negative for individuals and
communities. This project will test that assumption through systematic
investigation of the possibility that pro-social values promoted during the war
might contribute to post-war resilience, recovery, and reconstruction. Besides
having practical implications, findings will contribute to social science theory
of social change over time periods marked by extreme disruption. The research
also provides social scientific training to two local field assistants; supports
graduate student training; and promotes international research collaboration.