* 0962545
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Industry Clusters, Trade, and Growth
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Donald Davis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 01/31/2011
* USD 4,600.00

Industry Clusters, Trade, and Growth Economists have long recognized that a
central effect of trade is to change the set of industries in an economy. When
industries are heterogeneous, either in their potential for productivity growth,
or in their ability to generate spillovers that improve productivity in other
industries, these changes will affect a country's growth rate. Simple
observation, as well as recent empirical evidence, suggests that such
heterogeneity exists to a significant degree. The goal of this project is to
understand how trade affects growth through its affect on the composition of
industries in an economy. Particular attention will be paid to the role of
industry clusters, by which is meant groups of industries where each industry in
the cluster has significant productivity spillovers to other cluster industries.
The PI addresses this problem using both theoretical and empirical tools. The
theoretical contribution is fairly well developed. The results suggest that
trade may increase the growth rate of all trading economies, if it concentrates
industries or strengthens clusters. Conversely, trade may decrease growth in all
trading economies if it weakens industry clusters. These results are new and
contradict previous studies, such as those by Young (1991) and Matsuyama (1992),
who apply more restrictive and less realistic assumptions. An important
implication is that the effect of trade on growth depends crucially on the
initial set of industries in an economy and the pattern of industry clusters.
The empirical portion of this project, which is still in its infancy, involves
constructing a new data set describing the evolution of the economy of
Lancashire County, England, from the Industrial Revolution to the present.
Lancashire County, birthplace of the industrial revolution, is interesting as a
clear case of successful trade-driven and cluster-based development. Another
reason for choosing this case is the wealth of data available. These data will
be used to illustrate the mechanisms described by the theory, and to test its
predictions. Intellectual Merit The intellectual merit of this project rests on
the importance of the question it addresses. As the world becomes more
globalized the decisions countries make regarding trade policy will become more
and more important. The recent experience of East Asia suggests that trade can
be a powerful engine for growth, yet in other cases we see that trade need not
lead to growth. The PI's work provides a new analytical framework for assessing
the effects of trade and suggests how trade, technology, and industrial policies
can be used to harness the power of trade to create growth. Furthermore, the
results suggest that when trading partners coordinate to design proper policies,
all trading partners can benefit. Broader Impacts The broader impacts of this
work will be felt through its impact on trade policies, and related technology
and industrial policies. With nearly every country involved in significant
trading relationships, any knowledge that increases the ability of countries to
enact trade policies that increase growth will have wide applicability. Once
completed, the PI intends to disseminate the results both through academic
publication and through channels focused on reaching policymakers.