* 0962184
* IODP Expedition Objective Research:  Neogene productivity and biogenic sedimentation in the equatorial Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2014
* Mitchell Lyle, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 359,316.00

This project addresses important topics concerning ocean productivity in the
equatorial Pacific (EP), atmospheric paleo-CO2 and the global carbon cycle over
the past 26 Ma period as inferred from paleontological and geochemical analyses
of sediment cores collected from the IODP PEAT expedition, leg 320. This
expedition was highly successful at retrieving the first complete Cenozoic
record from the equator. Although a highly productive region, the high nutrient
load of the EP makes it an inefficient ecosystem, thus making it susceptible to
rapid changes in cycling rates and serving an important role in ocean
biogeochemical cycles. Major changes in biogenic sedimentation in the EP
throughout the Cenozoic is believed to reflect past changes in this cycling and
in productivity. Sedimentary diatom assemblages will be analyzed from cores of
leg 320 as indicators of productivity, bio-Ba and bio-Si will be used as
indicators of export production, and organic carbon and CaCO3 measurements will
be made to understand the past changes in carbon cycling. This comprehensive
multi-proxy approach and micropaleontological analyses will increase our
understanding of paleoproductivity, carbon export and burial, and biogeochemical
cycling in the equatorial regions during the middle to late Miocene.

Broader impacts: Atmospheric CO2 levels are strongly regulated by ocean
productivity. Understanding past changes in ocean productivity during warm earth
conditions from analysis of the sedimentary record provides insights into
natural variations of paleo-atmospheric CO2 levels and the biogeochemical
influences of this. This study will provide fundamental information for better
understanding global climate. The project provides financial assistance for
undergraduate students and will support and train a graduate student. The
project takes good advantage of a large investment previously made in an IODP
expedition and strengthens international collaborations within the IODP
community.