* 0962919
* MOBILIZE: Mobilizing for Innovative Computer Science Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2018
* Derrick Chau, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 12,500,000.00

MOBILIZE: Mobilizing for Innovative Computer Science Teaching and Learning is a
Targeted Math and Science Partnership between the University of California Los
Angeles (UCLA) as the lead and the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD)
as the Core Partner school district. The Computer Science Teachers Association
(CSTA) and the Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. are Supporting
Partners. The Partnership promotes computational thinking, with an overarching
goal of fostering inventiveness and innovation among students and teachers
through increasing the computer science instructional capacity of high schools,
especially in a large urban school district. This project brings together the
Center for Embedded Networked Sensing (CENS), an NSF Science and Technology
Center (STC) in the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
and Center X in the Graduate School of Education &amp; Information Studies at
UCLA. MOBILIZE deploys challenging and engaging hands-on computer science
projects and curricula using new participatory sensing technologies in high
school mathematics and science courses. MOBILIZE prepares a large number of high
school teachers to use inquiry teaching methods with the intent that
technologies that are ubiquitous with students today, such as mobile phones,
peak the interests of students and motivate them in ways that ultimately
increases both students' achievement and their identities as "doers" of science,
while enhancing the computer science knowledge and pedagogical acumen of
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MOBILIZE:&lt;br/&gt;--creates exciting,
challenging, multi-disciplinary, real-life based, cutting-edge, hands-on inquiry
projects, tools, and materials for teaching computer science concepts in high
school computer science AND in standards-based mathematics and science classes.
Piloting occurs locally with dissemination nationally, with the long term goal
of increasing student engagement and achievement in computer science,
mathematics, and the other sciences. High school teachers work with STEM and
education faculty to develop new computer science materials that build on the
CENS Participatory Sensing systems, which involve students in observing and
analyzing environmental and social processes where they live, work, and
play;&lt;br/&gt;--develops an innovative model of professional development for
current and future high school teachers around the implementation of these
projects, to include multi-disciplinary teams of teachers organized into
learning communities with STEM and Education faculty, coaching, and a new pre-
service computer science methods course, in order to create a cadre of teachers
with expertise in both computer science content and pedagogy;
and&lt;br/&gt;--informs state and national policy changes (including changing
the academic status of computer science from vocational to academic and
establishing a computer science teaching credential) necessary to improve the
quality of high school computer science instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research hypotheses explored focus on: students as computer scientists, whether
in mathematics, science or computer science courses; teachers as computer
scientists, whether teaching mathematics, science or computer science; and
impact on pre-service teachers in terms of their likelihood to utilize inquiry-
based instructional strategies during their early years of teaching.