* 0962749
* Using ancient DNA to understand the relationship between human biology and cultural practices in the Late Woodland and Mississippian Time Periods (AD 930-1200) in North America.
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Susan Alt, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2013
* USD 124,144.00

Archaeological analysis suggests that cultural exchange from regional centers
like Cahokia to peripheral areas took place at the time of Mississippian
Emergence (~1000 years ago), and this study focuses on the relationship between
human culture and biology, a central question for anthropologists. Ancient DNA
methods are used to examine the importance of small-scale population movements
in this change. DNA is analyzed from individuals at sites that span the Late
Woodland and Mississippian periods (AD 930-1200) on the periphery of Cahokia,
and from Mississippian individuals at Cahokia region sites. Analyses test the
hypothesis of temporal genetic continuity at these sites, and determine whether
alterations in mortuary practice reflect changing concepts of kinship. Fluoride
dating will resolve the burial sequences at these sites.&lt;br/&gt;This project
will significantly increase the genetic data from previously unstudied
populations of prehistoric Native American peoples. Analyses will further our
understanding of Native American prehistory and how culture is affected by
movements of people, and provide the first genetic data from multiple Late
Woodland mounds. Hypotheses regarding Late Woodland and Mississippian mortuary
practices and kinship will be tested. This is the basis for a larger regional
study of prehistoric genetic diversity and disease, and will be used to
investigate familial factors in research on prehistoric tuberculosis infection
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides educational opportunities
at multiple levels. This research is part of the dissertation of three female
graduate students. The development of the Fluoride Dating Lab enhances options
for graduate and undergraduate training and provides a direct benefit to
regional anthropologists. Results will be utilized in outreach programs to local
K-12 schools and museums. A symposium will be organized at the Midwest
Archaeological Conference. These results may aid in policy formation by
government institutions and museums with respect to Native populations.
&lt;br/&gt;