* 0962792
* Targeted Math Science Partnership:  Middle Grades Earth and Space Science Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2017
* Laura Guertin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 7,611,019.00

Pennsylvania State University and several school districts in Pennsylvania,
including three rural districts - Bald Eagle, Bellefonte and Penns Valley - and
three urban districts - Harrisburg, Reading and York, have formed a partnership
around Earth and Space Science (ESS). Several schools in the Philadelphia City
school district are also committed to participating in the partnership. The
Middle Grades Earth and Space Science Education partnership involves faculty
members from Geosciences, Astronomy and Education at three Penn State campuses,
University Park, Brandywine and Harrisburg, and targets ESS in grades 4 through
9. Teacher professional development activities concentrate on building deep
conceptual understanding of big ideas in ESS in four topic areas: energy
production, climate change, plate tectonics, and solar system astronomy. The
goals of the partnership are to: 1) contribute to the understanding of
conceptual development in ESS through the middle grades, 2) develop and support
current teachers across Pennsylvania to engage students with the significant and
complex questions of ESS fields, 3) strengthen the science content preparation
of pre-service teachers to deepen their understanding of ESS, and 4)
institutionalize improved communication and collaboration in teaching and
learning among colleges and campuses of Penn State, in underserved urban and
rural school districts, and across the partnership. The partnership is employing
four main strategies to accomplish these goals. First, professional development
for in-service teachers includes a suite of week-long residential workshops that
integrate content with pedagogical best practices in the four thematic target
areas. During these workshops and in follow-up meetings throughout the year,
teachers and STEM and education faculty work on developing learning progressions
and performance standards aligned with them in the four areas. Second,
initiatives for middle grades students involve teachers and guidance counselors
in implementing the performance standards, curricula and pedagogy studied during
the workshops, while collecting data to inform the learning progressions. Third,
initiatives for pre-service teachers are focusing on curriculum development
aligned with the learning progressions, capacity building for urban teaching,
and authentic research experiences. Fourth, university faculty and graduate
students are involved in professional development workshops and structured
observations of middle school ESS classes in order to foster reciprocity of
expertise, with ESS experts gaining pedagogical knowledge and ESS teachers
receiving rich content-specific feedback. The research is examining the question
of how an understanding of big ideas in ESS can be characterized as learning
progressions, and how these learning progressions can inform the development of
curriculum, assessment and instruction in these grades. The evaluation is
focusing on collaborative planning to articulate a theory of change, and to
provide formative and summative evaluation.