* 0962160
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Reproductive Trajectories of Geladas (Theropithecus gelada)
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* David Pappano, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/29/2012
* USD 19,870.00

Strong male bonds are rare among primates, especially for female-bonded species.
Thus, the relationship between male bonding and reproductive strategies remains
largely unexamined in female-bonded species. Geladas (Theropithecus gelada)
provide an ideal model for understanding how male bonds influence male
reproductive trajectories in a female-bonded species. Prior to acquiring
reproductive access to females, "bachelor" geladas live in cohesive all-male
groups. Eventually, males graduate from these groups to gain sole reproductive
access to a group of females (one-male unit). Bachelors acquire one-male units
using one of several strategies: (1) directly overthrowing the leader male, (2)
submissively entering a unit and attempting to pare females away from the unit
over time, or (3) capitalizing on the chaos of a recent takeover to
opportunistically mate with females. Additionally, bachelors have been observed
to cooperate in attempts to overthrow leader males and enter one-male units with
former members of their all-male group - yet only one male eventually reaps the
reproductive benefits. This project investigates the behavioral and hormonal
factors that shape the reproductive trajectory of gelada males as they move from
an all-male group to a one-male unit. The researchers will(i) describe the
social interactions among bachelors within their all-male group; (ii) determine
the behavioral and hormonal factors that influence bachelor participation in
takeover attempts of leader males, and (iii) determine whether bachelor quality
predicts a reproductive strategy. Behavioral data and noninvasive fecal hormone
sampling will document the reproductive trajectories of male geladas.
Additionally, digital photographs will be taken of male chest patch color - a
feature that may indicate male quality - to document changes in color as males
move from their bachelor groups to one-male units. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
from this research will inform conservation decisions regarding these rare
primates, and the investigator's presence in the Simien Mountains National Park
help deter illegal activities in this World Heritage Site that is in danger.
This project provides income and training to local Ethiopian field assistants
and the co-PI has arranged to explain gelada behavior to high school students in
several U.S. states.