* 0962627
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: What Motivates Apartment Owners to Invest in Structural Mitigation for Earthquakes? The Relative Roles of Risk Perceptions, Social Influence
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Michael O'Hare, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 04/30/2011
* USD 8,550.00

This research documents the beliefs and behavior of apartment building owners in
Berkeley, California regarding the potential earthquake vulnerabilities of their
properties. In doing so, the researcher capitalizes on observed variation in
responses to a 2005 local ordinance that imposed new requirements on owners of a
particularly hazardous and socially-important building type known as "soft-
story" construction. Approximately 60 semi-structured interviews of Berkeley
soft-story owners, including some owners that retrofit their buildings prior to
the law and thus were exempt from it, will be conducted. Subjects will also
complete a written questionnaire containing demographic, personality, and risk
perception items. These qualitative and psychometric data will be combined with
administrative information from compliance records, engineering reports, and
building permit applications to comprehensively explore how this population
frames their decisions about seismic safety and to assess commonalities and
distinctions among multi-unit residential property owners who have implemented
different degrees of structural mitigation. A second objective of the study is
to look for indications of the mechanisms through which the recent law may have
influenced owner thoughts, intentions, and behaviors about mitigation. The goal
is to illuminate how social influences interact with individual differences in
the formation and change of risk perceptions and risk adjustment behaviors in
the target population and, specifically, to test the hypothesis that
personality, social perceptions, past experiences, and demographic traits will
correlate more with mitigation intentions and behavior than either risk
perceptions or project cost-effectiveness.

The broader impact of the research is its contribution to the development of
targeted, more effective risk communication approaches, policy designs, or
incentives for motivating earthquake preparedness behaviors among similarly
situated building owners.