* 0962244
* Numerical Simulations and Theoretical Studies of the Plasma Dynamo and Couette Flow Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/24/2009,07/31/2013
* Fatima Ebrahimi, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 295,307.00

This award funds research to carry out numerical simulations in support of
Plasma Dynamo and Couette Flow experiments. A Plasma Couette experiment, the
first of its kind, has been constructed to study Magnetorotational Instability
(MRI) in a hot, unmagnetized and fast flowing plasma. Plasma is confined by a
strong multipole magnetic field at the plasma surface. The goals of the
experiment are to study the MRI and possible self-generation of magnetic field
by MRI-driven turbulence at high magnetic Reynolds numbers (the regime
applicable to astrophysical plasmas). If successful, the concept could be
readily extended to a larger, plasma-based dynamo experiment, studying the self-
generation of magnetic field (MHD dynamo) but through hydrodynamic-driven
turbulence in a confined plasma. Numerical modeling and theoretical studies are
crucial for advancing the understanding of these two experiments and assuring
their ultimate success. Numerical simulations using the extended MHD code,
NIMROD, will be done and the numerical results will be directly compared with
the experimental measurements. Numerical simulations are also expected to
provide a guidance for the experimental design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed simulations with NIMROD code would strongly benefit the validation of a
code, NIMROD, extensively used by the Magnetic Fusion community. In addition,
the Magneto-rotational Instability (MRI) is thought to play a vital role in many
astrophysical settings. Thus it is essential to have a line of physical
experiments and computational models carried out that can test, guide and
perhaps challenge many of the precepts now being applied in theoretical models
with regard to MRI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted
to the NSF-DoE Partnership in Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation
08-589. This award is being funded jointly by the Divisions of Physics and
Astronomical Sciences of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.