* 0962831
* Conference Support for 9th International Symposium on Functional pi-Electron Systems (F-pi-9); Atlanta, GA; May 23-28, 2010
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Seth Marder, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 01/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

Technical. An international symposium on functional pi-electron systems (F-pi-9)
will be held at the Georgia Institute of Technology, May 23-28, 2010. The goal
of the symposium is to provide a forum that attracts a diverse audience to learn
about state-of-the-art research in the area of functional pi-electron systems.
The idea is to promote discussions of broad applications of functional pi-
electron systems covering fundamental aspects of chemistry, physics, and
materials research, and to provide exposure to technology drivers and
biologically important systems that are often neglected at more specialized
conferences on displays, organic photovoltaics, and nonlinear optics. Non-
technical. An important impact of this conference will be to increase the
attendance of scientists and students from underrepresented groups. Strong
efforts will be made to improve the inclusion of women and minorities in fields
related to chemistry, physics and materials science of electronic and photonic
materials. Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future directions,
it is expected that new ties will be established among universities, research
institutions, and industry. The requested NSF funds will be used to support the
registration of women and under-represented minority researchers or faculty
members who are professors at a minority serving institution and who will bring
minority students with them to the conference. The symposium is co-supported by
the MPS Divisions of Chemistry [MSN
(Macromolecular/Supramolecular/Nanochemistry) Program] and Materials Research
[EPM (Electronic and Photonic Materials) Program].