* 0962721
* Bacterial Interactions Underlying Coral Disease Resistance
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Farooq Azam, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2014
* USD 603,638.00

Intellectual Merit: An ever-growing variety of diseases, including some
demonstrably caused by bacteria, are decimating reef-building corals in many
places around the globe. Corals are open systems persistently exposed to a great
diversity of exogenous bacteria in the overlying seawater and attached to
sinking particles. Furthermore, as coastal development continues to expand,
increasing eutrophication, there is increasing concern that endogenous bacteria
among the normal coral associated community could proliferate to become
opportunistic pathogens causing tissue damage and coral death. How corals resist
bacterial invasions is a complex issue, one critical aspect being the ability of
endogenous bacteria to resist colonization and proliferation of potential
pathogens.

Despite great strides in recent years uncovering the remarkable genetic
diversity of coral-associated bacteria, mitigation and management of coral
diseases remains hampered by a lack of understanding of in situ ecological
interactions within the microbial community and with exogenous bacteria that
underlie coral health and disease. Bacterial attachment and proliferation are
critical steps in the infection process, thus inhibiting or preventing
colonization and proliferation of pathogens is fundamental to disease
resistance.

Recent research by the investigator demonstrates that corals exposed to organic
matter enrichment can become colonized by potential pathogens, but the
communities can rebound from such perturbations. Conducting in vitro studies,
the investigator found that bacteria-bacteria antagonism is common among coral
isolates which suggests it may be a mechanism to resist community shifts and
pathogen colonization. It could thus drive resilience within coral-associated
microbial communities. In this project the investigator will test these
interactions in an in situ context.

Microbes are critical for the functioning of coral ecosystems at the global
scale and, therefore, it is essential that a mechanistic understanding of
microbial interactions at the microscale be attained. The following hypotheses
will be tested which are designed to elucidate the ecological mechanisms by
which bacterial colonization and proliferation in the coral mucus layer (CML)
are prevented by microbial interactions: 1) Bacterial community homeostasis in
the CML is maintained through the exclusion of potential colonizers 2)
Microspatial organic matter hotspots within the coral mucus layer, particularly
surrounding zooxanthallae, create loci of intense growth and antagonism 3)
Spatially dispersed organic matter inputs overwhelm microscale hotspots and
enable pathogens to colonize the CML

Broader Impacts: This project simultaneously improves our fundamental
understanding of coral associated microbial ecology and provides a necessary
scientific basis for marine resource management decisions. Public education, at
both the local and international levels, is a key component of the routine
activities of all participating researchers, and these activities will prosper
from inclusion of cutting-edge ecological findings generated by this research.
Additionally, three postdoctoral researchers (two full time and one at two
months per year) and one graduate student will receive training from the
integrated research and education activities supported through this renewal.