* 0962666
* Collaborative Research: SHINE--Observations and Modeling of Energetic Particles Associated with Corotating Interaction Regions During Solar Cycles 23 and 24
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Mihir Desai, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 04/30/2013
* USD 126,302.00

This collaborative research team will investigate the evolution of energy
spectra, time-intensity profiles, and charged particle flows along and across
the interplanetary magnetic field in co-rotating interaction regions (CIRs)
observed during solar cycles 22 and 23. They will use measurements of energetic
particles, magnetic fields, and solar wind plasma obtained by the ACE, Wind, and
STEREO spacecraft to study these CIR events. This team will also develop a new
theoretical model, based on their existing 'Particle Acceleration and Transport
in the Heliosphere' (PATH) numerical code, in order to study the time-dependent
acceleration and transport of particles associated with CIRs, as well as to
probe the 3D structure of CIRs and the evolution of magnetic connections between
an observer at Earth and remote CIR locations beyond Earth orbit.

Understanding the properties of solar energetic particle (SEP) events associated
with CIRs remains an outstanding problem for the scientific community. This
study will yield new information about the 3D structure of CIRs and the
configuration of the interplanetary magnetic field, both of which are crucial
for the development of future global heliospheric models, which are in turn
important for space weather forecasting.

Research results will be presented to the broader community at scientific
meetings and at smaller workshops where student participation is encouraged. The
team will also publish findings via peer-reviewed journals and web-based monthly
electronic newsletters. In this project, several graduate and undergraduate
students will be supported at the University of Alabama at Huntsville (UAH) and
at the University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA). This project will integrate
and synergize existing research programs at UAH, the Southwest Research
Institute (SwRI) in San Antonio, and the Johns Hopkins University's Applied
Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL).