* 0962175
* Collaborative Research:  Local Elections in America Project (LEAP)
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Melissa Marschall, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2013
* USD 236,222.00

Urban politics scholars have for some time lamented the notable absence of a
database on local elections in the US. Given the large number of cases (nearly
90,000 local governments) and considerable institutional and contextual
variation across and within local governments, one might assume that the study
of US local elections is an area of substantial scholarly investigation. And yet
this is a relatively unexplored area of inquiry. The absence of scholarly
research on local elections is significant, since 96% of the nearly half million
elected officials in the US represent local rather than state or federal
jurisdictions, and since municipalities have the largest share of elected
officials, with 27% (US Census Bureau 1995).

The Local Elections in America Project (LEAP) will accomplish two goals. First,
it offers a path-breaking methodology to create a centralized, comprehensive,
and cost effective local elections database that will provide unparalleled
opportunities for learning about local elections and the political, racial and
socio-demographic features of American cities. The software application will
systematically collect, digitize, and disseminate data on city council and
mayoral elections, employing an automated system that will continue to collect
elections data long into the future without ongoing external funding. Moreover,
the application will be highly flexible and could therefore be adapted to handle
different types of elections (e.g., school board or judicial contests) or units
of analysis (precincts).

The second goal of this project is to use the LEAP database as the foundation
for research that focuses on the centrality of race/ethnicity in local electoral
politics. The increasing racial/ethnic heterogeneity of the US population is
nowhere more evident than at the local level, which means that local elections
provide the best arena for testing a whole range of theories. This component of
the project focuses on the emergence and political ambition of minority
candidates in American politics and the role of candidate and voter
race/ethnicity in the process and outcome of American elections. To date almost
no studies have examined the conditions under which minority candidates run for
office and there is little in the way of theory to guide understanding of the
"supply side" of minority representation. Is the lack of minority representation
in elective office due to the defeat of the minority candidate or the absence of
minority candidates? No study has even ventured a guess at this question. Other
specific questions this project will address include: Under what conditions do
African Americans and Latinos decide to run for local office, and how is their
"path to office" different than that of their white counterparts? And, once the
minority candidates are victorious, what is the trajectory of their political
careers? How does candidate race/ethnicity shape the competitiveness of
municipal elections (including primaries)?

LEAP represents an unprecedented advancement in the areas of data collection and
dissemination. The project creates the much needed infrastructure to describe
systematically, as never before, the landscape of local politics and elections,
to test empirically an unprecedented range of social science theories that have
heretofore been little studied in the context of local politics, and to
establish an automated and ongoing process of data collection. The database will
provide a crucial corollary to current databases and open up local elections to
scholars outside of urban politics. Making the LEAP data available via an
interactive website will maximize access and use for social scientists,
educators, and stakeholder groups.

This award was partially funded by the Office of Cyberinfrastructure (OCI) CF21
Venture Fund for promoting the reuse of Cyberinfrastructure (CI) elements.