* 0962422
* Collaborative Research: Applications of Asymptotic Statistical Decision Theory in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Jack Porter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,033.00

This project will use asymptotic statistical decision theory to develop new
procedures and optimality results for two areas of current interest in
econometrics: estimation and inference for partially identified parameters; and
optimal treatment assignment rules. Partially identified models have received
considerable recent attention in economics. In partially identified statistical
economic models, not all quantities of interest can be perfectly recovered even
with an idealized data set, but one can obtain bounds on the quantities of
interest. Although such models can increase the robustness of empirical analysis
by relaxing auxiliary assumptions, they are nonstandard from a statistical
viewpoint. By using tools from asymptotic statistical decision theory to analyze
these models, we can obtain sharp restrictions on the properties of statistical
procedures, compare alternative procedures simply, and obtain optimality
results. The results of this research will provide economists with new tools,
and methods for selecting the best tools, for conducting bounds
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second component of our project will develop
decision-theoretic approaches to treatment and policy analysis. In this project,
we consider optimal treatment assignment problems. A major goal of treatment
evaluation in the social and medical sciences is to provide guidance on how to
assign individuals to treatments. For example, a number of studies have examined
the problem of profiling individuals to identify those likely to benefit from a
social program. These empirical studies typically focus on estimation, or
inference on the size of the treatment effect. Our research takes a decision-
theoretic approach, which connects the statistical analysis of the data to a
formal policy decision. In recent work, we show how such an approach can be used
to develop optimal procedures for treatment assignment in a wide range of
binary, static cases. In the next phase of our work, we will broaden our
analysis to a number of situations of practical relevance: settings with multi-
valued or continuous treatments; and dynamic treatment assignment problems,
where decisions can be made sequentially in response to intermediate
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Models with partial
identification arise throughout the social and life sciences. Our research will
provide estimation and inference tools for researchers in other social sciences,
survey analysis, biostatistics, and other fields. Treatment assignment problems
and related dynamic programming problems also have broad application. Our
research will provide researchers in medicine, biostatistics, and many other
fields with procedures to make treatment and policy recommendations optimally in
light of past data.