* 0962903
* Integration and evolution of human and non-human primate postcranial morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* John Polk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2014
* USD 149,772.00

The skeleton of the limbs and body plays an important role in locomotion, but
the patterns of relationships among different aspect of bone shape (their
integration) and the genes that affect these relationships remain poorly
understood. This study develops a better understanding of how patterns of
integration correspond to variation in primate movement and how genes affect the
ways in which skeletal traits are integrated with one another. The research
compares bone morphology among a large number of primate species to test the
hypothesis that integration in the limbs is the result of adaptation by natural
selection in response to the different performance requirements that species
encounter. It uses a similar comparative approach to test hypotheses about
whether patterns of integration structured or were structured by adaptive
evolutionary shifts in response to selection on locomotor behavior. In order for
bones to evolve, there must be genetic variation in bone shape and size, but
there is little know about which genes are involved in producing this variation
in normal, healthy organisms. This project uses a very large population of mice
to relate aspects of bone shape and size to specific regions of the genome.
Comparisons between the patterns of integration in mice and primates, including
humans, will then help guide future investigations into what role these genes
have had in the evolution and development of human skeletal morphology.
&lt;br/&gt;At a practical level, understanding how humans differ from our
closest evolutionary relatives in skeletal patterns of integration will aid
future studies of many physical health problems, such as back pain and bad
knees, which are directly attributable to our unique morphology. Understanding
the genetic basis of bone size and shape in the mouse will help guide future
investigations into the development and hereditary basis of diseases that affect
the skeleton. Understanding how the integration of bones varies across primates,
including humans, will provide a fresh perspective on how these differences have
evolved. This is particularly important when considering the origins of humans'
unique, bipedal mode of locomotion. Additionally, the understanding of the
genetics of bone shape will be very informative for continuing investigations
into the links between development and the evolution of organismal form. This
research will afford many students, including a substantial number from
underrepresented groups, with hands-on research experience in a way that will
help them be able to synthesize a new understanding of how organisms develop and
evolve. Furthermore, students will receive training in state of the art
morphometric scientific imaging, and statistical computing technologies and
methods. This will allow them eventually to pursue fruitful independent research
programs in any of several biomedical fields. Public understanding of science
will be aided by the production of a large number of digital representations of
bones that can help students at many educational levels visualize biological
variation.&lt;br/&gt;