* 0962804
* SFBay Integrated Middle School Science Project (IMMS)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Jeffery Seitz, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2016
* USD 11,957,003.00

The San Francisco Bay Integrated Middle School Science Project (IMSS) Targeted
Math-Science Partnership is a partnership - between California State University,
East Bay (CSUEB), the Alameda County Office of Education, and the Hayward, San
Leandro and San Lorenzo unified school districts - that is developing and
studying a comprehensive teacher professional development model designed to
transform science teaching and learning in underperforming middle schools
serving predominately low-income, underrepresented minority students. Grounded
in an extensive body of research and evidence based best practices, the IMSS is
engaging students and teachers in authentic discovery as active members of a
science professional learning community with federal research laboratory and
industry scientists, disciplinary faculty and educational specialists. The
project is preparing fifty-one middle school science master teachers and three
regional science leaders/coaches who are impacting approximately 432 teachers
and 69,000 students over the life of the project. In addition, thirty-six
district and site administrators are participating in the professional
development activities and are providing the master teachers with release time
and other resources to support the project goals. The preservice program at
CSUEB is being modified to include additional science content knowledge and
preparation on the use of inquiry-based learning in middle school science
courses. Four new science courses are begin added to the preservice program and
the program is being aligned with the new California Foundational Level General
Science Credential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMSS project expects the following
outcomes:&lt;br/&gt;1) To increase the quality of middle school science teachers
by increasing their science content knowledge and stimulating their sustained
use of inquiry-based pedagogies. &lt;br/&gt;2) To create, assess, and refine
exemplary investigative science instructional case modules and to distribute
these modules through an online professional development community maintained in
MERLOT and the NSF-funded National Science Digital Library. The instructional
case modules are being developed in the context of disciplinary research being
conducted by disciplinary faculty and scientists at federal and industrial
research laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;3) To have statistically significant gains in
middle school students' science achievement as measured by the California
Standards Test (CST).&lt;br/&gt;4) To develop leadership models and
infrastructure that lead to sustained institutional change in all core partners
in the project.&lt;br/&gt;5) To recruit and prepare forty-two middle school
science teachers from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;6) To rigorously study
the impact of inquiry-based learning and teacher professional development on
student achievement in middle school science.