* 0962142
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Collective Action and Social Networks in a Peruvian Community
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Eric Smith, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 17,652.00

Doctoral student Henry Lyle (University of Washington), supervised by Dr. Eric
A. Smith and Dr. Donna Leonetti, will undertake research on the relationship
among social networks, collective action, free-riding, and reputation. Free-
riding in this context refers to shouldering less than one's fair share of the
cost of production of a public good. This study will shed light on how
cooperative behaviors of individuals are promoted locally, and how such
behaviors may persist or be undermined by a variety of contextual factors.

The research will be carried out in highland Peru, an extreme environment that
highlights the significance of cooperative behavior. The indigenous people of
the Peruvian Andes have a long history of political and economic
marginalization. This history combines with high altitude stressors, such as low
ecosystem productivity, to make it difficult for families to assure a consistent
and adequate supply of food and maintain good health. One important method of
coping with variability in food intake and with episodes of illness or injury
involves exchange networks among households. This research aims to better
understand how one's standing in these critically important social networks is
established and maintained; the role that social reputation (achieved from
helping with community projects) plays in this process; and whether those who
over-contribute (that is, help out with community projects even if others fail
to do their part) do so because of later benefits.

The researcher will collect both qualitative and quantitative data through a
variety of research methodologies, including: demographic censuses, semi-
structured interviews, time allocation observations via focal scans, and
participant observation in community tasks. Data also will be gathered on
reputation for participating in community projects, time allocation to community
projects, and inter-household exchanges of food, labor, and medical aid.
Analyses will utilize multiple regression and social network analytical methods
including exonential random graph models.

This research is important because cooperative behavior is an essential part of
human adapative strategies. It is theoretically innovative in linking cutting
edge analysis of social network dynamics with data on generosity and reputation.
The project also has practicial applications to improving the functioning of
communal undertakings, such as all-important irrigation and other resource
management systems. Funding this research also supports the education of a
graduate student.