* 0962119
* The Perceptual Identification and Representation of Image Contours
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* James Todd, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2015
* USD 436,101.00

It has long been recognized that a convincing pictorial representation of an
object can sometimes be achieved by drawing just a few salient contours in an
image. This phenomenon is really quite remarkable, given that a line drawing
effectively strips away almost all of the variations in color and shading that
are ordinarily available in natural scenes. Somehow the artists who create such
drawings are able to capture the essential information for perceptual
recognition with just a few simple strokes. Although a well structured line
drawing is easily interpreted by human observers, the ability to create these
drawings can require considerable artistic skill. Indeed, despite almost a half
century of research in the field of computer vision, there are no existing
algorithms that can duplicate the performance of a competent human artist. In
this project, Dr. James Todd and his students at the Ohio State University will
investigate how human observers perceptually identify different types of image
contours, such as shadows, corners or occlusion. The group will also examine
which contours in an image are perceptually most important for creating
pictorial representations of objects. The stimuli in these studies will include
drawings by artists with varying amounts of training, who will be asked to
produce line drawings of objects with known 3D structures. The drawings will be
ranked by human observers to assess their relative perceptual effectiveness. The
contours in the drawings will also be compared with different aspects of the
depicted surface geometry in order to determine which specific aspects of a
surface are most important for its pictorial depiction.

A better understanding of how human observers perceptually determine the 3D
shapes of surfaces from 2D image data has many possible applications, including
the design of more robust and effective algorithms in machine vision, improved
techniques for 3D visualization in computer graphics and design, and the
potential development of more functional prosthetic devices for the blind. This
work may also have a significant impact on how students are taught to draw in
art or design courses.