* 0962135
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Transmission Mechanisms of Cumulative Cultural Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2011
* Lee Cronk, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2011
* USD 19,284.00

Rutgers University doctoral student, Helen Wasielewski, under the direction of
Dr. Lee Cronk, will investigate the effects of social learning on accumulative
social change. The researcher will focus specifically on comparing the effects
of imitation (behavior copying) with emulation (copying of products of
behavior). Using an experimental micro-society design, which is a laboratory
method for simulating cultural generations, the research will (1) improve
understanding of how different social learning mechanisms contribute to the
evolution of cumulative culture; (2) develop new methods for studying cumulative
culture; and (3) contribute to better understanding of human cognitive
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will collect data by videotaping
social information transfer in a laboratory setting. Subjects will be asked to
construct a weight-supporting device using simple materials and their success
will be evaluated by measuring the maximum weight that each constructed device
is capable of supporting. The subjects will be videotaped as they work and the
tapes subjected to a close analysis to determine the amount and success of
information transfer under different social learning conditions. The researcher
will focus on (1) the interactions between the type of learning used and the
rate of accumulation of changes to culture, (2) the effects of different social
learning mechanisms on the fidelity of information transmission, and (3) the
efficacy of behavioral information transmission by emulation in the absence of
direct access to the behavior itself (that is, by looking solely at successful
device examples without being able to observe the behaviors that produced them).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will help social
scientists to better understand the cognitive changes that were necessary in
human evolution for people to develop and pass on complex cultural practices. It
also will contribute to understanding how cultural information is transferred
between individuals, which is of interest to those concerned with cultural
variation and processes of change. Funding this research also supports the
education of a social scientist.