* 0962219
* Investment: Theory, Estimates, and Public Policy
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Christopher House, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2014
* USD 364,290.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Investment: Theory, Estimates, and Public
Policy&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze the determinants of investment
spending. It will quantify several key determinants and study how they affect
investment both in theory and in practice. The proposal features two related
lines of research. The first research component is an empirical analysis of
investment at a disaggregated level. The second component develops and estimates
a structural model of investment. The two research components are complementary.
The empirical results are used to inform, test, and estimate parameters of the
structural model. In turn, the structural model provides important insights into
the effects of recent and future investment policies. The first part of the
project presents an empirical analysis of investment. This research establishes
key empirical facts that investment theories should match. It also evaluates the
empirical success of several existing theories. Specifically, using a panel of
type-specific investment data, four prominent empirical issues are studied: (1)
the cyclicality of pre-tax and after-tax investment prices; (2) the role of
uncertainty in investment spending; (3) the response of investment to tax
subsidies and (4) the response of automobile production and prices to the
Consumer Assistance to Recycle and Save Act of 2009, also known as "cash for
clunkers.?" The primary data sets used are the BEA underlying detail tables for
investment, recently available measures of economic uncertainty, and an updated,
revised set of type-specific investment tax subsidies.The second part of the
proposal presents a structural equilibrium model of investment. The theoretical
framework builds on previous studies which feature fixed adjustment costs at the
microlevel. The model adds to this research by introducing a new investment
timing friction not featured in earlier work. The timing friction allows firm-
level heterogeneity to have a substantial influence on equilibrium investment
dynamics. This is a ignificant extension of the research on fixed costs and
firm-level heterogeneity since important effects of such heterogeneity are not
present in earlier models. As a result, the proposed framework will provide a
better guide to analyzing investment policy. The magnitude of the timing
friction will be estimated with type-specific investment data. The empirical
work in the first part of the proposal will provide several parameters to assess
the fit of the theoretical model and to develop estimates of the effects of
specific policy changes.&lt;br/&gt;Summary of intellectual merit. The project
will develop a modern model of investment that incorporates key frictions that
imply important firm-level heterogeneity. While the model incorporates many
complex modern features, it is also analytically tractable and yields sharp
testable predictions. Hence, this research will allow modern investment models
to confront the data in a meaningful way and to be used to evaluate specific
policies.&lt;br/&gt;Summary of broader implications. This research will provide
both theoretical and empirical guidance for government policies designed either
to affect overall economic activity by stimulating investment or to promote
investment to increase economic growth. Additionally, the results of this
analysis will be valuable to studying business cycles by shedding light on how
various shocks affect investment activity.