* 0962484
* New Measures of Preferences: Risk, Time, Beliefs, and Social Image
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* James Andreoni, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2015
* USD 444,390.00

This project explores four areas of individual decision making: choices over
risk, choices over time, reporting beliefs about probability distributions, and
concern for one 's social-image. The four sections are tied together by
constructing new ways to measure and estimate preferences. With risk, we ask
subjects to construct a most preferred gamble by trading away some probability
of winning for an increase in the prize. For choices over time, we vary the
returns, time delays, and likelihood of getting paid and ask individuals to
diversify across receiving payment "earlier" or "later." For eliciting beliefs,
we employ a new scoring rule that is simple and transparent and tends to result
in more updating behavior. Finally, with social image we intend to show that
when a person's choices may have some moral consequences, an essential feature
of the deliberations is the image created in the minds of others. All of these
issues are addressed with new and simple techniques that tend to produce data
that is more in line with neoclassical models of choice than many other
techniques employed by economists and decision scientists in the
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, the projects presents a new methodology
for measuring the foundations of economics analysis: preferences and beliefs. In
the process we gain a deeper understanding of how the mind approaches complex
individual and social decisions. This research will provide economists and
decision theorists with new instruments that will improve the reliability and
accuracy of their work. Policy makers will have new information to use in
evaluating programs that affect time and risk. Institution and mechanism
designers will have a deeper understanding of how to incorporate and use social
motives to improve performance and efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;