* 0962840
* Science Learning through Engineering Design (SLED) Targeted Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2019
* Alyssa Panitch, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2019
* USD 6,793,800.00

The Targeted Math-Science Partnership of Science Learning through Engineering
Design (SLED) vision is to increase grade 3-6 student learning of science by
developing Indiana's first integrated, engineering design-based approach to
elementary/intermediate school science education. The partnership involves
Purdue University's colleges of Engineering, Science, Technology, and Education
working with four Indiana school districts: Taylor Community School Corporation,
Plymouth School Corporation, Lafayette School Corporation, and Tippecanoe School
Corporation. The project is devising a design- and standards-based curriculum,
inventing design-informed science instructional methods, and implementing on-
going assessments to inform the project at the pre- and in-service teacher
education levels in central Indiana. The partnership is using summer institutes,
linkages with Purdue pre-service teachers, cyber-infrastructure, action
research, and graduate coursework to equip teachers with design-based
pedagogical skills and science content. An external advisory board consisting of
recognized experts in science education, mathematics education, and engineering
design meet annually to provide input to the project
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four interrelated components:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) collaboration between STEM disciplinary faculty and
grades 3-6 teachers to adapt and develop engineering design-based tasks;
&lt;br/&gt;2) an in-service teacher professional development program to equip
grades 3-6 teachers in partnering schools to use engineering design as a tool
for teaching science through authentic, inquiry-based, multi-disciplinary design
units; &lt;br/&gt;3) a pre-service teacher education program to prepare future
elementary school teachers to teach science using the engineering design
process; and &lt;br/&gt;4) research that will investigate how grades 3-6
teachers teach science through the engineering design process and how students
learn through design-based activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific outcomes
that the partnership is working to produce include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) In-
service professional development for 200 elementary/intermediate school teachers
and preparation of 100 pre-service teachers in the use of engineering design to
teach science through authentic, inquiry-based, multi-disciplinary design
projects.&lt;br/&gt;2) Improved science achievement of 5,000 students in grades
3-6 in the partner schools through exposure to engineering design-based
curriculum and activities implemented by teachers. &lt;br/&gt;3) A library of
tested, design-based curricular materials to support teaching science in grades
3-6. &lt;br/&gt;4) Creation of a cyber-infrastructure-enabled community of
practice related to science education through engineering design that can
disseminate grades 3-6 engineering design-based curriculum materials.
&lt;br/&gt;5) Research on the understanding of how teachers teach science
through the engineering design process and how young students learn science
through design-based activities.&lt;br/&gt;6) Institutionalization of
engineering design-based innovation through the development of an undergraduate
engineering design-focused science methods course, a graduate course for in-
service teachers and STEM graduate students, and the integration of engineering
design-based curriculum in grades 3-6 of partner schools.