* 0962352
* Labor Supply Models and the External Validity of Randomized Welfare Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Patrick Kline, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2016
* USD 434,700.00

This project aims to enhance understanding of labor supply and program
participation decisions by: 1) developing and estimating a behavioral model of
labor supply using survey and administrative data from a randomized welfare
experiment, 2) assessing the importance of precise measurement of agents'
choices and incentives on the accuracy of the model's predictions, and 3)
evaluating the ability of the estimated model to predict the results of other
experiments in different populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this research is to generate accurate quantitative models of labor
supply and program participation. Such models can be used to evaluate the impact
of reforms to the social insurance and tax system and to make quantitative
statements about the welfare effects of proposed and existing policies. Our
estimation approach combines observational and experimental variation in
incentives and opportunities. The experimental variation in welfare rules allows
us to relax many of the key assumptions typically employed when estimating
behavioral responses to changes in program rules. Our ability (or inability) to
accurately predict the results of markedly different randomized experiments
provides a policy-relevant metric for evaluating our modeling framework in
general and, more specifically, our ability to account for self-selection into
program and labor market participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
deliver two research papers. The first paper focuses on assessing the extent to
which the ability of labor supply models to match experimental impacts depends
upon measurement issues and modeling complexity. We will begin by developing and
estimating a model of welfare participation and labor supply using data from the
California Work Pays Demonstration Project (CWPDP) -- a large scale randomized
welfare reform experiment implemented in California in the early 1990s. The
longitudinally merged administrative and survey data available from this
experiment allow us to measure the budgets (and hence incentives) of agents in
substantially more detail than previous studies. Moreover, the various
components of the data contain independent repeated measurements on a number of
key variables allowing us to detect and model recording and reporting problems
in a more satisfactory manner than has previously been attempted in this
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will then examine how our estimates change
when we coarsen the choices available to agents, use approximate rather than
exact policy rules, or ignore measurement problems. Our focus will be on how
these changes influence our ability to match experimental impacts on quantities
of direct policy interest such as total welfare payments and program
participation. The analysis will also provide a quantitative unbundling of the
incentive effects associated with the CWPDP treatment, allowing us to ascertain,
for example, the relative importance of changes in welfare eligibility rules vs.
changes in earnings disregards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second paper is
motivated by the concern that randomized experiments may have little external
validity. The CWPDP experiment, for instance, was conducted on a sample of on-
going welfare recipients residing in four California counties during a sustained
boom in the state job market. To what extent can what we learn from the
California experiment be generalized to other populations, time periods, and
program mixes? The many state welfare experiments conducted during the 1990s
provide us with the opportunity to answer this question. We will use our
estimates from the CWPDP sample to generate predictions about the results of
randomized experiments in two other states. This will entail developing methods
to re-estimate distributions of unobservable preferences and skills from the
control observations available in each state's sample. We will conclude with an
assessment of the practical advantages (if any) of access to experimental
variation in generating credible out of sample policy
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of our project will be to
develop methods for enhancing what can be learned from social experiments
through use of a behavioral model. We seek to illustrate how to build and
estimate economic models capable of "pooling together" and interpreting the
results of multiple experiments in the presence of unobserved individual-level
heterogeneity. We believe such methods will become increasingly important as
social and field experiments continue to proliferate in economics.&lt;br/&gt;