* 0962203
* Collaborative Research: Legislative Tactics and the Durability of Legislation
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Charles Shipan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2013
* USD 81,798.00

Scholars, lawmakers, and the general public have little understanding as to why
some laws last a long period of time without the substantial amendment while
others are either killed or substantially amended in a relative short period of
time. What accounts for this difference? Are there certain tactics that Congress
uses that increase the likelihood that a law will continue in its original form,
unchanged by future Congresses? Are there conditions at the time of enactment
that affect whether a law will live a long life? And what effect do subsequent
conditions have? Do they influence the likelihood that a law will be amended in
a significant way? In this project we build on and extend our earlier work
(Maltzman and Shipan 2006; forthcoming) to examine why some laws are amended
soon after passage while others remain untouched by future Congresses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of understanding how a law can be designed
to have a long lasting impact cannot be overstated. First, the longer a law
lasts before it is amended, the greater the potential to shape the nation's
economic, social, and political welfare. Second, much of the value of
legislation--to legislators, to interest groups, to the general public, and so
on--comes from the assumption that the law itself will have longevity. When this
original agreement is revised through future amendments, such changes affect the
value of that law to the original participants. Third, compliance with the law
depends in large part upon a calculation regarding its longevity. If one
believes a law is likely to be either rescinded or revised, rational actors will
abstain from investing in compliance. Finally, we live in a period when the
general public, pundits, and even lawmakers recognize that Congress's capacity
to address all of society's problems is limited. Part of this limit reflects two
issues that are beyond the scope of our project--the extent of the nation's
problems and normative issues regarding the proper role of government. At the
same time, however, this limit may reflect the fact that our lawmaking
institutions repeatedly are called upon to address issues that had been
confronted earlier, by previous Congresses. Our project has the potential to
limit the need for consistently revisiting the issues that confront the nation.