* 0962802
* Theoretical and Experimental Research on Voting and Bargaining Games
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Thomas Palfrey, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2014
* USD 311,556.00

Intellectual merits: This research project studies strategic voting and
committee bargaining mechanisms under conditions of incomplete information from
both theoretical and experimental perspectives. Many questions remain unresolved
about the general theoretical problem of designing optimal voting mechanisms to
efficiently aggregate preferences and information, without explicit side
payments, and also about actual behavior under such mechanisms. Theoretically,
there are questions of the relative performance of different voting mechanisms,
where performance can be evaluated relative to several different objectives,
including economic efficiency, informational efficiency, and equity. The
research approaches voting behavior from a mechanism design perspective, and
compares the performance of different voting mechanisms in different kinds of
environments. The research encompasses five projects in political economy. Three
of these projects will explore promising extensions of the research initiated
under the current grant. These are: (1) The Dynamic Political Economy of Public
Infrastructure; (2) Strategic Voting and Information Acquisition in Committees;
and (3) Vote Trading in Committees. The first follows naturally from the dynamic
political bargaining model studied under the current grant. Bargaining
agreements evolve over time, with past bargaining outcomes setting the table for
current and future rounds of bargaining. We extend that pure private good model
to incorporate a dimension of durable public goods, or "public infrastructure."
We propose to compare the effects of different voting rules and government
organization on the bargaining process, especially with respect to the effects
on efficient investment in public infrastructure. The second project evolved
from experimental studies conducted by the PI and collaborators on the "swing
voter's curse," a phenomenon whereby less informed voters have incentives to
either abstain or even vote strategically against the outcome they would choose
if the decision they would choose on their own. The extension endogenizes the
acquisition of information by voters. The third part of the proposed research
involves studying new voting mechanisms that allow voters to express preference
intensities over a multiple decisions across different issue dimensions. We
apply competitive equilibrium analysis to this kind of environment and propose a
new equilibrium concept with vote trading, called "ex ante exchange
equilibrium." We then study the predictive power of this model by setting up
controlled laboratory "vote markets." The emphasis is on the comparative statics
predictions and the efficiency properties. The two additional projects are: (4)
The Emergence of Efficiency in Dynamic Coordination Problems; and (5) Dynamic
Cursed Equilibrium with an Application to Sophisticated Voting in Dynamic
Agendas with Incomplete Information. The analysis of the data will explore these
extended models of limited rationality to help explain where and why the theory
seems to be adequate and where and why it misses. Project (4) characterizes
efficient dynamic equilibria subject to constraints imposed by the symmetry
structure of the coordination game. We will design and conduct experiments that
look at the effects of the number of players in the group and also the effects
of the symmetry structure of the game. Project (5) explores a new specification
of limited strategic sophistication that extends the cursed equilibrium to
extensive form games. It extends the cursed equilibrium logic from traditional
"mixed strategies" (strategic form) to behavioral strategies. The original
formulation was done in strategic form and so the idea of cursed equilibrium did
not have bite in many sequential contexts. We apply this to a variety of
sequential games,&lt;br/&gt;in particular sequential voting with incomplete
information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: In addition to basic
research, the proposed research has an education component, by training graduate
students in experimental economics and economic theory. The ultimate goal of the
research is to better understand how procedures in commitees affect decision
making and with and eye to understanding how these procedures may be modified to
improve decision making and overcome obstacles such as conflicting preferences
and beliefs, and asymmetric information. This better understanding in the long
run can improve performance of organizations and policy-making institutions. The
performance of voting procedures are evaluated according to traditional economic
welfare criteria, informational efficiency, and equity. There is extensive
software development proposed under the grant. This software may be used freely
by other researchers in experimental economics and will be publicly available as
open source code.