* 0962553
* Collaborative Research:  Experimental Evidence on the Returns to Vocational Education in Kenya
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Isaac Mbiti, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,273.00

Project Summary: "Experimental Evidence on the Returns to Vocational Education
in Kenya"&lt;br/&gt;Youth unemployment is among the most pressing social and
economic problems facing less developed countries, yet too little is known about
how best to smooth the school-to-work transition or boost human capital for
those not on the academic schooling track. Vocational education is one promising
avenue for addressing the problem, especially through the dynamic private
vocational sector. This project will study impacts of a vocational education
voucher program among Kenyan youth, using a randomized design together with an
innovative panel dataset. This is the first (to the investigators' knowledge)
randomized evaluation of a vocational education intervention in Africa and
builds on ten years of detailed information in the Kenyan Life Panel Survey
(KLPS) dataset.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed research is its
reliance on a credible research design and unique dataset to address at least
four central questions in the fields of development, labor and public
economics:&lt;br/&gt;(1) What are the returns to education in Africa? The
proposed project will estimate the impact of vocational education on formal
sector employment, labor market earnings, entrepreneurship decisions, migration
(within Kenya and abroad), remittances and fertility. Approximately 2,160 out-
of-school Kenyan youths, drawn from the KLPS dataset, applied for vocational
education tuition vouchers in the Kenyan study district. Half of these
individuals were randomly selected to receive vouchers, with the non-winners
serving as the control group. The project will also leverage the extensive (pre-
intervention) individual-level data in KLPS to estimate heterogeneous returns to
schooling by cognitive ability, socioeconomic status, and gender.&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Are returns to vocational education higher in the private training sector? Among
the voucher winners, a random half received vouchers that can be used only in
government-supported training centers, while the other half received
unrestricted vouchers that could be used in either public or private centers.
The comparison of outcomes between the restricted (government only) and
unrestricted voucher winners will illuminate any additional returns to access to
private centers.&lt;br/&gt;(3) How are the "returns" to educational investments
spatially distributed? The unusual KLPS panel dataset, which tracks respondents
wherever they move within East Africa, will also provide new insights into how
human capital investments affect out-migration decisions and remittances back to
the sending area, shedding light on whether vocational education reduces or
amplifies inter-regional economic disparities.&lt;br/&gt;(4) What factors affect
the demand for vocational education? This project will produce examine
experimental evidence on both the role of (i) price (through the tuition voucher
experiment above) and (ii) information about average returns to vocational
schooling, in determining demand. A baseline information experiment provided
additional information (including basic statistics and a video) to a randomly
chosen half of program applicants, highlighting (a) the higher earnings of
vocational training recipients (in a cross-sectional analysis) and (b) the
higher earnings of those who receive training in male-dominated trades (e.g.,
automobile mechanics) relative to female-dominated trades (e.g., seamstresses).
The investigators will examine whether this information and encouragement
affected the decision to enroll in a vocational education center and the type of
course chosen. The preliminary results show large impacts of this information
treatment on the enrollment decisions and course choices of Kenyan females, with
a significant shift towards male-dominated courses.&lt;br/&gt;A key broader
impact of the proposed project is the training of Economics Ph.D. students based
in the U.S. in field data collection methods and applied econometrics. Another
broader impact is the possibility of influencing public policy in less developed
countries, and especially in Africa. Vocational education is seen as one of the
most promising avenues for addressing the pressing problem of youth
unemployment, and Kenya and many other African governments are currently
expanding public programs in this sector. This project will provide rigorous
evidence on the demand for and impacts of vocational education. The research
team plans to continue actively disseminating results to development
policymaking through this research, as they have with previous projects. The PIs
have extensive data collection experience and policy contacts in Kenya dating
back over a decade and work with a highly effective team of enumerators.