* 0962488
* Collaborative Research: Applications of Asymptotic Statistical Decision Theory in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Keisuke Hirano, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2014
* USD 212,682.00

This project will use asymptotic statistical decision theory to develop new
procedures and optimality results for two areas of current interest in
econometrics: estimation and inference for partially identified parameters; and
optimal treatment assignment rules. Partially identified models have received
considerable recent attention in economics. In partially identified statistical
economic models, not all quantities of interest can be perfectly recovered even
with an idealized data set, but one can obtain bounds on the quantities of
interest. Although such models can increase the robustness of empirical analysis
by relaxing auxiliary assumptions, they are nonstandard from a statistical
viewpoint. By using tools from asymptotic statistical decision theory to analyze
these models, we can obtain sharp restrictions on the properties of statistical
procedures, compare alternative procedures simply, and obtain optimality
results. The results of this research will provide economists with new tools,
and methods for selecting the best tools, for conducting bounds analyses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second component of this project will develop
decision-theoretic approaches to treatment and policy analysis. In this
component, the PIs consider optimal treatment assignment problems. A major goal
of treatment evaluation in the social and medical sciences is to provide
guidance on how to assign individuals to treatments. For example, a number of
studies have examined the problem of profiling individuals to identify those
likely to benefit from a social program. These empirical studies typically focus
on estimation, or inference on the size of the treatment effect. This research
takes a decision-theoretic approach, which connects the statistical analysis of
the data to a formal policy decision. In recent work, the PIs have shown how
such an approach can be used to develop optimal procedures for treatment
assignment in a wide range of binary, static cases. In the next phase of their
research program, the PIs will broaden our analysis to a number of situations of
practical relevance: settings with multi-valued or continuous treatments; and
dynamic treatment assignment problems, where decisions can be made sequentially
in response to intermediate outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Models with partial identification arise throughout the social and life
sciences. This research will provide estimation and inference tools for
researchers in other social sciences, survey analysis, biostatistics, and other
fields. Treatment assignment problems and related dynamic programming problems
also have broad application. The research will provide researchers in medicine,
biostatistics, and many other fields with procedures to make treatment and
policy recommendations optimally in light of past data.