* 0962743
* Revitalization of University of Florida Helium Liquefaction and Recovery System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Neil Sullivan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,834,243.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will revitalize and
enhance the capability of the University of Florida Helium Liquifaction
facility. The installation of new compressors and storage capacity will upgrade
the current facility to the next generation infra-structure to support research
of both large scale users and the widely distributed small scale users across
campus for the next 15 to 20 years, expanding the total volume of liquid
delivered and recovered annually from 89,000 liters to 135,000
liters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance infrastructure for
research by providing low cost helium supply. The University of Florida supports
curricula in cryogenics and trains more than 60 undergraduate and graduate
students and post doctoral associates each year in classes and research
laboratories in this area. The training is integrated with research activities
throughout the laboratories including safety instruction on handling low
temperature liquids, and is unique in training students in low and ultra-low
temperature techniques. In addition, the University provides technical consults
to many other universities and laboratories both national and international. The
investigators who use the liquid helium will be mentoring many undergraduate
students in summer programs (undergraduate research programs in physics,
chemistry and materials research) and give lectures at elementary and middle
schools throughout north-central Florida, and at the NHMFL Summer School.
Research and educational activities supported by liquid helium research are
expected to increase training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students in this field and increase retention rates. In addition, a webpage will
be set up for outreach activities and this site will provide information about
the facility including a photo tour of the facility and the complete list of
research, educational projects and community activities that could benefit from
the facility.