* 0962993
* Collaborative Research: Trade Liberalization in a World of Heterogeneous Firms: Theoretical and Quantitative Results
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Kim Ruhl, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 02/28/2013
* USD 105,760.00

Trade Liberalization in a World of Heterogeneous Firms: Theoretical and
Quantitative Results Intellectual Merit The applied general equilibrium models
used to predict the impact of the North American Free Trade Agreement on trade
flows failed to capture the explosion of trade that occurred subsequently and
the accompanying redistribution of trade across industrial sectors. The analysis
of disaggregated trade flows between Canada, Mexico, and the United States shows
that much of the increase in trade has been trade in goods not previously
exported or exported very little - what is known as the extensive margin of
trade. This proposal shows that mechanically incorporating this insight into
crude projections of North American trade patterns would have produced
significantly better predictions of the pattern of trade following the enactment
of NAFTA than did multisectoral applied GE models. The data suggest that
capturing the extensive margin of trade is important for understanding the
impacts of trade policy, which implies that models that generate extensive
margin growth are needed. The proposed research will use advances in the firm-
level theory of trade to build models that are suitable for policy analysis. The
initial aim of the project is to evaluate the properties of models based on two
types of industrial structures: monopolistic competition with entry costs, as in
Melitz (2003) and perfect competition, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002).
Constructing models flexible enough to be estimated for policy analysis requires
generalizing the standard theories. Based on Kehoe and Ruhl (2009b), the models
are extended to include multiple dimensions of firm heterogeneity and
generalized distributions over underlying productivity. A mapping scheme is
developed to match the firm-level decisions in the model to the product-level
and industry-level aggregates in the data. Broader Impact To inform the policy
debate over free trade and protectionism, economists need to better understand
the impact of trade on different industries. The proposed research develops
models that transform the firm-level trade models popular in current research
into models useful for policy analysis. Methodologically, these sorts of models
will allow economists to analyze the impact of policy on the structures of
industries. Currently, the United States is negotiating free trade agreements
with several Latin American countries, and a free trade agreement with South
Korea waits to be approved by the legislatures in each country. Successful trade
negotiations require careful evaluation of the impact of trade policy on
individual industrial sectors. Without an accurate understanding of the
distributional impacts of trade policy, it is difficult to advise policy makers
and to inform the public on the merits of such liberalization policies