* 0962449
* Innovation Through Institutional Integration Projects  OASIS One-Stop Academic Student Integrated System
* EHR,HRD
* 06/01/2010,10/31/2013
* Magdy Attia, Johnson C. Smith University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 10/31/2013
* USD 749,864.00

Molecular spin devices (MSDs) are promising candidates for revolutionizing
computer logic and memory. MSDs aim to harness the controllable transport and
magnetic properties of molecular device elements which can be synthetically mass
produced. However, there have been insignificant efforts to predict or measure
the effect of molecular coupling on the performance of a MSD.

In order to produce insights about the role of molecular device elements on the
magnetic properties of the MSDs, the Research Initiation Award project entitled
- A Monte Carlo and SQUID Magnetometer Study of Molecular Spintronics Devices -
has two goals: a) To perform Monte Carlo Simulations (MCS) to theoretically
investigate the interplay between the magnetic molecules and ferromagnetic
electrodes responsible for bringing about the desired characteristics within
MSDs. The project will study the effects of Heisenberg exchange coupling between
magnetic molecules and ferromagnetic electrodes of a MSD; study the effect of
dimensionality, geometry on the molecule induced magnetic coupling, and
improvise algorithms for Monte Carlo Simulations near phase change points in a
MSD. b) To experimentally study the effect of molecular device elements on the
magnetic properties of the MSDs. The research will focus on magnetic tunnel
junction (MTJ) based MSDs, by conducting a SQUID magnetometer based
magnetization study before and after transforming a variety of MTJ test beds
into MSDs by utilizing molecular device elements.