* 0962080
* Collaborative Research: Culture, Psychological Distance and Modes of Moral Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2010,09/30/2016
* Jeremy Ginges, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 09/30/2016
* USD 363,851.00

Common approaches to resource and political conflicts often assume adversaries
understand the world on the basis of rational choices. Given this assumption,
one can predict the behavior of potential allies and adversaries by analyzing
the costs and benefits of a given action from their perspective. In prior
research involving psychological experiments, anthropological fieldwork and
political science surveys relating to political and resource conflicts, the PIs
have found that that when sacred or protected values (e.g. "My values are not
for sale"; "Do the right thing regardless of the consequences") are in play, the
assumption that the values people place on different actions is simply the sum
of the values of their consequences may be wrong. As a result, the practice of
providing incentives to increase the attractiveness of certain courses of action
and/or penalties to make other courses of action less attractive to try and
achieve a desired outcome in a conflict may backfire. Planning and acting in
ignorance of or disregard for non-consequentialist value frameworks may
exacerbate conflict, with grievous loss of treasure and lives.

In the proposed research, the PIs examine how different moral frames, with
different types and uses of sacred values, shape personal and collective
identity, influence cultural and political decision making, and sustain inter-
group conflict. The studies will broaden theoretical and empirical analyses of
moral cognition, including how protected or sacred values (SVs) affect people's
lives and play out in diverse cultural contexts. SVs are distinct from secular
values because of their association with transcendental beliefs, relative
immunity to tradeoffs with instrumental values, emotional salience, and
significance for personal and collective identity. The project will examine how
SVs operate in real-world contexts, identifying those circumstances where they
result in decision makers ignoring material consequences and distance in time or
place and produce paradoxical results as well as those where they produce
outcomes that track those that follow from the consequentialist assumption. The
methodology integrates basic and applied research, combining laboratory and
field experiments, surveys and interviews in a number of different cultural
settings (North America, the Middle East, and India) in order to provide "real-
world" relevance.

The results will contribute to a comprehensive theoretical framework and wide-
ranging empirical analysis of the psychological and cultural mechanisms
underlying moral reasoning and decision making, the formation of cultural
identity, and the nature of sacred values.