* 0962997
* IRNC:ProNet: TransLight/StarLight
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Tajana Rosing, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,070,500.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Translight/Starlight Project&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0962997&lt;br/&gt;PI: Tom DeFanti - UC San Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Translight/Starlight team will be pursuing application experiments on
international networks with 6 different activity areas. These areas
are:&lt;br/&gt; - Greenlight International - TL/SL will investigate monitoring
for energy consumption in selected international-reach experimental
networks.&lt;br/&gt; - SCCSnet - TL/SL will support the Science Cloud
Communication Services Network by assisting projects that are developing high-
performance communication services tailored for computational clouds used by
data-intensive scientific applications. These projects are addressing the high-
volume, high-performance national and international communication requirements
of scientific computational clouds versus general consumer and enterprise
clouds, which use the commodity Internet. &lt;br/&gt; - CineGrid ? TL/SL will
help enable the production, use and exchange of very-high-quality digital media,
including scientific collaborations and visualizations, over photonic networks.
UCSD will serve as the lead on CineGrid activities. TL/SL funding will offset
personnel time involved in conducting international trials, and for partial
participant costs for the annual CineGrid conferences in 2010, 2011, and 2012,
held at Calit2.&lt;br/&gt; - High-Performance Digital Media Network (HPDMnet) ?
TL/SL will work with international partners to develop new services based on
high-performance optical transport (i.e., optical multicast) of large-scale data
streams, including high-resolution digital media streams, as well as new
capabilities for high-volume scientific data. &lt;br/&gt; - iGENI (International
GENI) ? TL/SL will connect existing StarLight resources with current GENI
backbone transport resources.&lt;br/&gt; - SAGE - TL/S will help transition SAGE
from a transformative research prototype to a hardened technology that provides
production-quality, community-driven open services for visualization and
collaboration utilizing shared national and international cyberinfrastructure,
for the advancement of scientific research and education. Partners sites are in
the US, Australia, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Japan, Korea, Netherlands,
Russia, Saudi Arabia, and Taiwan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Contributions from this project have the potential to strengthen
activities in network modeling, exploring leading edge green technology
research, simulation, advanced imaging transmissions enabling the IRNC program
to play a formative role in the emerging discipline of network science, and
enhancing NSF's leading role in sustainable stewardship of
cyberinfrastructure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will help IRNC operators better understand their networks by making more
effective use of data they already collect as well as newer technologies for
measurement and visibility of their networks. The data will have broad
applicability to other researchers and pragmatic network operations.