* 0962825
* The Cultural and Biological Significance of Ethnic Substructure in New Mexican Hispanics
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2015
* Heather Edgar, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2015
* USD 327,915.00

This research examines sociocultural and biological variation in Hispanic people
in New Mexico, a state known for its unique history of early Spanish
colonization and continuing immigration from Latin America. The
multidisciplinary team is collecting data on ethnicity, genetics, morphology,
and health from a diverse cross-section of the New Mexican public and using
these data to examine how people construct ethnicity, the sociocultural and
biological correlates of ethnicity, and the social causes of economic inequality
and health disparity. The project redresses limitations of previous research on
race and ethnicity, including: 1) reliance on static US Census categories that
do not fully capture how people think about ethnicity, 2) the assumption that
people from a particular ethnic group are culturally and biologically
homogeneous, 3) reliance on indirect or inadequate measures of sociocultural and
biological variation, 4) the assumption that ethnic groups are stable in space
and time, 5) the uncritical use of ethnicity as a proxy for genetic ancestry,
and 6) the failure to employ a biocultural and evolutionary perspective.

The project provides training for several Hispanic undergraduate and graduate
students. The public health policy implications of findings will be explored
with faculty from the UNM Alfonso Ortiz Center for Intercultural Studies and the
Institute for Race and Social Justice. Results will be communicated to the
public via a web-based exhibit and by a panel exhibit that will travel
throughout the state. The research will generate a comparative database from
other US Hispanic groups that can be used by social scientists and medical
health professionals. The results will be presented by the investigators and
their students in leading scientific journals and at professional meetings.