* 0962708
* Collaborative Research: Holocene Shell Accumulation from the Southeast Brazilian Bight: Multi-Centennial Dynamics of Oceanographic, Environmental, and Ecological Changes
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Christopher Romanek, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2011
* USD 11,865.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Holocene Shell
Accumulation from the Southeast Brazilian Bight: Multi-Centennial Dynamics of
Oceanographic, Environmental, and Ecological Changes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will assess the Holocene dynamics of oceanographic processes on the
Southeast Brazilian Bight (western South Atlantic), a region affected by a
western boundary equatorial current, ENSO/SOI-related coastal runoffs, and
shelf-break and coastal upwelling events. The PIs will exploit advances in AAR
(reverse-phase HPLC for analyzing sub-milligram shell aliquots for asparitic
acid D/L ratios) and automated sampling/analytical techniques, to develop
multiple stable isotope and elemental time-series of dated brachiopods and
bivalves from time-averaged shell accumulation sites across the inner shelf,
outer shelf, and continental slope of the Southeast Brazilian Bight. The
objectives of this project will be to evaluate multi-centennial to multi-
millennial changes in (1) the frequency of short-term events (ENSO/SOI,
upwelling); (2) the strength and position of the South Brazil Current; and (3)
shellfish bio-productivity in order to evaluate hypotheses regarding the long-
term stability of heat-transfer by ocean currents, changes in frequency of ENSO-
related coastal runoff in the South Atlantic, and volatility of shelf-break and
coastal upwelling as they respond to global-scale climatic processes. This
research will support a post-doctoral scientist, involve students and generate
new international synergies. This project was co-funded with support from the
Office of International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;