* 0962441
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Cross-Cultural Research on Psychiatry, Gender and Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2010,01/31/2012
* Carole Vance, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2012
* USD 15,982.00

Columbia University doctoral student, Sahar Sadjadi, MD, with the guidance of
Dr. Carole Vance, will undertake comparative research on psychiatric diagnoses
and the influence of western diagnostic tools across cultures. The focus of the
research will be current clinical practices around gender disorders in children,
in both diagnosis and treatment, since 1980, and the use and influence of the
diagnostic categories recently revised by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders Task Force of the American Psychiatric Association. The
research will be carried out in two clinics, one in Boston, MA, and the other in
Tehran, Iran. The researcher will collect data through participant observation
in the Task Force and clinics; through interviews with clinicians, patients, and
parents; and through study of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual texts and
technical instruments.

The research is significant because it will be the first cross-cultural
anthropological study of these particular disorders in children. More generally,
it will elucidate the increasing world-wide influence of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual. The research also will develop new methodologies for moving
among the multiple, connected, and unequal scales of global expert knowledge,
and local clinical practice. Supporting this research also supports the
education of a graduate student.