* 0962677
* Collaborative Research:  Integrative analysis of the scaling of primate feeding systems
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2015
* Andrea Taylor, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2015
* USD 95,968.00

Feeding systems are the energy-acquiring systems of humans and other primates.
The teeth, jaws, and muscles, are the proximal interface between primates and
their environments. Therefore, understanding the evolutionary forces that shape
those components is essential to understanding the adaptation and evolution of
primates. This work tests hypotheses and models relating diversity in the
primate feeding system to size-related changes in food intake rate. It documents
how shape and movements of the mandible, the size and architecture of the jaw
muscles, and the amount of food an animal eats in a single bite change with body
size to meet size-required changes in food intake rate of primates. These data
will be collected using computed tomography (CT) scanning of primate mandibles,
anatomical studies of primate chewing muscles, and behavioral studies of
primates feeding in captivity. Mathematical models of the feeding system will be
tested, modified and improved, then used to examine how feeding system designs
in different evolutionary groups of primates balance trade-offs between
advantages of bite force production, chewing speed and gape.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will create novel and important data sets
that can be accessed in the future by other researchers interested in feeding
biomechanics, bone biomechanics, and musculoskeletal systems in general. The
investigators will continue to recruit under-represented minority and female
undergraduates to receive training and mentoring in research and advice on their
paths to graduate, medical, and other professional schools. These students will
collaborate in all aspects of the work, including presentation and publication.
The PIs will continue their outreach programs to local schools and their
synergistic activities with other NSF-funded projects.