* 0962589
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Stories that Stick: Cultural Narrative and Mass Opinions on Climate Change
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Hank Jenkins-Smith, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2011
* USD 10,395.00

Climate change is easily identified as one of the most contentious and pressing
policy problems facing the United States. While scientific opinions on the
reality of climate change show high levels of agreement, a non-trivial component
of the public rejects the claims of these scientists. Why? Current social
science explanations of this divergence in opinion have tended to focus on
either the public's lack of accurate knowledge or media bias that misleads the
public. These explanations focus on message structure influence, but fail to
account for characteristics internal to the individual that most certainly
interact with these message structures. This dissertation addresses this gap in
our knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two theories that account for both
individual internal factors and external stimuli in opinion formation and change
are merged to create a Cultural Narrative Model (CNM). Specifically, Cultural
Theory metrics assess individual cultural predispositions, while narrative
provides the message structuring theory. This model is tested using a web-based
experimental manipulation of over 2500 nationally representative respondents.
Among other findings, the CNM may suggest that narrative structure plays a
significant role in helping respondents develop emotional responses to groups,
determining how much of a threat climate change is, and, how willing a
respondent is to act on the threat of climate change. One broader impact of this
project is that the new knowledge should be beneficial to society through its
utility to risk communicators.