* 0962410
* Topics in Dynamic Panel Data Analysis, Time-Varying Individual Heterogeneities, and Cross-Sectional Dependence
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Jushan Bai, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2014
* USD 226,971.00

This research deals with estimation and inference problems for dynamic panel-
data models under time-varying individual heterogeneities and cross-sectional
dependence (common shocks). An important aspect of these problems is that the
individual heterogeneity and the common shocks are correlated with the
explanatory variables. This correlation is fundamental for economic variables.
Standard procedures such as within-group estimators will lead to inconsistent
inferences. This research explores new estimation procedures and related
inference problems. It also presents feasible implementation of the suggested
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last two decades have witnessed a huge
development of panel data econometrics, as panel data techniques can solve
issues that are hard to solve by either the cross section or time series
procedures alone. With the increasing availability of panel data sets, the
associated techniques have become the key tools of empirical researchers. The
recent advancement and the importance of the panel techniques are summarized by
three excellent monographs: Arellano (2003), Batagi (2006), and Hsiao (2003).
Much of this literature has focused on the case of time-invariant individual
heterogeneities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The research considers
models that allow the individual effects to be time varying, and the time
effects (or common shocks) to have different impacts across individuals. Such
models have both empirical and theoretical foundations, as detailed in the
projection escription section. Moreover, the individual heterogeneities and the
common shocks are allowed to be correlated with the regressors. This correlation
arises naturally for economic variables when choice and decisions are involved.
In this project, the PI will consider how to formulate the problem so that the
estimation can be handled by the traditional methods such as the nonlinear
generalized least squares or the quasi-maximum likelihood method. Careful
analysis for small T (time periods) dynamic panel models will be rendered. Panel
unit root and panel cointegration problems under both fixed T and large T will
be considered. The corresponding inferential theory will be derived.
Furthermore, models with heterogeneous slope coeffcients, their estimation, and
inference will be studied. As in Alvarez and Arrelano (2005), robust likelihood
that allows for changing variance will be considered, as the changing variance
itself may be the object of interest. All the analysis will be conducted in the
presence of time-varying heterogeneities and in the presence of correlation
between the effects and regressors. This research will advance our knowledge and
understanding of panel data models; it will enrich panel data analysis and
result in additional tools for empirical studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: This research deals with new methodologies and their implementations.
Within economics, the methods are applicable in labor economics, industrial
organization, and macroeconomics. These methods are also applicable outside the
field of economics when panel data methods are called for. Computer programs
will be made available to the general public. The proposed research will also
enrich classroom teachings. NSF funding will help train graduate students for
theoretical and computational work.