* 0962962
* ARI-R2: Renovation of the North Carolina State University Phytotron for Improved Environmental Control and BSL-3 Containment
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Steven Clouse, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,793,916.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The four-story NCSU (North Carolina State University) Phytotron built in 1968
with most of the construction (~$1.5M) and first eight years of operating funds
provided by the NSF, followed by 33 years of maintenance and staffing provided
by NCSU. After 42 years of continuous operation the NCSU Phytotron is in dire
need of upgrades to meet present and growing demands for controlled
environmental research with model and relevant plants, insects and small
animals. This award provides funds to provide critical infrastructure upgrades
include: (1) renovating and upgrading the core environmental systems
specifically replacing chillers and pumps, re-insulating chilled water and
glycol lines to accept the recent connection to university chilled water lines.
Applying epoxy coating to chamber and greenhouse floors; (2) replacement of
controllers modulating the environmental conditions for individual environmental
chambers with sensitive digital CO2 controls; and (3) conversion of one rooftop
glasshouses and adjacent plant dark room into a BSL-3 facility for funded
research with select agents and other exotic high risk viral, bacterial, fungal
and nematode plant pathogens.

As NC State is a premier plant biology institution, this NSF-funded legacy is an
invaluable University-wide facility that is used in many federally funded
research projects and is a focal point for training and research at all levels.
Into the future the infrastructure renovations will allow the Phytotron to be a
key public large-scale high-throughput plant phenotypic analyses facility. NC
State graduate, undergraduates as well as summer REU program students from non-
Research I universities and other outreach programs for underrepresented groups
use the Phytotron for independent research projects under the direction of a
diverse faculty who serve as role models and mentors. The renovations will have
immediate scientific impacts as NCSU researchers will undertake more sensitive
global climate change studies and acquire pathogens and microbes from
collaborators around the world housed in the centralized BSL-3 facility
certified to meet or exceed federal and state containment guidelines. The NCSU
Phytotron renovations will maintain NC States broad and robust integrated
contemporary biology community and greatly increase the collaborative potential
and competitiveness of NCSU in these fields.