* 0962968
* IRNC:ProNet: TransPAC3 - Asia-US High Performance International Networking
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* John Hicks, Indiana University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,472,141.00

TransPAC3 is a continuing project building on the existing TransPAC2 cross-
organization project. It will provide multi-gigabit bandwidth and services
connecting researchers in the US with their counterparts in Asia and utilizing
the current technological advances in those areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research and education networks included in the TransPAC3 collaboration cover
all of Asia excluding only North Korea, Brunei, Myanmar, and Mongolia. Indiana
University will lead the TransPAC3 Collaboration in a cooperative partnership
with the Asia Pacific Advanced Network (APAN), Delivery of Advanced Network
Technology to Europe (DANTE), and in coordination with Internet2 and other
research and education networks that are interconnected through the project. The
collaboration in Asia will connect to the APAN XP in Tokyo directly, and from
there to 15 countries in Asia. TransPAC3 will connect to China via Hong Kong and
the CNHI Exchange Point and to the Trans-Eurasian Information Network (TEIN3)
network via Singapore. The TEIN3 network currently provides connectivity to 12
Asian countries and Europe with 7 additional countries soon to be connected.
DANTE is the operator of the TEIN3 network in North, South East, and South Asia
and connects almost all countries in those parts of
Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TransPAC3 will initially deploy 20 Gbps of bandwidth
between Asia and the US using 10G carrier service offerings. TransPAC3 will
deploy one 10 Gbps link between Pacific Wave and Tokyo in years 1 and 2. A
second 10 Gbps link will be provided by NICT, Japan, at no cost to NSF. In Year
3 of the award this will be expanded as demand and pricing evolve. As 40Gbps and
100Gbps become available and affordable at trans-Pacific distance they will
become part of the provided service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This proposal rests well within the guidelines of the IRNC
solicitation and will expand and enhance services in security, identity
management, measurement, and operational integration. US ? Asia connectivity
requires close cooperation between the participants, and this project will
consist of a collaborative team. Security is a major issue for all concerned and
is a focus of the proposal. The PI has proposed and intends to provide
deployment of accurate and useful measurement technology as well as leading edge
circuit services to meet high bandwidth applications. Eliminating duplication of
expensive links should decrease overall costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;As with the previous IRNC award, it is expected that the
awardee?s TransPAC3 collaboration will provide highly expanded opportunities for
US researchers to interact and collaborate with their fellow researchers in
Asia. The PI?s recent cooperation in connecting Pakistan to the global R&amp;E
infrastructure continues to show fruitful results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating diversity in research and education is a
strong component in this proposal. The PI has plans to partner with the Gerald
L. Bepko Internship Program at Indiana University to extend educational outreach
and integrate diversity into the TransPAC3 project, with the goal to identify,
connect, and work with underserved students and advance their knowledge and
ability in information technology.