* 0962506
* SHINE:  Kinetic Heating of Coronal Hole Ions for Generation of the Solar Wind by Imbalanced Turbulence
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Philip Isenberg, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 02/28/2014
* USD 434,138.00

The project will investigate the turbulent generation of the fast solar wind by
using an existing numerical model that solves the coupled quasilinear equations
of proton diffusion and resonant wave growth. During this project, the Principal
Investigator (PI) will progressively add more physical processes to the
numerical model and finally compare the simulation output with observations. At
each step, the team will explore the consequences of expanding their model on
the heating and acceleration of coronal hole protons and minor ions. The PI
asserts that these investigations will lead to more detailed kinetic models of
the generation of the solar wind in the corona, enabling improved understanding
and predictions of the state of the heliospheric environment. This work will
also provide new insights into self-consistent plasma kinetics and the
dissipation of plasma turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the team
will add nonlinear wave effects, such as resonance broadening and turbulent
transport, to their simulations in order to yield realistic Alfvén wave growth
in the solar wind. They will also incorporate such nonlinear calculations into
their inhomogeneous coronal hole model. The team plans to construct a detailed
kinetic model for the radial evolution of coronal hole protons as heated by
imbalanced wave fields, obtaining predictions for the kinetic particle and wave
states. The PI will also compare his model's output with actual coronal hole
observations taken by existing spacecraft instruments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
modeling effort will yield predictions of particle and wave fluxes that will
guide the development of, and be tested by, future NASA spacecraft missions,
such as 'Solar Orbiter' and 'Solar Probe Plus.' The tasks will be performed
within the theoretical turbulence and reconnection group at the University of
New Hampshire, which will provide opportunities for graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers to participate in this project.