* 0962279
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Looking Upstream: Governance of the Forest-Water Interface in California
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2012
* J. Keith Gilless, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 16,641.00

Interactions of U.S. federal public lands agencies with non-government actors
such as businesses, non-profit organizations, universities, and citizens have
evolved in recent decades towards a network-based governance model for managing
public lands and natural resources. This trend is also occurring in many other
areas of public policy, changing how society makes decisions about public issues
and altering the roles and responsibilities of government agencies. Although
this has important implications for democracy and accountability, there is
little research on how government agencies have adapted to network-based
governance, for example in how they build and shape their networks. This
research project asks how a critical natural resource agency, the U.S. Forest
Service, pursues network-based approaches for managing public lands and
resources. As the demand for network-based governance increases, with whom does
the agency choose to work, and why? How might these choices reflect political
constraints or organizational logics? How do resulting governance networks
change power dynamics and shape public access to decision-making? And how are
local-level networks embedded in, and shaped by, broader political contexts such
as state and federal natural resource politics? In our study, we address these
issues by focusing on how the U.S. Forest Service uses network approaches to
manage national forests for downstream water supply in California, where
national forests in the Sierra Nevada mountain range produce half of the state?s
water supply. The management of these watersheds is increasingly a concern of
downstream water stakeholders and decision makers in light of recurrent droughts
and predictions that climate change will adversely affect water timing and
yields. The research project combines network analysis with comparative case
studies in three national forests and their watersheds.