* 0962429
* 2010 Meteorological/Light and Color in the Open Air Conference; St. Marys City, Maryland; June 16-20, 2010
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2010,06/30/2012
* Charles Adler, St Mary's College of Maryland
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2012
* USD 11,383.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will partially fund travel
by selected participants in the 2010 Meteorological/Light and Color in the Open
Air Conference in Annapolis. These "Light and Color" conferences have been held
since the 1970's to discuss research on optical phenomena in nature, especially
light in the atmosphere and landscape. These topics are not only fascinating in
themselves, but also cut across many different scientific disciplines:
meteorologists interact with physicists and biologists, and gifted amateurs also
present their findings before academics. Topics covered have included beetle
irridescence, the optics of the rainbow, rainbows in paleolithic art and
discussions of observations made by sailors stranded above the arctic circle.
Topics which will be covered at the 2010 meeting will include: the optics of the
rainbow; ice crystal haloes; sky colors; optics of the aurora; snowflake
physics; and the applications of optics of the atmosphere in computer graphics
and animation. There is also a strong artistic component to these meetings:
pictures taken by participants are among the most striking in nature
photography; one of the additional merits of this years meetings will be an art
show of these photos at Boyden Gallery at St. Mary's College. The conference
proceedings will be published in a special issue of the journal Applied Optics,
which will appear about 1 year following the conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These meetings have
not only inspired much research and several hundred papers on the subject of
light and color in the landscape, but have served as the inspiration for a
number of popular books on the subject, popular articles, a CD ROM collection of
these papers and others on atmospheric optics, and a large number of popular
lectures, both at the conferences and at the institutions of the attendees. The
2010 conference will have several features designed to promote a broad impact to
the community at large, including an art show. Attendees at the conference are
being asked to loan their best light and color photographs for a special art
show which will be running concurrently with the conference at the St. Mary's
College Boyden Art Gallery. The show will be advertised heavily in the St.
Mary's County and Washington, DC area; the gallery is free and open to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public Lecture: Dr. Stanley Gedzelman, a long-time
attendee of the conferences, will be giving a special lecture to the public
(entitled "Meteorology and Art") a few days before the conference begins. The
lecture will be free and open to the public, and again advertised throughout the
local and Washington, DC community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keynote Speaker: The
Keynote Speaker for each conference is carefully chosen to broaden the impact
and interest of each conference. At this conference, we are inviting experts on
computer graphics to discuss the interface between optics and graphics,
especially as used in the production of animated
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;K-12 Outreach: The subject of the conference, the
play of light in the landscape and atmosphere, is one which is truly of
universal interest and spans many disciplines. One of the broadest impacts of
the conference is how it can inspire people with interest in the physics of the
natural world around us. Five local area high school science teachers will be
given stipends to attend a special session and luncheon at the conference to
discuss how to use the beauty of the natural world to inspire students to follow
careers (or at least take interest in) the sciences.