* 0962931
* IRNC: ProNet - TransLight / Pacific Wave
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Edward Lazowska, University of Hawaii
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2015
* USD 3,999,773.00

The TransLight/Pacific Wave (TL/PW) project builds on close and effective
collaborations built over the last decade among the University of Hawaii, the
Pacific Northwest Gigapop (PNWGP), and the Corporation for Educational Network
Initiatives in California (CENIC) to create and operate a unified distributed
exchange service for Research and Education (R&E) networking in the Asia-Pacific
hemisphere. TL/PW will present a unified connectivity face toward the West for
all US R&E networks including Internet2, National Lambda Rail and Federal agency
networks, enabling general and specific peerings with more than 15 international
R&E links, including those funded by other NSF IRNC projects, serving scores of
countries. Distributed peering services at network Layers 1, 2 and 3 will allow
the project to seamlessly support domain-specific projects while remaining
committed to equitable shared global R&E network services. TL/PW will work with
Internet2, National Lambda Rail, the other IRNC awardees and international
networks to provide seamless evolutionary production networking services to the
international research community. The value of TL/PW to the nation and the world
is demonstrated by the fact that TL/PW is not proposing to buy new international
links. Rather, TL/PW funding will be used to provide domestic backhaul, hosting,
support and facilitation for those engaged in R&E networking in the region.

TL/PW will provide domestic support for AARNet's SX-TransPORT project, which
provides two 10Gbps circuits from Australia to Hawaii to the West Coast of the
U.S. on the Southern Cross Cable Network submarine fiber system. This project
not only connects Australia's R&E networking community but also provides
connectivity for the world's premiere setting for astronomical observatories,
the summit of Mauna Kea on the Big Island of Hawaii. The Mauna Kea observatories
comprise over $1 billion of international investment by 13 countries in some of
the most important cyberinfrastructure resources in the world. TL/PW will also
continue to advance and support research network connections in the Australasia
and Pacific regions.

The Intellectual Merit of TL/PW derives from its championing of end-to-end
connectivity and network advancement that stimulates innovation among leading
domain scientists and cyberinfrastructure engineers. TL/PW has innovated to
create the world's model distributed exchange serving the global R&E networking
community, and will continue to advance reliable and cost-effective global
cyberinfrastructure to meet broader research and education needs. TL/PW will
focus on emerging network-enabled sustainable services, like cloud computing,
and will take on a special leadership role to support major international
scientific cyberinfrastructure in areas unique to its service area: astronomy
and ocean observatories. TL/PW will enable the advancement of scientific
discovery, and in so doing, advance the state of cyberinfrastructure-empowered
research and education.

The Broader Impact of TL/PW will result from its sweeping enablement of US
researchers to easily collaborate with their colleagues in many of the fastest-
developing parts of the world. TL/PW is superbly positioned to support global
access to large-scale international sensor networks like the NSF-funded Ocean
Observatories Initiative and the substantial international investment in
telescopes that comprise the Mauna Kea Observatories. Working with major
commercial players, including Amazon and Microsoft, TL/PW will actively advance
the state of cloud computing services that investigators will increasingly apply
in their research as a greener and more cost-effective approach to
cyberinfrastructure deployment. TL/PW also plans to leverage its unique
positioning to extend R&E networking into the Pacific Islands, which are central
to understanding the global phenomena of climate change, sea-level rise and
ocean acidification.