* 0962952
* CAREER: Determination of Performance-Based Earthquake Engineering Parameters using Paleoseismic Techniques
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Russell Green, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2012
* USD 367,062.00

The objective of this project is to develop and validate a framework for
assessing seismic hazard parameters for regions where moderate-to-large
earthquakes are high-consequence, low-probability events so that performance-
based earthquake engineering (PBEE) can be properly implemented. The
implementation of PBEE requires both the fragility of structural systems and the
probabilistically quantified seismic hazard to be known in order to establish
the annual probability of specific losses due to seismic events. However, the
probabilistic quantification of the seismic hazard is highly uncertain in
regions where the return period of moderate-to-large earthquakes is
significantly longer than the historic earthquake record, such as in the Pacific
Northwest (PNW) and the central/eastern United States (CEUS) -- we know
moderate-to-large earthquakes occurred in these regions, we just do not know how
large the events were or how often they occur. Paleoseismic techniques,
particularly paleoliquefaction investigations (i.e., the study of liquefaction
features from pre-instrumental earthquakes), are the most plausible way to
extend the earthquake record into prehistoric times. Such techniques allow both
the recurrence time and characteristics of moderate-to-large earthquakes to be
established and, thus, remove a major impediment to implementing PBEE in these
regions. The impact of the project will be the significant reduction of the
seismic risk of newly designed and constructed standard and hazardous
facilities. The project is particularly timely as the nation (as well as the
world) renews their interest in the construction of nuclear power plants, which
if to be realized safely requires proper quantification of seismic hazard. For
regions of the US where the new plants are likely to be located (e.g., CEUS),
reliable paleoseismic data are absolutely essential for assessing seismic
hazard. In addition to graduate students from the University of Michigan (UM),
undergraduate students from both UM and Valparaiso University will participate
in a demonstration exercise in which a paleoseismic investigation of the Wabash
Valley Seismic Zone will be performed. Also, as part of this project, the PI is
initiating an outreach program for military veterans. The reason for
establishing this outreach is that veterans tend to possess many of life's
skills that will enable them to succeed in academics. The vast majority of
enlisted veterans come from the lower socio-economic echelons in the US, and a
large percentage of veterans are underrepresented minorities, as compared to the
general population.