* 0962223
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Social Networks in Parents' Decision-Making about their Children's Vaccinations
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Bettina Shell-Duncan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2011
* USD 9,028.00

Graduate student Emily K. Brunson (University of Washington), under the guidance
of Dr. Bettina Shell-Duncan, will examine the role that social networks play
when parents decide whether or not to vaccinate their children. In some parts of
the United States, vaccination rates have fallen dramatically. This research is
designed to determine the proximal causes of the decline. Brunson's own previous
qualitative investigation revealed that parents vary in the extent to which they
do research and what kind of research they do before making their decisions.
Some parents may consult books or internet sites, while others may not; some
parents may consult other people, and others may not. The current project is
designed to look at whether egocentric (personal) networks predict parental
decision making about both traditional childhood vaccinations and crisis
response vaccinations such as that for H1N1.

The research will be conducted in King County, Washington, one of the locales
where vaccination rates have declined. Brunson will employ a quantitative survey
to elicit parental social networks and to test how social networks influence the
type of vaccination decisions parents make. Typically, social network analysis
focuses almost exclusively on inter-personal connections. In contrast, Brunson
has developed an innovative approach that combines person-to-person network
connections with person-to-non-human-information source connections in a single
network analytic.

The research is timely and important. When vaccination rates fall below 80
percent, vaccination may become less effective even for those who are
vaccinated. Thus understanding how parents reach decisions about vaccinating
children has important public health policy implications particularly at a time
when the threat of global pandemics, such as H1N1, is increasing. The research
also will contribute to the development of social network theory by examining
the role of multi-sourced social networks in knowledge transmission and
decision-making. Finally, funding this research supports the education of a
social scientist.