* 0962616
* Doctoral dissertation Research: Transmission Mechanisms of Trade Shocks
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2010,06/30/2011
* Samuel Kortum, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2011
* USD 10,800.00

Transmission Mechanisms of Trade Shocks&lt;br/&gt;This project studies how the
productivity and welfare consequences of international trade shocks spread
within a country, from the industries in which they first hit to the whole
economy. The transmission of productivity and wage changes implied by a larger
export propensity or import penetration follow paths of least resistance
determined jointly by (a) sector-specific techology, (b) correlation across
different types of knowledge in the workers` population, and (c) spatial
relations across locations. The first element influences which types of
occupations are relatively more affected by trade shocks initially; the second
element determines the adjustments in relative wages vs. quantities across the
workers' knowledge space; the third element defines local scarcity of different
types of knowledge, i.e. the elasticities of local labor demand and supply
functions for different occupations. Given initial conditions on each of these
components, shocks diffuse with predictable patterns across workers, firms, and
locations. The evidence on these issues will be provided by twenty years of data
from an employer-employee matched dataset representative of the French
employment. From this data, the PI's can extract occupational choices, infer
commuting patterns at a very fine geographical detail (around 37,000 French
towns) and match these outcomes with domestic and export behavior of
establishments. These data provide a truly unique opportunity for studying the
geographical and occupational diffusion of trade shocks. This study develops the
conjecture that workers' choices, along the occupation and job location margin,
at the same time (a) act as a transmission mechanism and (b) allow (or hinder)
the gains in productivity through reallocation emphasized by well established
development in the international trade theory. A clear understanding of how
trade shocks unfold is essential to identifying the disruptive and productive
consequences of trade. This research will develop an empirical methodology to
(a) quantify the speed and deepness of the geographic diffusion process, (b)
assess the relative importance of adjustments in wages, employments and
occupation, (c) measure local and aggregate gains in productivity through
factors'reallocation, and (d) emphasize the geographic component of
heterogeneity in these adjustments. These advancements will contribute to give
sounder estimates of the magnitude and distribution across workers of gains and
losses from trade, and comes at a time where micro-level data on workers and
firms choices and locations is increasingly available for developed and
developing countries. This project will provide a firmer basis for
counterfactual trade policy analysis for the application of old trade policies
to new environments, or the implementation of completely new policies, providing
a bridge between the theory of international trade, the literature on program
evaluation, and the real-life consequences of policy choices.