* 0962863
* The Poincare Institute:  A Partnership for Mathematics Education
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2018
* Andy Katz, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 05/31/2018
* USD 9,550,799.00

The Poincaré Institute for Mathematics Education, led by Tufts University, in
collaboration with TERC, with Dover, NH, School District as core partner, and
partner districts in Massachusetts (Fitchburg, Leominster, Medford, Medway, and
Somerville), New Hampshire (Dover, Sanborn, and Timberlane), and Maine
(Portland), seeks to transform and improve the teaching and learning of
mathematics in middle school and the connections between the elementary, middle,
and high school curricula. The project's work will directly benefit 180 in-
service and 24 new teachers and, each year, more than 2200 students.

Building on successful NSF-funded collaborations between Tufts and TERC - the
Fulcrum Institute, the Early Algebra, Early Arithmetic Project, and the Inquiry
Project, the Partnership leverages expertise from mathematicians, physicists,
educational researchers, and school districts to: (a) create graduate-level
online courses on mathematical content, research in mathematics education, and
mathematical knowledge for teaching, offered to three cohorts of in-service
teachers (grades 5 to 9) from three states; (b) use algebra and the mathematics
of functions and modeling for promoting coherence among topics in the
mathematics curriculum; (c) implement permanent discussion forums where teachers
plan, review (using video technology), and improve their lessons, drawing upon
the critical mathematical topics and issues of learning and teaching; (d)
strengthen and expand partnerships with schools by preparing teachers and
researchers in Tufts' graduate programs in Mathematics and Education, through
internships with teacher leaders and participation in educational research; (e)
conduct research on teacher development and student learning; (f) support school
districts' efforts to improve their mathematics curriculum; and (g) disseminate
a teacher development model for adoption by other university-school
partnerships.

The project rests on the premise that to improve students' learning one needs to
broaden and deepen teachers' understanding of mathematics, of how children think
and learn, and of mathematics knowledge for teaching. The Poincaré Institute
offers an interdisciplinary, research-based model for introducing a deeper,
integrated approach to mathematics in districts where minority and under-
privileged students typically underperform. The courses, materials, and examples
of effective teaching are free, open-source, cross-platform modules that
universities and schools can use and modify under Creative Commons licensing.
The partnership also contributes to the preparation of teachers, research
students, and post-doctoral fellows.