* 0962996
* Renovation of Chemistry Facilities at the University of Cincinnati
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Sandra Degen, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will be used to support
the renovation of one synthesis laboratory, two laser laboratories and a
computational chemistry facility, totaling 3300 square feet. Renovations to this
research facility will directly impact five Chemistry faculty members and their
research groups, which include about 25% of department graduate enrollment.
Through collaborations and instrumentation sharing, the improvements also are
expected to significantly enhance research and research training across the
department, as well as in other departments. The renovations will directly
impact the externally-supported research in computational chemistry, biophysical
chemistry and organic, organometallic and inorganic synthetic chemistry from the
research groups of Beck, Connick, Dima, Gudmundsdottir and Stan. The renovated
facilities will update the research infrastructure, enabling new experiments and
research activities for the participating faculty.

These renovations will promote scientific collaborations, especially among
undergraduate and graduate students, as the improved laboratories will allow
synergistic interactions between synthesis and analysis, as well as increase
computational capabilities. These renovated facilities will expose students of
all ages to a dynamic research atmosphere, which will reinforce efforts to
excite these students about the study of Chemistry. It is anticipated that these
renovations will significantly impact the department's recruitment of
underrepresented minorities into Chemistry at the undergraduate level, while
also enhancing recruitment of all students at the graduate level.