* 0962153
* Personality and Politics in the Americas
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2011
* Jeffery Mondak, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2011
* USD 120,445.00

Research on political behavior seeks to improve our understanding of how and how
well citizens engage the political world. Scholars examine numerous facets of
political behavior, including matters such as the tendency of citizens to be
well informed or poorly informed about politics, the citizen's decision
regarding whether to participate in the political arena, how people process and
use information about politics, and the nature and coherence of political
attitudes. This collective body of research is motivated by the desire to
identify means to heighten citizen competence, and thus to improve the quality
of democratic governance. In short, with better citizens comes better
government. The specific research to be conducted in "Personality and Politics
in the Americas" will endeavor to contribute to our understanding of citizens
and politics by pinpointing the possible significance of people's core
personality traits for their patterns in political behavior. A key step in
accomplishing this objective is the inclusion of questions about personality
traits on national surveys about politics. In this research, personality items
will be added to the AmericasBarometer surveys, surveys that will be conducted
in sixteen or more nations in the Americas in
2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contemporary studies of personality and politics
build on recent scientific breakthroughs on the human genome and the biological
bases of human behavior. To a substantial extent, personality is biologically
determined. Thus, core differences in people?s psychological traits, including
differences that are present from birth, may influence multiple aspects of
political behavior. Recognition of this possibility paves the way for a dramatic
rethinking of citizenship. In the past, students of political behavior typically
have looked solely to environmental factors to explain differences across
citizens. Such works incorrectly assume that environmental influences will
operate comparably on all individuals. To take one obvious counterexample,
efforts to mobilize citizens to participate in politics surely will be much
better received among extroverts than among introvert, yet failure to
contemplate the possible significance of personality ensures that scholarship
ignores such fundamental differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In "Personality and
Politics in the Americas," ten personality items will be used to measure what
psychologists have dubbed the "Big Five" personality traits: openness to
experience, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and emotional
stability. These items, which collectively capture the bulk of personality trait
structure, will be added to AmericasBarometer surveys already set to be fielded
in the spring of 2010 as part of Vanderbilt University's Latin American Public
Opinion Project. The surveys will be completed by 1,500 respondents in each of
at least sixteen nations, and other survey items address a wide array of
political phenomena. Consequently, the resulting data set will be
extraordinarily extensive, and will offer the greatest opportunity to date for
research on personality and politics both within and across nations. Because the
data will be released to the scholarly community as soon as they are available,
with no embargo period, this project will yield an invaluable resource for
scholars studying politics, personality, and cross-cultural human behavior.