* 0962641
* 2010 Plant-Herbivore Interaction Gordon Research Conference; Galveston, TX
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,08/31/2010
* Colin Orians, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2010
* USD 20,000.00

The Gordon Research Conferences has sponsored 10 highly successful Plant-
Herbivore Interaction workshops in the past. This will be the 11th and will
feature 25 scientists currently conducting pioneering research in this area. The
sessions are synthetic and range in topics from molecular genetics and
biochemistry to community and ecosystem ecology and evolution. Speakers have
agreed to address their subject's frontier and to project into the future, with
the goal of generating discussion about the directions our science may take. The
meeting will open with an overview entitled Perspectives in Plant Herbivore
Interactions. Following, major topical areas to be addressed will be Herbivores
in Complex Communities, Evolution of Herbivore Responses to Plant Chemistry,
Plant Defensive Chemistry - Action &amp; Detoxification, Evolution of Plant and
Insect Defense: Glucosinolates, Interaction Models: From Ecology to Genes,
Extended Phenotypes and Evolution, Integrating Below Ground Interactions, and
New Perspectives on Invasive Species. Like all Gordon Conferences, there are
formal sessions in the morning and evening, leaving early afternoons free for
impromptu field trips, discussions, and workshops. The formal sessions have been
scheduled to maximize discussion; discussion leaders have been chosen to
stimulate collegial discussion. Daily poster sessions in the late afternoon in a
relaxed and convivial atmosphere, will also foster discussion. All attendees
will be encouraged to submit posters, and history suggests that nearly all will
do so. The relaxed and intimate atmosphere of this conference consistently
generates excellent, stimulating interactions, and lasting networks,
collaborations and friendships. This conference, like its predecessors will have
its broader impacts by setting the course for research in this field for years
to come. In addition, approximately 40% of funds will go to the support of
graduate student and post-doctoral participation. Eight of the 25 speakers are
female, nine are from outside the U.S. Half of the discussion leaders are
female. As a result of this conference, new collaborations will be developed,
new methodologies employed, new theories tested, and young/emerging scientists
will interact with the top researchers in the field.