* 0962253
* Collaborative Research:   Co-Organization of River Basin Geomorphology and Vegetation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Rafael Bras, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 219,000.00

Physical and ecological processes of the earth surface are intrinsically
coupled. This work seeks to test the following hypothesis: &lt;br/&gt;River
basins organize through local non-linear interactions (between vegetation, soils
and topography) in such a way that identifiable global patterns emerge on the
3-D structure of the river network and on the organization of
vegetation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The above hypothesis suggests a vegetation-
modulated erosion in response to stochastic climatic forcing that involves a co-
organization of the structure of the river network and the vegetation of the
basin. Modeling will be used within the context of data from two different grass
dominated sites. The co-evolution of landscape morphology and its vegetation
patterns will be studied under stochastic climate forcing, and constant and
varying tectonic uplift (or base level drop). The major questions to be
addressed are: 1) Are there any large-scale signatures of vegetation
organization in river basins? 2) Is there any global strategy in the
organization of landscape morphology and its vegetation cover? 3) What is the
impact of climate or uplift fluctuations on vegetation self-organization and
erosion rates on a complex adaptive topography? 4) What is the effect of
disturbances such as fire and grazing on the co-
organization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will add to an expanding body of
work in grasslands and water limited regions of US and the world. It will
provide added scientific and operational value to the ongoing ecosystem
monitoring efforts in grasslands in United States. The potential payoff of this
type of research includes broad social and economic benefits related to water
supply and quality as well as ecosystem health and
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a highly interdisciplinary effort that
will combine research results from different branches of earth sciences (i.e.,
ecology, geomorphology, hydrology) under the umbrella of a physically-based
numerical framework.