* 0962805
* Maine Physical Sciences Curriculum Partnership:  Research and Infrastructure for Ongoing Educational Improvement
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2010,08/31/2017
* Michael Wittmann, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 14,407,853.00

This Math and Science Partnership project brings together forty-two rural Maine
schools, the University of Maine, three Maine non-profits with expertise in
science education, and science and technology leaders at the Maine Department of
Education to target the teaching and learning of physical sciences in grades
6-9. The partnership research is aimed at gathering information on effective
science curricula and pedagogy for working in rural communities. This project
focuses on the identification and implementation of proven curricular resources
and the full range of critical supports needed for their successful
implementation. The Partnership implements research-supported curricula and
intensive professional development for teachers using the new curricula. Pre-
service teachers of science from the University of Maine and partnering
universities participate in curriculum selection and professional development,
and also work as teaching partners in the classroom to implement the curriculum.
The implementation involves approximately 9800 students and 100 teachers and
exposes teachers to 100 hours of professional development over two years. The
project provides direct services to the participating districts, builds a
regional infrastructure for ongoing improvement in STEM education and
contributes to a designed research effort that will inform future rural
educational initiatives.