* 0962261
* Globalization, Technology, and the Skill Premium
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Ariel Burstein, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 02/29/2016
* USD 403,403.00

Intellectual Merit: The value of world trade as a share of world output, the
sales of foreign affiliates of multinational firms as a share of world output,
and the developing world's share of this global activity have grown tremendously
over the last few decades. Over this period there was also a large increase in
income inequality, both in developed and developing countries, as measured for
example by the rise in the relative wage of skilled to unskilled workers - the
skill premium. The changing nature of globalization and the increase in the
skill premium raise a set of important questions. To what extent can the growth
of trade and offshoring account for the rise in the skill premium in developed
and developing countries? What are the different implications for the skill
premium in developed countries of globalization with developing countries versus
globalization with developed countries? What would be the implications for the
skill premium in a country such as the United States of further development in a
country such as China?&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal the PI's describe a research
agenda to address these and other questions, building a quantitative model of
trade, offshoring, and the skill premium in developed and developing countries.
The framework features two independent sources of comparative advantage (factor
endowment differences and technological differences) and skill-biased technology
(more efficient producers employ a relatively higher share of skilled workers).
The PI's show that a reduction in trade and/or offshoring costs induces a
reallocation of resources both towards sectors that are intensive in a country's
abundant factor (generating a Stolper-Samuelson effect that increases the skill
premium in skill-abundant countries and reduces it in skill-scarce countries)
and within sectors towards more efficient producers that are more skill
intensive(generating a skill-biased technology effect that increases the skill
premium in all countries). Larger dispersion in productivities across producers
weakens the Stolper-Samuelson effect and strengthens the skill-biased technology
effect, while offshoring strengthens both. The PI's then use a parameterized
version of the model that matches salient features of U.S. data on trade and
offshoring to study the impact on the skill premium of changes in the extent of
globalization (i.e. the shares of trade and offshoring in output), in the
composition of globalization (i.e. the relative importance of skill-abundant and
skill-scarce countries in the global economy), and the type of globalization
(i.e. the relative importance of trade and offshoring). In work-to-date, the
PI's find that the skill-biased technology effect is stronger than the Stolper-
Samuelson effect. In response to the three-fold increase in the extent of
globalization in the U.S. over the last 40 years, the model generates an
increase in the skill premium of 4% to 6% in the U.S. (or 1/6 to 1/4 of the rise
of the college wage premium during this period) and 5% in skill-scarce
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The work contributes to the
active debate on the link between globalization and inequality. The PI's provide
a quantitative framework to assess the implications for the skill premium of
policies that foster international trade and offshoring. The analysis also sheds
light on the differential impacts on U.S. inequality of trade and offshoring
integration with developed and developing nations.