* 0962940
* Improvement of Facilities for Faculty-Student Collaborative Research
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Pamela Fox, Mary Baldwin College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,205,601.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mary Baldwin College is the largest
college primarily for women in Virginia. Mary Baldwin College was founded in
1842 as Augusta Female Seminary. The James D. Pearce Science Center was
conceived in the late 1960s to embody a new, hands-on, research-based approach
to undergraduate science education. Pearce is the college's only building
devoted to the natural sciences. With only minor modifications since it opened
in 1970, the building has long since become scientifically, technologically, and
functionally outmoded, making it increasingly difficult for faculty to carry out
sustained research programs. Funds are provided to renovate parts of the Pearce
Science Center into a state of the art collaborative research training
environment, transforming the four-story, 46,000-square foot building into an
interactive space that supports an emphasis on faculty-student research on
campus and synergistic work with nearby larger institutions. The renovations
will support research in two interdisciplinary nodes: Neuroscience and Cell
Signaling and Environmental Systems Monitoring. The renovated space will provide
access to instrumentation by multiple users across disciplines, and provide
senior thesis research with greater visibility and prominence. The HVAC systems
will be upgraded to meet current ventilation and air quality standards;
electrical systems to provide improved, energy efficient lighting and adequate
power for equipment; built-in casework and hoods to meet current standards of
efficiency and utility; and technological infrastructure to provide modern
networking capabilities. It will provide access for a growing cohort of young
female scientists, including a significant percentage of women of color, to
next-generation research approaches and instrumentation.