* 0962554
* Collaborative Reseach: Model-Based Methods for Debiasing Individual Probability Assessments: Theory, Experiments, and Application to Mississippi River Delta Restoration
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Benjamin Hobbs, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2013
* USD 152,810.00

Experts are often asked to provide judgments to inform both private sector and
public policy decisions. Such judgments may be used alone or with scientific
models to estimate the probability of events such as changes in energy markets,
levels of future carbon dioxide emissions, global temperature change, or the
number of hurricanes to make landfall in the United States. Expert judgments are
essential because past data may either be unavailable or not directly relevant
due to changing conditions. From psychological research, however, we know that
when making such probability judgments, people use mental short-cuts, or
heuristics. The heuristics skew how people express judgments, resulting in
unintentional biases in probabilities that systematically distort an
individual's stated probabilities. These cognitive biases are the focus of the
research, rather than intentional biases in which expressed probabilities are
deliberately distorted in order to game the system. Minimizing cognitive biases
in expert probabilities is essential when the probabilities are inputs to
scientific models or to decisions that must be made without waiting for perfect
information.

The objective of this research is to develop mathematical models and statistical
procedures with which an analyst can estimate the degree of bias for an
individual and thereby quantify adjustments that would eliminate those biases.
The research focuses on three cognitive biases: overprecision, the tendency to
be too sure that a particular event will occur; partition dependence, in which
judged probabilities depend inappropriately on how the range of the uncertain
variable is divided; and carryover, an ordering effect in which an individual?s
stated probabilities may be affected by previous judgments. The bias measurement
and debiasing methods are to be developed and tested in experimental settings
using a large group of participants. The experimental results will show the
extent of the biases under various circumstances, and the effectiveness of the
method for removing the bias. This research will enable experts to provide
probabilities that better represent their beliefs and knowledge, undistorted by
bias, when engaged in public- and private-sector risk analyses. Potential
applications include decisions in which data scarcity, coupled with high stakes,
make the use of expert judgments essential. These include many areas of business
decision making, as well as high-stakes policy decisions concerning, for
instance, climate change and terrorism risk.