* 0962416
* The Market for Financial Advice
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2015
* Antoinette Schoar, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 05/31/2015
* USD 106,000.00

THE MARKET FOR FINANCIAL ADVICE&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The United
States has seen a dramatic shift in how pensions are invested. Managed savings
(government or employer defined benefit plans) have given way to individually
directed savings (defined contribution plans). A growing body of lab - and to a
lesser extent field - evidence in behavioral finance raises concerns over this
trend, arguing that individual investors are ill informed or even biased in
their investment choices. Examples range from owning too much employer stock to
using heuristics such as naive diversification. Many argue, however, that biased
investors can still make good investments choices because intermediaries like
financial advisors will help to undo their biases. In fact, 67% of US households
owning equities or bonds consulted with a least one advisor between 2003 and
2008. Little is known, however, how this market for financial advice functions
and whether it indeed leads to the desired outcomes for investors. The PI's
propose two experiments to examine the supply and demand sides of the financial
advice market. The first experiment uses an audit study methodology, novel to
finance. Trained auditors visit advisors posing as "clients". Different
(randomly assigned) treatments capture a number of investor biases: auditors
vary both in the portfolios they present and the investment strategies they
initially espouse to advisors. Outcome measures include the nature of advice
that is given and attempts to de-bias clients. The treatments further allow the
PI's to test advisor moral hazard; do they de-bias only when it leads to greater
fees. Before the financial crisis, the PI's conducted a medium scale pilot that
showed the feasibility of this approach as well as interesting results about
advisors? selective de-biasing. The second experiment analyzes how, in the lab,
investors assess advisor quality. Subjects see videos featuring financial advice
from different advisors. The advice is randomly matched to advisors and varies
in the extent to which it caters to biases, maximizes fee income or represents
high quality advice. Subjects are asked to rate the quality of the advisor and
the advice. The sample of test subjects will be drawn from a representative
cross section of people in the adult working population; across different
demographic subgroups, such as age, income, education and genders. The PI's have
secured consent from several large employers in the Boston area to sign up some
of their employees for the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Together these studies will present some of the first data on
this very important market. The PI's will collect quantitative data on a
question that has only been discussed in the abstract. They use novel methods
and random assignment to allow for causal inference and provide conceptual
insights into the forces that shape the market for financial advice. For
example, do investors provide market discipline for advisors? Could fee-income
distort advisors? Answers to these questions will provide an important empirical
basis for future theorizing and empirical on the market for financial
advice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of
how individuals invest their money has broad implications. Financial academics
and regulators struggle to understand if and how behavioral biases affect market
prices (as the recent debate on noise trader models in asset pricing
highlights). Macroeconomists struggle to produce accurate models of individual
consumption and investment. These debates have consequences for regulatory
policy broadly construed. Shedding light on them can therefore impact a variety
of areas. The results will also have immediate implications for regulating
investor choices (e.g. disclosure) and the market for advice specifically. The
financial crisis has renewed interest in designing smarter regulation of
consumer finance products and the market for financial advice in the US and
around the world. A firm empirical understanding of this and any potential
market failure is essential in designing better regulation. Regulation would
take a very different form if catering to investors' biased beliefs was the main
problem rather than fee induced moral hazard of advisors.