* 0962741
* 2010 Colloidal, Macromolecular &amp; Polyelectrolyte Solutions Gordon Research Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Lynn Walker, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 05/31/2010
* USD 15,600.00

0962741&lt;br/&gt;Walker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are requested to
enhance attendance at the 2010 Colloidal, Macromolecular &amp; Polyelectrolyte
Solutions Gordon Research Conference. This conference, which will be held in
February 2010, will bring together a diverse group of researchers to exchange
ideas on the topic of dynamics in complex fluids; a topic relevant to the larger
fields of polymer and colloid science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
of the proposed activity: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and technology
revolutions in biotechnology, nanotechnology, energy and soft materials have
spurred great interest in complex fluids and interfacial science. The Gordon
Research Conference on Colloidal, Macromolecular &amp; Polyelectrolyte Solutions
explores the frontiers of research about complex solutions of charged,
macromolecular and colloidal systems and their interfaces. This conference has a
strong interdisciplinary tradition bringing together materials scientists,
engineers, physicists, and chemists. The conference attracts industrial,
government and academic scientists to a stimulating set of presentations and
discussions. The program highlights the exciting impact of colloidal,
macromolecular and polyelectrolyte solutions on materials, with specific
emphasis on the dynamics of these systems. The conference will present the
latest exciting results of top researchers in the colloid, polymer and
polyelectrolyte fields. Fundamental problems within these fields and how these
apply to the other relevant disciplines will be discussed. The impact of these
fundamental ideas on specific applications in areas such as formulation, battery
design, lab-on-a-chip development, materials design and separation of
biomolecules will be highlighted through specific speakers and involvement of
industrial scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the proposed
activity: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference seeks, as do all Gordon Research
Conferences, to gather people in the field and foster interaction between them
and with younger researchers (specifically, graduate students and post doctoral
researchers in relevant disciplines), in an effort to generate new ideas in this
field. Accordingly, a retreat like atmosphere is designed, consistent with GRC
philosophy, and its principal product is the summary and dispersal of ideas
across the community. The broader community includes scientists and researchers
in chemistry, physics, engineering, and materials science; participants from
both academia and industry will ensure that discussions range from fundamental
through practical. There are no formal publications, only collegial exchanges on
site and afterward. The program for the 2010 meeting includes a strong
representation of female, African American and Hispanic speakers and discussion
leaders. The organizers will strive to ensure that during the selection of
participants to the meeting, a diverse audience will be constructed.