* 0962505
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Mass Media Effects on Elite Legislators: A Social Psychology Case Study of Climate Change in Peru
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Bruno Takahashi, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2011
* USD 6,302.00

This research seeks to provide a better understanding of the role of the
information presented in the media in the policy behaviors of elite legislators.
This research, conducted in Peru, focuses on the case of climate change, a
current policy issue that is receiving considerable attention from policy
makers, the public, and the media. Studies show that the media is one of the
main sources of information about climate change within the public and policy
makers; therefore - considering the complexity of the issue - the information
presented requires special attention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research
question driving the research is: In what ways and to what effect, do the mass
media influence the knowledge, environmental attitudes, beliefs, values, and
behaviors of legislators in Peru with regard to climate change? The few previous
studies in this area have provided inconclusive and often contradictory evidence
about the role of the media in policy decision making due to the methodological
constraints of studying this target population. This project uses a survey and
in-depth interviews with legislators, a media content analysis of newspapers,
and an analysis of secondary sources such as voting behaviors and policy
documents. The theoretical framework, from social psychology, focuses on the
relationship between information seeking behaviors and levels of
environmentalism. The research will contribute to the growing literature
focusing on direct mass media effects on policy making, and will provide
recommendations to improve environmental news coverage and communication
processes related to policy decision making.