* 0962683
* SHINE: Understanding the Impact of Non-MHD Effects on the Coronal Mass Ejection Dynamics in the Inner Heliosphere
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2010,10/31/2011
* Merav Opher, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 10/31/2011
* USD 242,239.00

The team will investigate the impact of non-magnetohydrodynamic (non-MHD)
effects on the dynamics of coronal mass ejections (CMEs) and shocks in the inner
heliosphere, and in particular, on the CME acceleration profile, shock strength,
and geometry. The Principal Investigator (PI) also plans to study the role of
magnetic reconnection in the initiation and liftoff of a CME and its subsequent
propagation in the heliosphere, using a global MHD code developed by her
collaborators at the University of Michigan.

Global heliospheric simulations usually include non-ideal processes in terms of
numerical dissipation and anomalous resistivity. To bridge the gap between
small-scale kinetic modeling and global simulations, this team will use a
simulation code and "Space Weather Modeling Framework" developed at the
University of Michigan to quantify the interaction between large-scale global
magnetospheric dynamics and microphysical processes in diffusion regions near
magnetic reconnection sites. This code will incorporate a new mechanism for
controlling dissipation in the vicinity of reconnection sites, in terms of non-
gyrotropic corrections to the magnetic induction equation. Such non-gyrotropic
effects have been demonstrated to significantly alter the global evolution of
the Earth's magnetosphere, and their inclusion in heliospheric MHD simulations
is a very promising new approach.

The PI is very active in mentoring female students and postdocs. The team
enhances diversity in the solar physics community by including several female
researchers who will be role models for young women interested in the physical
sciences and engineering. This research program will include the training and
participation of a female PhD student at George Mason University, as well as a
collaboration with a female scientist at the Community Coordinated Modeling
Center at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. This study is directly relevant to
space weather forecasting, since it will enhance the capabilities of the Space
Weather Modeling Framework now in wide community use.