* 0962752
* Pelvic Shape and Differential Mortality: Obstetric Variation Among Indigenous North American Populations
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2010,12/31/2011
* Adam Sylvester, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 12/31/2011
* USD 15,186.00

This research examines the association of pelvic dimensions and natural
selection as it relates to both age-at-death in females and climate among past
indigenous North American groups. The investigators predict that narrow pelvic
inlets in females, a measure of obstetric efficiency (the ability to give birth
without complications) will have caused higher death rates in young aged
individuals. In addition, previous studies have linked pelvic shape, especially
hip breadth, to body heat regulation. Individuals with wider bodies have less
surface area relative to body mass, and therefore are more efficient at
retaining body heat. Indigenous North Americans have been shown to possess wider
bodies than would be expected for the latitudes in which they lived. Thus, their
body shape may be related to common ancestral occupation of colder climates, a
trait then shared by descendent populations. Although climate may have selected
for narrower bodies in warmer climates, obstetric efficiency may have attenuated
this pressure. Although multiple factors are related to the age at which
individuals died, a correlation between young aged mean mortality and narrow
dimensions in the pelvic outlet would support pelvic shape and obstetrical
complications as a selective factor among females. Furthermore, if the shape of
the pelvic outlet covaries with overall hip breadth, this would indicate that
pelvic shape is indeed a balance between at least two selective pressures:
climate and obstetrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly, this project contributes
to the understanding of biological changes encountered by migrating humans and
factors influencing those changes. It contributes further to an understanding of
body shape variation among humans. The study will incorporate pre-doctoral
students in data collection at major skeletal repositories and encourages
students toward the development of further studies. Furthermore, new methods for
capturing and comparing shape data, developed in collaboration with a
postdoctoral researcher at the Max Planck Institute in Leipzig, will be created
and shared with other researchers.