* 0962492
* Collaborative Research: School Choice and College Admissions: Theory and Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Yan Chen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 09/30/2014
* USD 233,467.00

This proposal requests a three-year grant to support a program of research in
matching theory and experiments at the University of Michigan and Carnegie-
Mellon University. Part of the proposed research will be conducted in China, in
collaboration with Xiangdong Qin at Shanghai Jiao Tong University and Zongkai
Shi at Tsinghua University. This program is an extension of work&lt;br/&gt;that
has been supported by NSF grant SES-0720943 and university funds. The proposed
research is likely to have direct impact on the school choice reform in the U.S.
and college admissions reform in China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Intellectual
merit: The PIs propose to conduct theoretical and experimental studies of a
family of matching mechanisms applied to the school choice problem: the Boston
mechanism, which is one of the most commonly used and prominent school choice
algorithms in practice, and two alternatives which have superior theoretical
properties ? the Gale-Shapley mechanism and the modified Boston mechanism. Data
from the experiment will provide a rigorous evaluation of the family of
mechanisms in the school choice context. The PIs then propose experimental
studies of the college admissions mechanisms, with variants used in China. Both
the theoretical and the experimental studies of these mechanisms are essential
to advancing knowledge. Mechanisms cannot be evaluated purely on theoretical
grounds, because people may not use them as intended. Nor can they be evaluated
as used in the real world, because we do&lt;br/&gt;not have access to people?s
true preferences. Experiments are vital to understanding how mechanisms will
perform. It is important to note that the findings will guide both theory and
practice regardless of whether the hypotheses are confirmed or
rejected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Broader impacts: School choice has been one
of the most important and most widely debated topics in the past twenty years.
In the current debate on school reform, choice has moved to the top of the
national agenda. The Boston mechanism is a prominent algorithm used in several
cities pioneering the school choice program, but its performance has not been
thoroughly evaluated. As more states have passed legislation mandating intra- or
inter-district choice, it is urgent to evaluate this mechanism as well as
alternative mechanisms in order to make meaningful policy recommendations.
Similarly, college admissions mechanisms in China present a new class of
matching problems which influence the education and labor market outcomes of
more than 10 million high school seniors every year. The research proposal has
the potential to benefit society by influencing the method by which students are
matched with schools and colleges. The successful and timely completion of the
proposed experimental program is only possible with the involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students. Chen has been working with
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students through the Undergraduate Research
Opportunities Program at the University of Michigan since 1999 and the NSF REU
program. The PIs will continue to include 1-2 undergraduate students in this
research project every year. New undergraduate students will have the
opportunity to become involved in most phases of the project, including
literature review, assistance in conducting experiments and preliminary data
analysis. Analysis of large data sets requires the hard work and dedication of
graduate students. Therefore, the PIs plan to get one graduate student research
assistant for each year of the project. Graduate students are encouraged to
participate in conferences and workshops to present their research to the
research community. Graduate students will learn the entire process of
experimental research, from experimental design, execution, data analysis to
writing and presentation.