* 0962403
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Claiming Space, Redefining Politics: Road Blockades and the Articulation of Grassroots Power in Urban Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Marc Edelman, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/29/2012
* USD 11,290.00

Doctoral candidate Carwil R. James (City University of New York Graduate
Center), with the guidance of Dr. Marc Edelman, will investigate the spatial
logic and effects of urban protest activities, with a particular focus on
disruptive mass protests in public space, such as road blockades and occupations
of city centers. Have these mass protests, as some observers suggest, introduced
and facilitated new ways of "doing politics"? By studying these protests as
transformative events, this study will advance social scientific understanding
of the social protest and the political use of space.

The research will be carried out in two sites in Bolivia, Cochabamba and Sucre,
both known for urban protests. The researcher will use a mixture of social
science research methodologies to gather data, including: participant
observation in social movements; interviews and extended life histories of
organizers, participants, and state actors; and analyses of a variety of media
and archival sources. Through these methods, the researcher will determine (1)
the political and racial geography of the city; (2) the agendas and alliances of
active social movements; (3) and connections between their political goals and
their practices of protest.

This research is important for social science because it will pioneer new
methodologies for investigating short, impactful events in ethnographic depth.
Through its close attention to multiple aspects of political life, this research
also will contribute to understanding the effects of public, space-claiming
protest activities on the participants, the political system, and politically
and racially stratified urban geography. Supporting this research also supports
the education of a social scientist.