* 0962832
* Collaborative Research:  EAGER--Deployment of a New Photofragmentation Laser Induced Fluorescence (LIF) Nitrous Acid  (HONO) Measurement on FIONA
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2012
* David Tan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2012
* USD 161,454.00

EUROCHAMP (Integration of European Simulation Chambers for Investigating
Atmospheric Processes) is holding the Formal Intercomparison of Observations of
Nitrous Acid (FIONA) at the EUPHORE chambers in Valencia, Spain, in May 2010,
and the investigators have been invited to participate. Because of its
demonstrated high sensitivity and freedom from known interferences, PF-LIF
(photofragmentation - laser induced fluorescence) is a particularly desired
measurement technique for FIONA. The investigators plan to attend FIONA under
EAGER because of the compressed timeframe prior to deployment for FIONA .
Nitrous acid, HONO, is a critical species in the chemistry of the atmosphere. It
photolyzes rapidly in the near ultraviolet to produce the hydroxyl radical, OH,
and nitric oxide, NO. OH is the primary oxidant in the atmosphere and drives the
bulk of atmospheric chemistry; NO, in the presence of volatile organic species,
catalyzes the production of OH and thereby ozone. However, understanding of the
behavior of HONO is incomplete. A key component to better understanding this
important molecule is to ensure that the research community can measure it
accurately.

This is a joint effort between the Georgia Institute of Technology, where the
HONO instrument exists, and the University of Louisiana at Monroe (ULM). ULM
will contribute a field calibration and validation instrument, and deployment
and modeling expertise. Working in parallel is important for time reasons, given
the mid-2010 FIONA date. The educational impact of collaboration between ULM and
GA Tech will allow a highly motivated and self-disciplined undergraduate from
ULM to have experience with and access to new technology; to gain exposure to
current issues in atmospheric chemistry; and to develop critical thinking skills
needed in research. Interaction with a large research university like Gergia
Tech provides access to opportunities that ULM cannot provide. This student will
be expected to contribute to the science. The University of Louisiana at Monroe
is located in the Lower Mississippi Delta region which is historically an
economically disadvantaged area. ULM is committed to serving as a gateway to
diverse academic studies for citizens of the Lower Mississippi Delta.