* 0962625
* Collaborative Research: ESE: Food Price Spikes in a Warming World: Estimating Risks and Policy Responses
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* David Lobell, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 131,556.00

Between the winter of 2006 and the summer of 2008 prices of the world's four
most importat staple food commodities (rice, wheat, corn and soybeans) more than
tripled. These four staple crops comprise about 75% of the world's caloric base.
This project develops a new methodology to use detailed data about weather and
agricultural output to examine how climate change affects food commodity prices
and particularly commodity price variability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
begins with using econometric techniques and detailed data on weather and
agricultural output. The data are used to estimate and test a statistical model
of a non-linear relationship between weather and output; the results of that
model are predictions about the yield variability of the four major staple crops
in all major global production regions. The next step uses existing climate
change projections to develop sensible predictions for future specific changes
in weather patterns, including changes in the mean/average outcome, changes in
the variability of climate, and correlation between the different production
regions. The results of the first two steps are then combined to give a
prediction of how climate change will change the distribution of agricultural
yields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next step is to consider how past weather
shocks have affected supply and demand for these staple crops. This information
is used to estimate a structural model of supply and demand for each of the four
staple crops. Combining this market model with the predicted changes in the
distribution of agricultural yields allows the PIs to make predictions about how
future climate change will affect commodity prices. The models will also be used
to examine the likely effects of changes in government policy and changes in how
farmers and commodity traders store crops from year to year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specifics of the research plan
include&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A: Linking weather and yield variability. The PIs
extend their earlier work to examine yield variablility of the four major staple
crops throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;B: Climate change projections.
The PIs summarize the predictions of various General Circulation Models on (i)
mean outcomes; (ii) changes in variability, and (iii) correlation between
production regions. Each one of these three changes in weather patterns would
directly influence the distribution of yields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C: Predict
yield distributions&lt;br/&gt;Combining parts A and B gives revised yield
distributions under climate change. The non linear temperature-yield
relationship from part A implies that even a mean increase in temperatures with
constant variance could impact yield variability, as would a change in weather
variability. Finally, if weather becomes more (or less) correlated or if the
geography of agricultural production becomes more (or less) concentrated,
idiosyncratic productions shocks will no longer average out and total world
production could become more (or less) variable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;D: Yield
variability and commodity prices.&lt;br/&gt;Using weather-induced yield shocks
as instruments allows the researchers to estimate supply and demand elasticities
for the four staple crops. While randome yield shocks have previously been used
to estimate demand elasticities, lagged yield shocks can also be used to
identify supply elasticities, as past production shocks are linked to the
current period's effort through storage. With the elasticity estimates the
researchers can translate their yield distribution into a distribution of
commodity prices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;E: Simulate the effects of competitive
storage and government policies. &lt;br/&gt;Farmers and commodity traders are
likely to resond to changes in production and price variability by adjusting
inventory holdings. Inventories help to attenuate price variability in the face
of year-t0-year productions variability. Inventory adjustments will therefore
partly buffer changes in production variability, as could continued expansion of
irrigated agriculuture. On the other hand, export restrictions and other
government policies might exaggerate price
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project brings
economists, agronomists, and environmental scientists together. The results will
be useful for guiding both policymakers and farmers as they adjust to future
climate change.