* 0962309
* Experimental studies to understand and evaluate acclimation of marine plankton assemblages to increased CO2 and temperature.
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* David Caron, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2014
* USD 710,000.00

Intellectual Merit. Progressing ocean acidification and increasing sea surface
temperature may significantly impact marine plankton community structure and
community-level processes. Yet, our ability to predict specific responses is
still limited because of the tremendous taxonomic complexity of microbial
assemblages and the limitations of the methodological and experimental tools
presently available to test specific hypotheses. Research to study community
level effects due to a changing CO2/temperature regime often involve short-term
field incubations that subject organisms to simulated 'greenhouse' conditions. A
central question for understanding global climate change is whether the trends
and patterns that are observed in communities during short-term manipulations
can be extrapolated to the responses of fully acclimated plankton communities
over decadal or longer timescales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives
of this research program are: 1) to examine how protistan communities
restructure in response to increased seawater CO2 concentrations and temperature
in semi-continuous field incubation experiments, and 2) to evaluate if the
dominant algal species that are isolated from either ambient or increased CO2
and temperature treatments in field experiments will re-establish dominance
under the same conditions in acclimated laboratory culture competition studies.
Changes in community structure of natural protistan assemblages in our
experimental treatments will be followed using image-based methods (flow
cytometry, FlowCAM and microscopy) in combination with state-of the art
molecular tools (DNA fingerprinting). Molecular approaches have begun to reveal
an incredible high diversity for marine microbes and stimulate debate in regard
to the ubiquitous presence of a microbial 'Rare Biosphere'; that is, the
presence of a huge number of species that are present at extremely small
percentages of the total abundance of microbes, among a much smaller percentage
of dominant ones. Little is known about the ecological significance of these
rare species, and the investigators hypothesize that change in CO2 and
temperature will select for some of these members that are inconspicuous under
ambient conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique aspect of this experimental
approach is the combined use of field incubations that encompass entire natural
microbial assemblages, with a series of laboratory culture competition trials
that focus on the same groups of algae after extended acclimation, to evaluate
the validity of short-term experiments that examine changing CO2 and
temperature. First, field incubation experiments will be conducted to
characterize changes in protistan community structure under ambient and future
CO2/temperature regimes. Second, clonal algal strains will be isolated from
dominant taxa in present day and greenhouse treatments, and cultivated for
extended periods under their 'preferred' CO2/temperature conditions. Finally,
mixtures of these acclimated strains will be competed against each other, to re-
examine their responses to ambient and greenhouse conditions and compare them to
the responses observed in the unacclimated field incubation
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Two graduate students will
make this project the focus of their Ph.D. research at USC, and undergraduate
students will be involved in the field and laboratory work. Results from this
research will be incorporated in lesson plans on microbial diversity and global
climate change. Dissemination of data and results is planned on a project
website. The PIs in this project also participate in an on-going, innovative,
NSF-funded program (Centers for Ocean Science Education Excellence; COSEE-West)
which focuses on personal involvement of faculty in a custom framework to allow
an effective connection with K-12 teachers, thus improving math and science
education in disadvantaged parts of Southern California.