* 0962256
* ETBC: Aerosol and Precipitation Chemistry and Deposition Rates in the Western Atlantic Trade Winds: The Link to Sources, Transport, and Deposition Processes - II
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Joseph Prospero, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 616,796.00

This project will characterize aerosol concentrations and wet and dry deposition
processes at Barbados and Miami, with foci on African dust and related
constituents and on anthropogenic species. Observations will be based on a two-
year daily sampling protocol on Barbados and at Miami supplemented by intensive
field campaigns, including collaborative aircraft-based studies of aerosols and
clouds by German scientists, to be carried out during various seasonal dust and
pollution transport regimes. A major objective is to link results to larger-
scale processes. To this end, on-site ground-based aerosol remote sensors (lidar
and optical depth) will be used to link the surface-based measurements to the
overlying atmosphere and also satellite products in order to generalize to
larger scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will lead to a better
understanding of the processes controlling the transport and deposition of
African dust and associated substances over the tropical Atlantic and to
improved estimates of the impact of deposition on marine biogeochemistry in this
region. The integrated program (with remote sensing and modeling) will lead to a
better characterization of large-scale dust transport/removal processes and a
more quantitative modeling of them, including the linkage to source processes on
an event-to-event basis. This, in turn, will lead to an improved understanding
of the impact of atmospheric transport on biogeochemical processes in the global
ocean and to the possible impact of climate change on dust mobilization and
transport (and, hence, on ocean biogeochemistry and the carbon cycle). Also of
concern is the possible role of anthropogenic materials transported to the
ocean; these could directly affect biogeochemical processes in the ocean and,
mixed with dust, the chemical properties of the dust, including the solubility
of iron and other metals. A graduate student will be trained through
participation in all aspects of the program. The Caribbean Institute for
Meteorology and Hydrology will collaborate in the science activities and manage
daily operations of the Barbados site.