* 0962351
* Were there ever persistent social classes? Economic and Social Mobility, 1250-2009?
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Gregory Clark, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 01/31/2013
* USD 139,533.00

This research project will use information on the distribution of surnames in
England and the USA to answer the question "Do we live in a world of long run
equality of opportunity?" To answer this question we need to be able to trace
the fortunes of the descendants of the rich and poor over many generations, and
surnames supply this measure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will first
measure long run economic and social mobility in England from 1236 to 2009,
using three methods: common surnames (1250-2009), rare surnames (1559-2009), and
the linking of testators with rare surnames with their grandchildren, great
grandchildren and even more remote descendants (1450-2009). Common surnames, for
example, when formed in the middle ages around 1300 often signified upper or
lower class status. What was the later wealth and social status of the
descendants of these original social classes? The project thus will test whether
there were ever persistent social classes in England. It will also measure the
speed of regression to the mean in each era. Did social mobility increase with
the arrival first of the Industrial Revolution? Was it further increased in the
nineteenth century by universal public education? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
preliminary indications are that all through history England displayed a high
degree of economic and social mobility, with no groups persistently staying
above or below average. Common surnames like ?Smith,? for example, had lost all
information on social status by 1650. The rate of social mobility may have
increased between the medieval and the modern world, but this is not obvious
from the preliminary data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even medieval England with its
complete long run mobility thus differs from the modern USA, where groups such
as Black Americans have remained persistently below average income even in the
last 40 years, and others such as Jewish Americans have remained persistently
above average incomes. What features of England, even before modern education
and taxation systems, allowed for such complete long run social mobility? And
why have they not been found in the modern US?