* 0962008
* Collaborative Research:   Groundwater Discharge, Benthic Coupling and Microalgal Community Structure in as Shallow Coastal Lagoon
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Behzad Mortazavi, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2014
* USD 522,386.00

Numerous studies over the past few decades have shown that submarine groundwater
discharge (SGD) transports significant quantities of nutrients to estuaries and
nearshore oceans worldwide. So far, none of the geochemical and hydrological
studies of SGD have demonstrated a clear ecological role. At the same time,
studies of microalgal community dynamics have suggested, but not verified, that
SGD is an important determinant of community structure. We thus have neither
thorough SGD investigations with inferences about ecological responses nor
detailed observations of microalgae with only an inferred linkage to SGD.
Attempting to assess the role of SGD on microalgal dynamics is complicated by
two factors. First, discharge occurs through the benthos, which in near-shore
waters is the niche inhabited by benthic microalgae. The microphytobenthos (MPB)
can be present at densities orders of magnitude higher than the phytoplankton
and have repeatedly been shown to alter nutrient efflux. The role of the MPB as
a sink for nutrients will depend on their growth rates, which are in turn
largely driven by temperature and light availability. The second complicating
factor is that SGD can be highly episodic and its nutrient content very
variable. The effect of SGD on the phytoplankton assemblage may be due to
nutrient delivery and/or to dilution (reduction in competition and grazing
pressure) and altered residence times. The time-scales of SGD and community
response are difficult to assess by standard sampling methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will to investigate the link between SGD and
microalgal dynamics in Little Lagoon, Alabama, a model system for such a study.
In contrast to most near-shore environments, it is fully accessible; has no
riverine inputs; and is large enough to display ecological diversity (c. 14x
0.75 km) yet small enough to be comprehensively sampled on appropriate temporal
and spatial scales. The PIs have previously demonstrated that the lagoon is a
hot-spot for toxic blooms of the diatom Pseudo-nitzchia spp that are correlated
with discharge from the surficial aquifer. This project will use state-of-the-
art techniques to assess variability in SGD, the dependence of benthic nutrient
fluxes on MPB abundance and productivity, and the response of the phytoplankton
to nutrient enrichment and dilution. The work will integrate multiple temporal
and spatial scales and will demonstrate both the relative importance of SGD vs.
benthic recycling as a source of nutrients, and the role of SGD in structuring
the microalgal community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Although this
project is geographically restricted, its findings should be far reaching.
Groundwater-born nutrient enrichment is now normal where agriculture occurs over
porous soils, including in New England, Maryland/Delaware, Florida, Alabama,
likely Texas, Yucatan (Mexico), California, Korea, Japan, and the Netherlands
etc. The likely dependence of coupling between SGD and phytoplankton composition
is likely to be driven by temperature and the frequency/intensity of
precipitation, both of which will change in the Northern Hemisphere, according
to the IPCC. The phenomenon therefore has wide application. This project will
provide training opportunities for three Ph.D. students and the findings will be
incorporated into several courses: Physiological Ecology of Microalgae
(MacIntyre), Global Biogeochemical Cycles (Mortazavi) and Environmental
Radiochemistry (Burnett). Last, this project will build on the PI's active
partnership with local citizens, members of the Little Lagoon Preservation
Society (LLPS), in bi-weekly monitoring of water quality and microalgal
community composition. Members of the PI's lab have presented talks at each of
LLPS' quarterly meetings for the past 2 years. These are attended by local
stakeholders, local and state political representatives, and members of the
press, and have proved to be an effective means for outreach and education on
eutrophication, HABs and hypoxia. The relationship has been reported on
extensively in the local press and praised as exemplary in an editorial in the
region's largest newspaper.