* 0962306
* Sources of Particulate Organic Matter and their use by Benthic Suspension-feeders in the Coastal California Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2017
* Henry Page, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 03/31/2017
* USD 899,463.00

Intellectual Merit: Understanding trophic connections and how resource
variability affects consumers is necessary if we are to predict how food webs
may shift in the face of environmental change. Macroalgae and phytoplankton
support highly productive marine ecosystems. Research based on stable isotope
analyses has supported the idea that macroalgal detritus, especially the giant
kelp Macrocystis, is a major source of dietary carbon to benthic suspension-
feeders. However, recent findings by the investigator's four-year stable isotope
study suggest that phytoplankton, not kelp, are the main food resource for
benthic suspension-feeders on reefs in the Santa Barbara Channel, and that
variation in phytoplankton abundance, combined with feeding selectivity and the
scale of consumer tissue turnover times, may drive variability in consumer
isotope values. The results suggest that a key assumption made in 'snapshot'
isotope studies of coastal ecosystems over the past 20 years, which the isotope
signature of coastal phytoplankton can be represented by that of offshore
phytoplankton, could be incorrect. This assumption has been made because of the
difficulty in separating phytoplankton from detritus to obtain an uncontaminated
isotope signature, also a problem in freshwater systems.

The investigator will address two main objectives in this research project: 1)
determining the contribution of phytoplankton and giant kelp detritus to the
pool of suspended reef POM and whether POM composition varies with distance from
kelp forests, and 2) evaluating how different components of the POM are used as
food by reef suspension feeders. Two complementary approaches are designed to
explore the contribution of phytoplankton and kelp detritus to POM in coastal
waters: an advanced flow cytometry and cell-sorting system to separate
phytoplankton from bulk POM, and analysis of essential polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFA) in POM and consumers. The investigators have obtained preliminary
data that demonstrate the feasibility of both of these methods. Isotope values
of isolated inshore phytoplankton and kelp, and compound-specific PUFA, will be
used in mixing models to estimate relative contributions of these two major
primary producers to suspension feeder diets. Two hypothesized mechanisms that
may influence isotopic composition of consumers will also be tested: selective
feeding on particular fractions of the POM, and tissue turnover times.

This project will provide new insights into the trophic support of benthic
suspension feeders, an ecologically and economically important guild in coastal
ecosystems. The results will test the general hypothesis that giant kelp
detritus is an important source of dietary carbon to suspension feeders, a
commonly accepted idea that needs re-evaluation in light of key assumptions that
have been made in its support. Stable isotope analyses are an ideal tool for
testing this hypothesis given the spatial and temporal scales of variability
that exist in the abundance of phytoplankton and giant kelp at our study sites.
The sampling scheme combined with longer-term data on producer biomass provided
by the Santa Barbara Coastal LTER will enable the investigators to capture this
variability, which is generally missed by studies based on 'snapshot' stable
isotope analyses.