* 0962941
* A Center for Cognitive, Social, Computational &amp; Mathematical Neuroscience
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Thomas Wallsten, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to renovate outdated
laboratory suites in the Biology/Psychology Building on the campus of the
University of Maryland - College Park to create the Joint Center for Cognitive,
Social, Computational, and Mathematical Neuroscience. The Center will include
shared laboratory space designed to support brain imaging, eye-tracking,
computationally intensive data analysis, and collaborative research in
neuroscience. The facility will be used by 50-60 researchers, including the
faculty of the Psychology Department, their postdoctoral researchers, research
assistants, graduate and undergraduate students, and collaborators from across
the campus and partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The combination of
shared and dedicated laboratory facilities in the Joint Center is designed to
bring together researchers and students in various disciplines who have
overlapping interests and use overlapping methodologies. The unique,
multidisciplinary arrangement will enable researchers to work side-by-side using
shared imaging, electrophysiological, eye-tracking, digital coding, and
computational facilities and reach a level of synergy and collaboration that is
well beyond what normally occurs in individual laboratories. Areas of research
that will be enabled by the Joint Center include cognitive development, judgment
and decision processes, visual processes, emotion and affective processes, and
social and cross-cultural processes. Specifically the Joint Center will support
research projects such as examining the efficacy of cognitive training for
improving cognitive functioning, studying the neural mechanisms involved in
object recognition and suppression of background clutter, examining the culture-
specific effect, if any, on fundamental judgment and decision processes which
are most relevant to global conflict and cooperation, and exploring the
relationship between attention and physiological processes and social relations
such as infant attachment at both the behavioral and neural
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Joint Center will have a tremendously positive
impact on the quality of research and research training at the University of
Maryland and will serve as a model for future collaborative centers devoted to
behavioral and brain research. The Joint Center will also facilitate
undergraduate education and outreach efforts to improve diversity within the
university and the affected scientific fields. The Joint Center design and
layout will greatly increase the ability of the university to integrate
education and research in psychology through undergraduate honors research, as
well as to provide undergraduate research opportunities to local colleges and
universities with significant numbers of students from underrepresented groups.
Space will be reserved in the Joint Center to support a research partnership
with faculty from Morgan State University and their students.