* 0962088
* Globalization, Immigration and Penal Order
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2011
* Vanessa Barker, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 08/31/2011
* USD 32,162.00

This project asks three interrelated research questions: (1) Why has
incarceration increased in nearly every European country since 1990? (2) Why are
immigrants and other ethnic minorities overrepresented in European prisons? (3)
How can we explain cross-national variation in European penal sanctioning? It
seeks to explain and understand how immigrants have been caught up in European
ambivalence about global integration and neo-nationalism, tensions that are
managed differently through nation specific legal and political institutions.
How societies adapt to changing conditions by integrating new members is
critical to their social, economic, and political stability. European nations
that fail to do so could face a grim future built on the social exclusion of
perceived outsiders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study uses comparative
and historical methodology and three case studies (Sweden, the United Kingdom,
and France) to analyze and explain cross national penal regime variation and its
relationship to immigrant integration. By developing a thick description of
historical context and systematic analysis of a small number of cases, the
researcher is able to expose why (not just how) societies use criminal law
differently and what it means to the people involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project intends to contribute new knowledge about how criminal justice works
differently across societies even in the face of shared social problems. The
project will advance knowledge about how the criminal law is used to settle
broader questions about national belonging and political power. It also intends
to contribute new knowledge about the key role the democratic process and social
trust play in both immigrant integration and penal order. It will contribute an
original, empirically grounded, and comparative study to a highly charged public
debate about immigration, crime, and punishment.