* 0962010
* The LDEO Deep-Sea Repository and the Curating and Maintenance of the Sediment Library and Dredge Collection
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,11/30/2013
* Peter DeMenocal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 11/30/2013
* USD 758,998.00

Funds are provided to continue the operation of the LDGO Sample Repository and
allow better community access to both sea floor materials and related
information. Curation and maintenance of the existing and growing collection and
expansion of the range of sedimentary archives by inclusion of coral samples are
the main objectives. Further enhancement will include the generation of basic
data by discrete sediment measurements as well as nondestructive scanning
methods. Improvement of the digital data management and access with the Digital
Sample Curation System and an expanded data mining ability is also a goal. The
repository cores form important research materials for deep-sea exploration,
geological hazards, marine geology, tectonics, sedimentology, geochemistry,
evolution, and paleoclimate. Data from old and new materials in the collection
were and will be the source for novel interpretations resulting in hundreds of
high-profile and influential articles published during the past decade, in
leading journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Repository
continues to be involved in many educational activities. It participates in
Saturday Workshops for Educators where teachers can accrue up to 15 hours of new
teacher staff development credits. The Repository hosts many visiting graduate
and undergraduate classes and the lab is well suited for class seminars on
sediments from acquisition to processing. The plan includes employing
undergraduates and high school students in research-oriented positions. The
repository and its staff will also continue to be available to educators and the
media for opportunities to disseminate science to the general public