* 0962201
* Effects of Fe:C ratios in food on marine copepod productivity and physiology
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Nicholas Fisher, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2014
* USD 473,904.00

Crustacean zooplankton provide the energetic link between phytoplankton and
higher trophic levels in the ocean, including economically important fish
species. They also affect biogeochemical cycling through production of fast
sinking fecal pellets and the regeneration of nutrients. Historically, marine
food-web models have assumed that zooplankton productivity is energy limited,
and that productivity therefore scales directly with abundance of food in the
environment. However, comparisons of the iron contents of phytoplankton and
zooplankton, stoichiometric modeling and preliminary experiments all suggest
that in iron-limited regions of the ocean zooplankton growth and reproduction
may be limited by the supply of iron via the diet. This project will address
three questions regarding the response of copepods to food containing different
ratios of Fe:C. First, how the assimilation and retention of iron varies with
the Fe:C ratio in food will be determined. The critical threshold Fe:C ratio in
food at which copepod production is limited by iron depends on the assimilation
of iron and carbon from food, retention of assimilated iron and carbon within
copepod tissues and the elemental composition of copepod tissues. Under
controlled conditions in the laboratory both pulse chase radioisotope
experiments and stable elemental analysis will determine how these variables
change with Fe:C in the diet. Second, demographic consequences of variation in
Fe:C ratios in food will be assessed. Third, it will be determined whether iron
limitation affects copepods indirectly by influencing other aspects of food
quality. By selectively supplementing the diet of the copepods and by comparing
responses to different algal species the investigators will isolate the
characteristic of algal food that correlates most closely with copepod
production. In all aspects of the work, a diverse set of phytoplankton will be
used as composition and responses to iron limitation vary substantially among
major groups. The copepod employed in these experiments will be a cultured
coastal calanoid copepod, Acartia tonsa. The ability to culture this organism
will allow the investigators to conduct experiments throughout the year without
worrying about genotypic variability. In addition they will use copepods species
collected from the California Coast which actually experience iron limitation
somewhere in their range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By building a fuller
understanding of the factors controlling secondary production in the ocean, this
research will be of use to fisheries scientists and managers. It will also
inform policy regarding potential economic impacts of climate change and the
ecological and biogeochemical consequences of anthropogenic ocean iron
fertilization. A graduate and an undergraduate will be funded directly through
this proposal, and more undergraduates will be involved directly in the research
through alternate funding sources. The investigators will also build upon past
associations with local high schools, including one with a predominantly Latino
and African American student body, to involve secondary level students directly
in the research. Finally, they will partner with the Center for Science and
Mathematical Education at Stony Brook to engage in teacher training in global
change issues and to produce and test teaching materials related to marine
ecology and biogeochemistry.