* 0962540
* Dissertation Research: Collaborative Knowledge Production in an Urban Museum
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2010
* Jessica Watson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

This project examines the process of collaborative knowledge production within
the Oakland Museum of California as it undertakes the first major redesign of
its permanent exhibitions in 40 years. The research will observe the formation
of historical narratives and the delineation of "communities" through the lens
of the object as museum staff, community members, curators, and the objects
themselves interact to co-produce new representations and narratives. Objects
are at the heart of the investigation since groups define, lay claim to,
repudiate and are in turn defined by them. The project interrogates how
definitions of "community" and "expertise" affect the resulting exhibitions, and
how power relations infuse decisions that seem innocuous. The resulting
ethnography will not only compare how approaches to race, class and gender have
changed between the 1969 and 2009 exhibitions, but it will most crucially
provide insight into how cultural institutions collaborate with alleged "non-
experts" to provide new, dynamic forms of knowledge. This research brings
together insights and theoretical tools from the disparate fields of visual
anthropology, material culture studies and science and technology studies to
explore the role of objects in performing identity and constructing historical
narratives. The project is an investigation of science and its publics,
contributing to understanding how members of underrepresented populations
participate in the creation and consumption of knowledge presented in museums.
It will impact how institutions collaborate with communities to produce more
multivocal narratives of identity and difference. The project also has
educational relevance in producing deeper understandings of exhibition reception
by multiethnic stakeholders. It will examine the co-creation of narratives in
conjunction with diverse communities; such narratives have huge educational
potential because of their public prominence, use in the curriculum of
elementary schools, and their presentation of public culture and generally
accepted views of history.