* 0962001
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Pushed to the Margins: Methamphetamine, Crime, and Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2012
* Lajuana Williams, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 01/31/2012
* USD 8,478.00

Though a rich body of literature examines the causes and consequences of drug
criminalization and mass imprisonment in the United States, the majority of
these works are situated in urban contexts. Relatively little research considers
the effects of aggressive drug control practices on rural residents and non-
urban spaces. Focusing on methamphetamine use and control in rural areas, this
project examines the nature, extent, and consequences of such practices and
provides a theoretical frame to consider how the politics and policies of mass
imprisonment extend to rural America.

Ethnographic observation and interview techniques gather data on two distinct
populations that collide at the core of the issue. First, interviews and
interactions with law enforcement officials helps examine how local authorities
respond to and produce knowledge about the "meth epidemic," illustrating why
meth remains a top priority for law enforcement despite declining production and
use rates. Focusing on meth, which is often viewed as a rural and therefore
white phenomenon, also illustrates racialized elements of drug use and the
corresponding responses of law enforcement. Second, meth users sentenced to
community supervision or participating in community-based drug treatment
programs provide insight into the social antecedents of meth use and the
consequences of association with the drug.

The project promises a variety of implications for public policy. The research
illustrates how community characteristics influence our understanding of drug
use and drug users by paying close attention to the differences between rural
and urban contexts. Additionally, the unique research populations illustrate
differences between treatment and surveillance oriented approaches to meth use.
Further, the study provides useful data to inform offender reentry programs in
rural communities with limited resources. Ultimately, the project attempts to
connect patterns of drug use to broader historical and cultural forces unique to
rural communities.