* 0962703
* Integrable Systems and Random Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 03/02/2009,06/30/2012
* Irina Nenciu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2012
* USD 50,851.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The proposal describes three sets of problems that the PI
plans to investigate during the funding period. First, the PI will continue her
study of the Ablowitz-Ladik (AL) equation, and address questions related to
generalized orbits and multi-Hamiltonian structures for the finite system, as
well as their connection to the analogous Toda lattice problems. She is also
interested in finding the solution of AL with periodic boundary conditions, and
in the study of critical phenomena for the NLS equation, viewed as a continuum
limit of the AL equation. Second, building on her work on matrix models for
general beta-ensembles, the PI plans to investigate the asymptotic properties of
these models via the approach of Adler and van Moerbeke. This describes various
eigenvalue statistics of the model as solutions of completely integrable
systems; so far, only the cases with beta equal to 1, 2 or 4 have been studied,
and general beta-ensembles have never been used in this context. Finally, the PI
plans to investigate, jointly with P. Deift, the question of long-time
asymptotics for solutions of the water-wave problem with rough data, in the
small amplitude/long wavelength regime. In their investigation, they will treat
the problem as a perturbation of a completely integrable PDE, the KdV equation,
and use the associated scattering transform and Riemann-Hilbert techniques to
control the perturbation. In particular, a first step in this project is the
rigorous treatment of the long-time asymptotics for the KdV equation with
Sobolev initial data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research described in this
proposal concerns classical problems in two of the most active fields in
mathematics, random matrix theory and integrable systems. One of the most
fascinating scientific developments over the last fifty years has been the
discovery that a wide variety of mathematical and physical phenomena are modeled
by the eigenvalues of a random matrix. In particular, random matrix theory
describes the scattering of neutrons off large nuclei, the statistics of the
zeros of the Riemann zeta function on the critical line in the complex plane, as
well as problems in the "real world", such as the bus scheduling in the city of
Cavalierness in Mexico, or distances between cars on the freeway. The goal of
the PI's proposed research is to describe the asymptotic properties of certain
matrix ensembles which model some of the phenomena described above. Another part
of the proposal is concerned with studying the properties of two remarkable
evolution equations: The first is the Ablowitz-Ladik (AL) equation, which is a
discrete version of the well-known nonlinear Schroedinger equation (NLS). Beyond
their theoretical interest, both of the aforementioned equations have numerous
scientific applications, one of the most important of which is in optics. The PI
approaches the study of the AL equation using the methods from the theories of
orthogonal polynomials and completely integrable systems. Finally, the PI
proposes to study the water wave equation in a regime which can be used to model
tsunamis, by further developing the method of nonlinear stationary phase used in
the treatment of Riemann-Hilbert problems. &lt;br/&gt;