* 0962078
* Collaborative Research: Avian Diversification Across Tropical Asia: A Systematic and Biogeographic Analysis of Babblers (Aves: Timaliidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/14/2009,08/31/2013
* Sushma Reddy, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2013
* USD 234,229.00

Biodiversity study in tropical Asia remains in its infancy largely because the
state of basic systematic research lags far behind other regions. This
collaborative project will study the region's most diverse bird group, the
babblers, in order to re-evaluate taxonomy, reconstruct evolutionary
relationships, and assess the historical factors that influenced biological
diversification in tropical Asia. The research will involve detailed study of
museum collections, sequencing of mitochondrial and nuclear gene regions, and
integration of phylogenetic and earth history data to produce the most detailed
picture of avian diversification in tropical Asia to date.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in a more accurate assessment of
biodiversity in tropical Asia and produce a robust framework of diversification
patterns across the region. It complements ongoing biodiversity initiatives in
the region and the results will be of immediate use to conservation biologists
that are tasked with identifying unique and diverse faunas in order to
prioritize areas for protection. The research will also provide significant
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at the
participating institutions, and increase public understanding of biodiversity
issues through public exhibits and outreach programs at two natural history
museums.