* 0962664
* SHINE:  The CME-Dimming Connection: How a More Complete Understanding of CME Energetics and Magnetic Connectivity can be Achieved through Dimming Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Giuliana deToma, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 05/31/2014
* USD 451,696.00

The team will study commonly-observed signatures of solar eruptions known as
"coronal dimmings," in order to increase our understanding of the origins and
evolution of coronal mass ejections (CMEs). Coronal dimming observations provide
timing and location information for CMEs, and can help provide insight
concerning the energy budgets and evolving magnetic connectivity in CMEs.
Dimming motions offer a dynamic view of CME magnetic footpoint evolution, and
can aid in the determination of the length of time that strong magnetic
connections between a CME and the solar surface can persist.

In this project, the team will determine how dimming detectability relates to
CME energetics and magnetic field morphology. They will also characterize the
openness of CME magnetic fields by comparing remote dimming measurements with in
situ observations of suprathermal bidirectional electrons (BDEs), and test
whether a subset of CMEs actually evolve rooted externally to their source
region, as is currently predicted. The Principal Investigator (PI) expects that
this research will ultimately improve our ability to predict the heliospheric
structure and impacts of CMEs.

The team includes several female researchers who will be role models for
students, and in particular, for young women interested in the physical sciences
and engineering. The participants will present their results from this
investigation at community workshops and meetings. Since the PI has access to
NOAA's Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC) in Boulder, Colorado, this
research will have a direct impact on operational space weather forecasting. She
will work with NOAA forecasters at SWPC to implement advancements in CME
predictions as they become available during the project. A postdoctoral
researcher based at SWPC will collaborate with the proposing team and with
scientists from NCAR's High Altitude Observatory (NCAR/HAO).