* 0962098
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Learning Morality through Language: The Moral Socialization of Children
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* John Lucy, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2011
* USD 6,806.00

University of Chicago doctoral student, Allison DiBianca Fasoli, with the
guidance of Dr. John Lucy, will undertake research on the mechanisms by which
children are socialized into local models of morality through language
practices. This study of morality will serve as a case study in socialization
more generally by investigating whether or not theories of meaning developed in
linguistic pragmatics can be fruitfully applied to child socialization.
Linguistic pragmatics research has shown how situated meaning emerges over the
course of verbal interaction as language practices index relevant features of
social context and higher-order meanings, or models. By showing how meaning is
achieved, linguistic pragmatics perspectives offer a theoretical position from
which to investigate how children can acquire general frameworks of
interpretation through participation in everyday practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will employ a comparative research design
by analyzing the language socialization processes of children in two
communities, one of which self-identifies as conservative Protestant and the
other of which self-identifies as liberal Protestant. The researcher will
collect data through recording of spontaneous interactions, through participant
observation and interviews, and by eliciting interactions in a semi-structured
activity. The core data will be analyzed using discourse analytical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will make an original contribution
to child socialization theory through its focus on language practices as
mechanism of socialization. It will also contribute to the disciplines of
cultural psychology and psychological anthropology more broadly by illuminating
how local models are produced and reproduced ontogenetically. The study has the
potential to inform educational and clinical practices in dealing with
children's behavior problems and disorders because it will enhance our
understanding of the moral meanings that guide children's talk and actions. The
research also supports the education of a social scientist.