* 0962916
* University of California Natural Reserve System - Cyberinfrastructure Renovation
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Michael Hamilton, University of California, Office of the President, Oakland
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2013
* USD 710,115.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the renovation
of cyberinfrastructure at 17 of the 36 sites in the University of California
Natural Reserve System (NRS). The renovation will update the telecommunications
infrastructure at these sites, enabling the deployment of networks of sensors
and instrumentation by researchers and transforming the flow of data to
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NRS is a network of 36 reserves that
encompass more than 135,000 acres across twelve ecological regions in
California. The 17 reserves in the proposed project have older
cyberinfrastructure in need of renovation and/or are heavily used by a wide
variety of researchers. 13 of the 17 reserves to be renovated are "full
facility" reserves, possessing the facilities, equipment, and professional staff
necessary to support long-term research projects and multi-week field courses
remote from campus services. Several of the NRS reserves are testbeds for
researchers developing novel ecological sensors and observing systems, including
a range of new instruments and networked systems developed by the Center for
Embedded Networked Sensing. The James Reserve is the site for the National
Ecological Observatory Network's first Fundamental Instrument Unit prototype.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of research that will benefit from the
renovation is broad. The evolution of sensing technology is a driver for the
need for reliable, low-cost broadband Internet access to the reserves and the
instruments within them. Research to be pursued includes how climate change will
affect California's plant and animal species and the ecosystems that provide
essential services such as fresh water. Examples of projects that will make use
of the renovated communications infrastructure include: an investigation of the
ecological links between rivers and upland areas; a study of how water moves
through the landscape and into deeper, rocky geology; the development of a
Stream Experimental and Observational Network; and the development of the Very
Large Ecological Array, a new class of environmental sensor network intended to
observe micro-environmental conditions above and below ground and plant
phenology at multiple scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing
infrastructure for research, the University of California Natural Reserves are
used by educational institutions within California, including those in the K-12
system and the state higher education system. The reserves serve as training
centers for students and teachers. Data from the reserves is available to
students online, including climate data, hydrological data, ecological data, and
webcam imagery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed includes the upgrading of
communications infrastructure at the following 17 reserves: the Angelo Coast
Range Reserve, Blue Oak Ranch Reserve, Boyd Deep Canyon Desert Research Center,
Chickering American River Reserve, Coal Oil Point Natural Reserve, Dawson Los
Monos Canyon Reserve, Elliott Chaparral Reserve, Hastings Reserve, James San
Jacinto Mountains Reserve, Landels-Hill Big Creek Reserve, Motte Rimrock
Reserve, Sagehen Creek Field Station, Santa Cruz Island Reserve, Sedgwick
Reserve, Sweeney Granite Mountains Desert Research Center, Sierra Nevada Aquatic
Research Laboratory, and Valentine Camp.