* 0962983
* Repair and Renovation of Faculty Laboratory Facilities at a Comprehensive Public University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Philip Crawford, Southeast Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,330,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award supports a renovation project to provide critical repairs and
renovations to a 50-year old laboratory facility utilized by Chemistry and
Physics faculty researchers at a comprehensive, public university. The
renovation will combine related research areas and specializations into two
research centers within the department, one devoted to analytical and forensic
chemistry and one devoted to materials research. Laboratory equipment and
instrumentation will also be grouped together strategically in the centers so
that they are readily available to the faculty and students most likely to use
them in their work. Each research center will be assembled during the renovation
by the consolidation of smaller research labs and other rooms.

The renovation will also provide safe, sufficient facilities for current faculty
research, will improve recruitment of new research faculty, and will provide
opportunities to mentor and integrate student trainees in faculty research. The
majority of the University's service area includes a rural, economically
depressed region of the Mississippi Delta and Missouri 'Bootheel," in which
higher than average poverty and unemployment rates, coupled with geographic
isolation, limit opportunities for educational attainment and economic
stability.