* 0962440
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Parental Investment, Socioecological Variation, and Family Formation: Comparative Cases from Guyana
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2010,09/30/2011
* Ryan Schacht, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 09/30/2011
* USD 20,000.00

University of California at Davis doctoral student, Ryan N. Schacht, supervised
by Dr. Monique Borgerhoff Mulder, will undertake research on factors that affect
the formation of human gender roles. The research is driven by recent
theoretical and empirical work on gender that challenges conventional
assumptions regarding male and female patterned behavior. Many of the
assumptions about gender roles derive from research conducted primarily on
Western populations. Therefore, this project focuses on a non-Western group
undergoing rapid socioeconomic change.

The research will be conducted in two communities of Makushi people in the
Rupununi region of Guyana. Research methods will include both semi-structured
and structured interviewing. Data will be collected on Makushi culture and
social organization; demographics and economics; and qualities that previous
researchers have have found affect mate selection and marriage viability. These
data will be compared across the two communities to test hypotheses derived from
evolutionary theory on how features of the social arena, specifically the sex
ratio of reproductive-aged individuals in the community and the socioeconomic
factors that produce the sex ratio, affect sexual behavior, mate choosiness,
parental investment, and conjugal bonds. This work has broad theoretical
significance because it will provide an empirical basis for arguments by gender
theorists across the social sciences who call for a rejection of essentializing
masculine or feminine natures as well as the focus on binary gender strategies.
Additionally, the results of this research may inform policy for HIV prevention
and mitigation of domestic violence. Funding this research also supports the
education of a graduate student.