* 0962529
* International Scientific Collaborations in Mathematical and Physical Sciences: U.S. Participation in IAU, IUPAC, IUCr, IMU, ICO, IUPAP, and URSI
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Katherine Bowman, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2014
* USD 3,588,152.00

The U.S. mathematical and physical sciences communities are represented by the
National Academy of Sciences (NAS) in seven international scientific unions: the
International Astronomical Union (IAU), the International Radio Science Union
(URSI), the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP), the
International Commission for Optics (ICO), the International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), the International Union of Crystallography (IUCr),
and the International Mathematical Union (IMU). U.S. National Committees
(USNCs), staffed by the NAS, coordinate U.S. preparations for meetings of the
corresponding international unions and for scientific conferences, symposia, and
workshops organized by these unions to identify research topics, issues, and
programs of interest to their specific disciplines; identify and support U.S.
scientists to participate in union activities; and arrange for payment of U.S.
dues to the seven unions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is demonstrated through activities related to the utilization of
knowledge for the achievement of social goals, establishing nomenclature and
standards, participating in the governance of the seven international unions,
and advancing knowledge and understanding across the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Similarly, the broader impacts of this project
manifest themselves through activities that promote teaching, training, and
learning, that promote the growth of and diversity in the national and
international workforce, and that help shape the international dialogue in the
respective disciplinary areas.