* 0962435
* DDIG: Culture and the Experience of Chronic Disease: The Case of Diabetes in Urban India
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Peter Brown, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 04/30/2012
* USD 10,086.00

Doctoral student Lesley Jo Weaver (Emory University), under the guidance of Dr.
Peter J. Brown and Dr. Craig Hadley, will conduct research on the interaction
between particular cultural and social ideologies, on the one hand, and the
experience of chronic disease, on the other. The research questions will be
explored through the lens of co-occurring type 2 diabetes and depression for
middle-class women in New Delhi, India. Type 2 diabetes is one of India's
leading health concerns, especially among women, and depression is very common
among people with diabetes. Even so, relatively little is known about women's
everyday experiences of dealing with type 2 diabetes in India, where chronic
illness may interfere with intense household and family responsibilities as well
as careers outside the home. This research will therefore focus on individual
and family relationships, including conflicts that may arise when a woman has
type 2 diabetes. Particular attention will be paid to whether or not these
tensions produce signs and symptoms of depression and anxiety or perhaps whether
pre-existing depression exacerbates or leads to diabetes.

Weaver will use interviews, questionnaires, participant-observation, and blood
tests to explore how women and their family members perceive women's family
roles and responsibilities, whether or not they are depressed according to
biomedical and local standards, how effectively women are able to manage
diabetes and psychosocial stress, and whether or not these management efforts
create conflict or impede their ability to fulfill important family and personal
roles. This research is important because it will contribute to social
scientific theory of the relation between biological and cultural aspects of
human experience. In particular, it will contribute to understanding of how
particular forms of culture and social organization affect the experience of
chronic illnesses like diabetes and depression in everyday life. Therefore, the
research also has the potential to improve disease management. Because type 2
diabetes is increasingly becoming a health concern for both children and adults
worldwide, a better understanding of the ways in which diabetes intersects with
mental health and cultural variability holds promise for improving diabetes
management and treatment efforts. Funding this research also supports the
education of a graduate student.