* 0962619
* Using Observations to Elucidate the Magnetic Structure of Erupting and Non-Erupting Filaments
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Karin Muglach, Artep Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 05/31/2014
* USD 363,145.00

This investigation addresses the connection between coronal mass ejections
(CMEs) and magnetic structures at the solar surface. Given the motivation that
CMEs are recognized as the primary solar driver of non-recurrent geomagnetic
storms, the Principal Investigator (PI) will focus on a comprehensive study of
the structure, formation, and eruption of solar filaments, which are a basic
component of most CME eruptions.

Among other tasks, the PI will use high-cadence magnetograms and the application
of a Local Correlation Tracking numerical code to determine photospheric flows
in the vicinity of the polarity inversion line during the formation of a
filament channel. She will then identify the locations of magnetic flux
cancellation, coalescence, or fragmentation. She will test the hypothesis that
filament barbs are jet-like flows triggered by magnetic flux elements that cross
the filament channel and cancel with majority-polarity flux on the other side.
The PI also will perform a systematic survey of endpoint brightenings in
erupting quiescent and active-region filaments, employing spacecraft
observations in order to verify that these features occur at the outer edges of
transient holes (and are distinct from the well-known footpoint brightenings
associated with post-eruption arcades). Finally, using spacecraft data, she will
carry out a systematic study of rotation in erupting filaments, in order to test
the hypothesis that a filament/barb system has the opposite helicity sign to the
overlying arcade, contrary to the standard flux-rope model for filaments.

The PI expects this study to lead to a better understanding of the underlying
physical drivers of space weather. To enhance this broader impact, the PI will
work closely with colleagues at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, who are
actively involved in developing new operational techniques and instrumentation
for space weather prediction for the U.S. Department of Defense.