* 0962680
* EAGER: Hydration Induced Changes in the Structure and Dynamics of Biomolecular Conformations
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Joel Parks, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 11/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

In this EAGER project, supported by the Chemcial Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms Program, Dr. Joel H. Parks of the Rowland Institute at Harvard
University and his research group will investigate questions related to
conformations of gas phase biomolecular ions: 1) How does the conformation and
conformational fluctuations relate to the interactions and kinetics of molecular
adsorption, and 2) Can fluorescence lifetime measurements identify differences
in conformation between unsolvated biomolecular ions and ions supporting
adsorbed molecules.

It has been demonstrated in solution studies that vicinal water makes important
contributions to the structure and energy of proteins; and that the coupling
between fast hydration dynamics and protein dynamics is considered to play an
important role in protein folding. The hydration of biomolecules in gas phase
offers the possibility to study conformational dynamics in the absence of bulk
water background. The primary challenge of this research project is to apply
fluorescence methods developed in our laboratory to probe the conformations of
biomolecular ions in gas phase to similar measurements for hydrated ions. The
research conducted in this project may provide a deeper understanding of the
role of water in biomolecule dynamics and also lead to new applications and
experimental tools.

The combination of different experimental and theoretical methods (high vacuum
technology, nanosecond time-resolved fluorescence, electrospray technology,
molecular dynamics simulations) and fundamental processes (ion-molecule
interactions, conformational dynamics, radiative interactions) involved in this
project will provide broad training for students and post-docs. The
collaboration with senior colleagues and visits by their graduate students will
allow them to contribute to a variety of research activities and technologies
not available in a single laboratory. Additionally, Dr. Parks will actively
recruit undergraduate students to participate in this program.