* 0962572
* Spillovers from Price Regulations: Evidence from Rent Control in Cambridge, Massachusetts
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* David Autor, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2016
* USD 434,614.00

This research project investigates channels through which spillovers operate in
the housing market by exploiting variation induced by the elimination of rent
regulation. The project aims to improve our understanding of housing market
externalities, the direct and indirect effects of price controls, and to take
advantage of a unique policy experiment to explore core issues in urban
economics such as the evolution of neighborhoods and the capitalization of
amenities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several components of the project exploit a rich
new data set on rent regulation in Cambridge MA. The data set includes the
precise location for all rent controlled units in Cambridge until 1995, when a
statewide referendum eliminated rent control. We link the data set to all
housing market transactions in Cambridge and surrounding communities, building
permitting activity, data from the City Census, which includes the identity, age
and occupation of more than 80% of residents, and information on the credit
profile of residents aggregated at a fine geographic level specific to rent
controlled and non-rent controlled groups. The project investigates the impact
of the elimination of rent control on the prices of uncontrolled condominiums,
single and multi-family housing. Preliminary analysis suggests that there is a
substantial impact of the elimination of rent control on the prices of
uncontrolled houses in neighborhoods with large amounts of pre-existing rent
controlled units. We will carry out further analyses of the database to explore
the reasons for the price change. One mechanism involves changes in the level of
building permitting activity due to investment complementarities between units,
while the second involves measuring changes in the allocation of individuals to
housing after the elimination of rent control. Additional empirical work will
examine the direct impacts of the end of rent regulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The project documents
previously unknown facts about the nature and extent of spillovers in the
housing market. It includes the development of new databases which allow for
understanding various mechanisms which generate the spillovers. It raises new
questions about measuring the welfare costs of price
controls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Regulations affecting
housing markets are widespread and are often predicated on the existence of
spillovers. An improved understanding of the underlying forces generating
spillovers in housing can help shape policies which influence housing investment
and subsidies. Moreover, price controls are present in many segments of the
economy and an important aspect of these controls are the effects they have on
uncontrolled sectors of the market. Finally, rent control is often considered a
textbook example of how price controls affect the functioning of supply and
demand. The detailed nature of our dataset allows for aspects of this research
to be integrated into teaching. The project will also support graduate students.