* 0962354
* Human Capital and Unions in the Theory of Unemployment
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Robert Shimer, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 02/29/2016
* USD 406,458.00

The objective of this research is to better understand the determinants and
consequences of unemployment. We will explore how shocks to industries and
occupations affect the wages and unemployment rates of workers with different
skills levels. In particular, we will explore the implications of the fact that
individuals typically accumulate skills which are most applicable to the
industries and occupations where they have worked. For unlucky workers,
technological progress, adverse shifts in demand, and competition from
international trade may reduce the demand for these skills. Moreover, older
workers are less geographically mobile than younger workers. It follows that the
skills of experienced workers are supplied inelastically and so adverse shocks
will quickly lower these workers' wages. At some point, a worker may become
unemployed rather than continue to work at a wage far below his historical
level. In contrast, younger workers who have not accumulated specific skills and
who are less tied to a geographic area are more likely to move. The risk of
unemployment for skilled workers is exacerbated by labor unions, which may
sustain high wages by creating a fringe of long-term unemployment among workers
who are not allocated jobs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Unemployment falls as workers
move from the depressed to the expanding sectors of the economy, but this
adjustment process may be very slow. Accumulating skills valuable in the
expanding sectors can take many years, and earning seniority in the union of the
expanding sector may also be a very slow process. Therefore older workers in a
currently depressed sector may be willing to wait a long time for labor market
conditions to improve in their existing occupation or industry, possibly
retiring before they ever return to work. This lack of reallocation of skilled
workers creates the prospect of years of low wages and high unemployment rates
for such workers. The final goal of this project is to explore how policies can
ameliorate the adverse consequences of these shocks while encouraging workers to
move towards expanding sectors of the economy when
appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The PI and Co-PI propose a
novel theory of unemployment. Building on techniques developed elsewhere in the
economics literature, they will use analytically tractable models to examine the
interaction between idiosyncratic shocks and the worker's specific human capital
and seniority in the labor union. There has been relatively little work on the
type of model that this project will investigate, in part because such models
were previously viewed as intractable. Recent research by the PI and Co-PI has
made progress on this issue. The techniques the PI and Co-PI plan to develop
will also be useful for studying other economic environments where real options
are important, such as the migration decision for low skilled workers,
irreversible investment decisions, as well as some aspects of the housing
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The lifetime incomes of most
individuals are primarily determined by labor market outcomes: how capable the
individuals are of accumulating human capital and how the price of that human
capital fluctuates over time are important determinants of those outcomes. In
addition, for a worker who is a member of a labor union, the demand for the
services provided by that union and the mechanism by which the union assigns
jobs to its members significantly affects her labor market outcomes. Although
union membership has declined in importance in the U.S. for several decades,
recent developments suggest that unionization rates have bottomed out and are
now increasing. Thus the findings of this study should be relevant for
policymakers and researchers studying labor markets in particular, and
macroeconomics more generally. The techniques developed here are useful in other
fields in economics that study real options, including investment and finance.