* 0962117
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changing Perceptions: Redefining Indigenous Identity and Policy through Social Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Anne Sutherland, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2011
* USD 18,800.00

University of California-Riverside doctoral student Kohanya Ranch, with the
guidance of Dr. Anne Sutherland, will undertake research on how revitalization
movements affect American Indian political and social influence. The overarching
research questions are: How do indigenous, legal, political, and scientific
perspectives differ, how are those differences negotiated, what are the outcomes
for stakeholders, and what role do revitalization movements play?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in southern California
where there is a large concentration of Chumash American Indian tribes. Research
methodologies will include participant observation in arenas of indigenous
cultural reclamation and policy negotiation; interviews with stakeholders; and
analysis of archival materials including newspaper articles and legal documents.
Social network analysis will complement these methods by empirically mapping
informational and relational ties in indigenous policy and revitalization
networks. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will
pioneer an application of social network analysis to theorizing the outcomes of
stakeholder negotiation. The results of the research will also have practical
policy implications. Funding this research also supports the education of a
graduate student.