* 0962212
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Longitudinal Perspectives on Human Paternal Psychobiology in the Philippines
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Christopher Kuzawa, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 03/31/2011
* USD 19,988.00

Research has shown that in some cultural settings fathers have lower
testosterone levels than non-fathers. Because these studies have not documented
changes in hormones over time as men transition into fatherhood, it is not clear
whether men with low testosterone are more likely to become fathers, or
alternatively, if having a child leads to hormonal changes in men, much as past
research has shown in mothers. This study tests the hypothesis that men
experience a reduction in testosterone and an increase in prolactin (a hormone
related to nurturing behavior in mothers) after becoming fathers. This question
will be evaluated in 850 men participating in a large community-based study in
the Philippines. The second aim of the study is to assess whether providing care
to children leads to immediate, short-term changes in these same hormones in a
smaller sample of 60 of the same men. These men are asked to provide culturally-
appropriate care for their child for 30 minutes. Hormones will be measured in
saliva and fingertip dried blood samples before and after this interaction,
allowing evaluation of whether hormones shift to a profile more compatible with
nurturing behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By comparing hormone levels with
detailed reports of men's fathering behaviors and their attitudes regarding
fatherhood and childcare, this study will help clarify the nature of biological
changes that men experience in specific contexts of fathering. These
characteristics may be uniquely important in humans compared to many other
mammals. This project also expands understanding of the ways in which behavior
and biology differ across cultures by contributing important insights into the
range of human diversity in fathering behaviors and their relationships to male
hormonal profiles. Finally, the project fosters international research
collaboration between scholars and universities in the Philippines and US.