* 0962726
* SHINE:  Studies of Solar Wind Turbulence and Thermodynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Stuart Bale, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 03/31/2014
* USD 393,525.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) and his colleagues will investigate the physics
of proton and electron pitch-angle scattering and heating in the solar wind,
using multiple spacecraft instruments and relating these observations to solar
wind turbulence. Specifically, the research team will study the interaction of
turbulence, proton temperature anisotropy instabilities, and solar wind heating,
as well as the role of dispersive turbulence, waves, and instabilities in
controlling solar wind electron thermodynamics. The overarching goal of this
investigation is to understand the evolution of proton and electron
thermodynamics in the solar wind and of field fluctuations in the heliosphere,
over a wide range of parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team have previously
demonstrated their statistical approach to studying the physics of wave-particle
coupling in the interplanetary medium. This new investigation will provide a
detailed picture of the connections among temperature anisotropies, small-scale
instabilities, and turbulence. The PI's systematic study of different wave modes
for high frequency electromagnetic fluctuations will provide fundamental
constraints to temperature anisotropy studies, as well as constrain the
dissipation mechanisms of solar wind turbulence and associated heating.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide for the continued professional
development of a junior scientist and the training of one full time graduate
student. The study of the non-equilibrium characteristics of solar wind electron
distribution functions are of great importance for solving problems related to
heat conduction, plasma micro-instabilities, and transport in weakly collisional
plasmas, as well as for determining the origin of the solar wind. This work will
have broad astrophysical applications as well, since the dissipation modes and
instabilities investigated in this project occur in the solar corona, the
coronas of other stars and compact astrophysical objects, and in other more
exotic environments in the universe, such as astrophysical jets and supernova
blast waves.