* 0962778
* Mathematical ACES: Algebraic Concepts for Elementary Students
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2019
* Davida Fischman, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 05/31/2019
* USD 7,783,028.00

Mathematical ACES: Algebraic Concepts for Elementary Students (ACES), is a
partnership between California State University, San Bernardino (CSUSB) and
Ontario Montclair Elementary School District (OMSD). Supporting partners include
the CSUSB Center for the Enhancement of Mathematics Education and THINK
Together, a non-profit provider of after-school programs. To improve student
success in 8th grade algebra, ACES is targeting the critical juncture in the
mathematics education continuum as students move from elementary concepts to
algebra. The vision is to create and sustain professional learning communities
(PLCs) who work collaboratively to provide high quality instruction and
continuously improve mathematics instruction. Teachers develop a view of math as
exciting and interesting and gain a broad and deep understanding of the
curriculum within and across grade levels.

ACES is developing a distributed, classroom-based, cadre of 60 grade-level
teacher leaders who adopt math as their area of expertise and provide math
leadership to colleagues. Project goals include: 1) increase the mathematics
understanding and achievement of (grades 4-8) students; 2) increase teachers'
mathematical conceptual content knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge, and
effective application of pedagogical skills; 3) cultivate replicable cultural
and systemic changes that result in continuous improvement of mathematics
instruction; and 4) conduct empirical research to increase evidence-based
contributions to the teaching and learning knowledge base. Program components
include: 1) intensive summer institutes; 2) monthly workshops; 3) PLCs focused
on use of lesson study; and 4) teacher collaboration time. Innovative features
include creating a new model for classroom-based capacity building in which a
cadre of grade-level mathematics lead teachers gradually increase their
mathematics knowledge, earn mathematics certification, and become lesson study
facilitators. Instead of removing teachers from the classroom to assume coaching
type assignments, the program creates a new model for distributed grade-level
leadership involving a widespread network of teacher leaders who remain in the
classroom, whose professionalism is highly respected by their colleagues and
administration, who guide their peers in enhancing their teaching, and whose
leadership is a natural outcome of this professionalism rather than a district-
appointed position. At the university, lesson study is being introduced into the
pre-service teacher education program by math faculty engaging in lesson study
for teaching math courses to pre-service elementary teachers, and education
faculty utilizing a lesson study model for math and science methods courses in
the credential program. The research focuses on the degree to which teacher
variables of mathematics content and pedagogical knowledge, goal structure for
students, approach to instruction and to improving instruction, self-efficacy to
teach mathematics, and classroom teaching performance predict student
mathematics achievement, self-efficacy to do mathematics, goals orientation, and
perceptions of goal structure.