* 0962799
* Infrastructure Upgrade for U.C. Berkeley Atomic, Nanoscale, and Quantum Characterization Facility
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Holger Mueller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,682,741.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The purpose of this award is to
upgrade and repair basic experimental infrastructure within the University of
California Berkeley Atomic, Nanoscale, and Quantum Characterization Facility
(ANQCF) housed in the two basement levels of Birge Hall, on the U.C. Berkeley
campus. This space is devoted entirely to research and has been the primary
laboratory facility for the U.C. Berkeley Physics Department for the last 45
years. The infrastructure in this facility is no longer adequate, as it is
plagued by a noisy electromagnetic environment, acoustically and structurally
propagated vibrations, poor temperature control, particulate contamination, a
failing cooling water system, and lack of proper inter-laboratory connectivity.
These experimental limitations will be rectified through a major upgrade of
ANQCF infrastructure systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovations will enable
a new generation of experimental activities within the ANQCF that will probe the
ultimate limits of spatial resolution, electromagnetic sensitivity, as well as
time, frequency, and energy resolution. The improved experimental environment
created by the proposed renovations will allow carbon nanostructures to be
investigated at the single-atom level and in new physical regimes. New phenomena
will be explored in quantum fluids composed of superfluid helium as well as
degenerate atomic gases. The dynamics of individual spins will be explored using
new local probe and magnetometry techniques, and the limits of quantum
information manipulation will be tested in both atomic and solid state qubit
systems. The intricate mechanical systems of biology will be explored and
manipulated at the single molecule level. The proposed improvements in ANQCF
infrastructure will also allow broader participation in science and engineering
through a number of programs aimed at under-represented minorities, students at
all levels, and community college instructors. The Nation's science and
engineering enterprise will be impacted through enhanced training of scientific
personnel, new science and technological breakthroughs, strategic partnerships
in distributed energy research networks, and technology transfer to dynamic
Silicon Valley / Bay Area industries. Critical technologies that involve new
materials, electronic devices,and nanostructure applications in the areas of
computation, communications, chemical and photosensing, medicine, and energy
will be impacted.