* 0962588
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Hidden information and Hidden Action in Rural Crop Insurance Markets
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2012
* Christopher Udry, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 04/30/2012
* USD 19,250.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Agriculture is inherently risky, perpetually under threat
from draughts, hurricanes, floods, pests and crop diseases. In response to
farmers' need to manage risk, governments and policy makers throughout the world
have for decades attempted to provide public crop insurance or promote its
private provision. Almost all such attempts have failed to operate sustainably
without government subsidies.&lt;br/&gt;Project: The researchers propose to
study the reasons for this failure of crop insurance. They will, in partnership
with the Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation, a government entity, implement
an experimental crop insurance program offered to rice farmers in rural
Philippines. The design will allow them to separately identify the extent of
adverse selection (i.e. when demand for insurance is higher among farmers who
are more at risk) and moral hazard (i.e. lowered incentives of covered farmers
to prevent damages), the main barriers to efficient workings of insurance
markets.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Using recent developments in experimental
methodology, the researchers will be able to provide an empirical foundation for
seminal theoretical papers on the economics of contracts by empirically
decomposing these theoretical mechanisms. In addition, they will go beyond
recent experimental contributions by incorporating measures of preferences, such
as an individuals' aversion to risk, to further decompose the contract selection
decision. This empirical evidence will contribute to the iterative process, from
theory to testing and back to theory, that is so essential to the advancement of
scientific knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The research has the promise to
have broad implications for the design and implementation of public insurance
programs. The findings will improve understanding of the workings of insurance
markets and may lead to better regulation and more efficient insurance markets.
Finally, it will help in the design of crop insurance programs in particular and
thereby improve both risk management options for poor rural farmers and the
governments' use of public funds for rural development.