* 0962038
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Impacts of Food Processing on Diet-Induced Thermogenesis
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Richard Wrangham, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 05/31/2012
* USD 16,840.00

All human societies regularly process their foods by thermal and non-thermal
means. This feature distinguishes humans from other species, and may even be
compulsory from an energetic perspective, given that we possess relatively small
molars and gastrointestinal tracts that commit us to an easily digestible diet.
Yet the energetic significance of food processing and its evolutionary
implications have barely been considered. This study tests the hypothesis that
thermal and non-thermal processing lower the metabolic cost of food digestion,
known as diet-induced thermogenesis (DIT). Effects will be evaluated for tubers
and meat, foods widely exploited by humans and believed to have been critical
resources for ancestral hominins. In theory, processing of these foods should
result in a loss of structural integrity that lowers DIT due to reduced chewing
and gastric effort, as well as increased access by digestive acids and enzymes.
Since heat should weaken food structural integrity to a greater extent by
gelatinizing starch and collagen, it is further predicted that the effects of
thermal processing will exceed those of non-thermal processing. To evaluate
these predictions, energy expenditure data are collected via respirometry from
subjects before and after standardized meals served raw and whole, raw and
pounded, roasted and whole, or roasted and pounded, based on a counterbalanced
within-subjects design. Rats will be used as model organisms in the interests of
low cost and high control, but a subset of trials will be replicated using human
subjects to validate the animal model.

This study will quantify the impacts of thermal and non-thermal processing on
DIT, an important factor in energy balance. Results will improve our
understanding of the energetic returns of food processing and inform models of
hominin transitions toward higher dietary quality. Low DIT has been implicated
as a factor in the development of obesity. By determining the effects of food
processing on DIT, this research contributes basic data that could help
consumers influence the partitioning of meal energy to metabolism versus body
stores. Results will thus be communicated broadly to peer-reviewed journals and
conferences in anthropology and nutrition, as well as public forums. This
doctoral dissertation research project will also contribute to the professional
development of a female graduate student.