* 0962393
* Collaborative Research: Global Ocean Survey of Dissolved and Particulate Iron and Aluminum and Aerosol Iron and Aluminum Solubility Supporting the CLIVAR/Repeat Hydrography Project
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2015
* Christopher Measures, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2015
* USD 509,235.00

A scientist from Florida State University and one from the University of Hawaii
will participate in the final two cruises of the CLIVAR Repeat Hydrography
program to sample critical regions of the oceans of particular oceanographic
significance and have not been previously sampled during this program. The first
section will be S4P in 2011 which will sample a large normally inaccessible High
Nutrient Low Chlorophyll (HNLC) region between 160°E and 110°W and involve at
least three meridional sections into Antarctic coastal waters as well sampling
along a zonal transect at roughly 67°S. The second section is the reoccupation
of A16S between ~3°S and 55° S, currently scheduled for 2013 and will complete
the Atlantic section. Water samples will be collected at approximately every
other station occupied by the regular CLIVAR team, sampling 12 depths to 1000m.
The samples will be analyzed on-board for dissolved iron and aluminum,
nutrients, and salinity. Additional samples will be stored, acidified, and
analyzed on shore for manganese, iron, cobalt, nickel, copper, zinc, cadmium,
and lead using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). In
collaboration with the U.S. GEOTRACES steering committee, seawater samples will
be collected for shore-based determination of other trace elements and isotopes
by other investigators. In addition, the researchers plan to continue the daily-
integrated aerosol and event-based rainfall sampling, using existing CLIVAR
aerosol and rainfall sampling equipment, as well as the high-volume aerosol
sampling equipment and automated rainfall collectors recently purchased for use
in the U.S. GEOTRACES program. This will allow us to provide subsamples to the
U.S. and international "aerosol community". The aerosol samples will be analyzed
for ultrapure water soluble, seawater soluble, and total trace elements using
shore-based ICP-MS. Rain samples will be filtered (for samples greater than
200mL volume) and filtered and unfiltered subsamples will be stored frozen for
shore-based major ion analyses and ICP-MS trace element analysis.

As regards broader impacts, availability of the trace metal dataset acquired as
part of the CLIVAR Repeat Hydrography program will advance our knowledge of
global biogeochemical cycles and will improve coupled biogeochemical models.
Results from the study would be included into class lectures. One postdoc and
one graduate student from Florida State University and two postdoc from the
University of Hawaii will be supported and trained as part of this project.