* 0962772
* Partnership to Improve Student Achievement in Physical Sciences: Integrating STEM Approaches (PISA2)
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2018
* Edward Whittaker, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 05/31/2018
* USD 11,466,076.00

This project, led by Stevens Institute of Technology, in partnership with St.
Peter's College, Columbia University and 12 geographically, socio-economically
and academically diverse school districts throughout New Jersey, aims to improve
student achievement in physical sciences in grades 3-8 and increase the
quantity, quality and diversity of teachers who are prepared to teach physical
science. In addition, the partnership focuses on developing students' 21st
century skills, in particular problem-solving, innovation and creativity, by
embedding problem-based learning approaches into five new courses in the teacher
certification programs. The courses blend engineering design with the mastery of
science and mathematics concepts by focusing on three major topic areas as
identified by the AAAS Benchmarks for science literacy: the physical setting,
the designed world, and the nature of technology. The courses are correlated
with the 2009 New Jersey Core Curriculum Content Standards in science, which
have an interdisciplinary STEM approach and a problem-based learning emphasis.
Each of the five courses will be introduced through the perspective of a
contemporary issue in which science and engineering play a paramount role, such
as energy consumption and climate change. Scientific inquiry and the engineering
design process are embedded within each course and are used as vehicles to
promote 21st Century Skills, particularly problem-solving, innovation and
creativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the five years of the project, 400 in-
service teachers, 50 STEM undergraduates (preservice teachers) and 120 school
and district administrators will benefit from the partnership's primary
programs: 1) a new, five-course graduate certificate program, 2) intensive
professional development programs leveraging graduate course content, 3) school-
year workshops and monthly classroom visits, 4) a Pathways to Teaching Option
for science and engineering undergraduates, 5) leadership training/strategic
planning/organizational capacity building for district and higher education
partners, and 6) science scope &amp; sequence and curriculum
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the partnership creates an extended
faculty community at the lead institution, Stevens Institute of Technology,
extending a learning community known as Research &amp; Innovation in Engineering
Education, thereby formalizing faculty development pathways to the designation
of Master Teacher and providing credit in Stevens' promotion and tenure process
for participation in related activities.