* 0962310
* The Transition to Adulthood in Contemporary Society
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2011
* Ian Macmillan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2011
* USD 86,090.00

SES#: 0961828&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ian R. Macmillan&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University
of Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human lives are fundamentally
organized around the social roles that people occupy, the connec-tions between
roles, and how people move into, through, and out of roles over the life span.
Yet, there is increased speculation that the ways in which this happens are
changing in dramatic ways for young people on the path to adulthood, as well as
debate over how such processes are shaped by race, gender, and social class,
among others. In particular, some view the fundamental path-ways into adulthood
as being upended in ways that undermine efficacious transitions, limit later
life attainments, and ultimately re-configure and reinforce social differences
and stratification deep into the life course. To assess the changing nature of
the transition to adulthood and its consequences, this research applies latent
class techniques to longitudinal data (ages 17 to 27) drawn from the National
Longitudinal Surveys to a) formally model pathways through social roles of
schooling, work, and family across several cohorts who transitioned to adulthood
in dif-ferent decades of the latter 20th century; and b) examine the changing
influences of macro-level structural location, family background, and personal
resources. In doing so, this study will move the field forward by developing
theory and using sophisticated modeling and empirical data to chart processes of
social change as they play out in the lives of those in their early adult years
over the past several decades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition to adulthood
has held the attention of both scientists and policy-makers for several decades
and recent years have witnessed considerable concern over the emergence of
problemat-ic transitions that undermine quality of life across the age span. The
transition to adulthood is seen as particularly pivotal given its place in the
unfolding life span and its potential to both re-produce advantage and
disadvantage, as well as be a turning point in the lives of adolescents as they
move out of their teenage years. This research will answer questions about the
paths and prospects of those moving into adulthood against a backdrop of
deinstitutionalization and large-scale economic and cultural change. It will
enhance understanding not only of how social factors structure the life course
but also how pathways over the life course are implicated in processes of
cumulative advantage and disadvantage, and by implication, what
interventions/turning points will have long-term impacts on health and well-
being deep into the life course.&lt;br/&gt;