* 0962258
* A Multi-level, Agent-based Model for Identifying the Factors that Enable or Constrain International Climate Change Negotiations
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Mark Borsuk, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2013
* USD 700,000.00

Climate change policy represents a global, collective decision-making problem
unprecedented in scale and complexity. Scientific methods for evaluating
international policy, however, have tended to follow two separate lines of
analysis, neither of which is fully instructive for real world settings. One
approach, typically referred to as Integrated Assessment Modeling, is largely
pursued by economists and decision theorists and focuses on assessment of the
long-term costs and benefits of various greenhouse gas reduction scenarios. A
second approach originates with game theorists and focuses on evaluating
international structures and conditions likely to lead to effective cooperative
climate agreements. Both types of analysis rely heavily on the simplifying
assumption that national economies are orchestrated by perfectly rational
central planners who have the information and ability to make optimal decisions
despite the presence of pervasive uncertainty about mitigation costs, climate
damages, and future states of the economy. In reality, the outcome and
implementation of any international climate agreement will be the net result of
a complex interplay of stakeholders at multiple levels who have limited ability
to make optimal decisions and have differing beliefs, power, and incentive
structures. Therefore, it is likely that the existing assessment tools overlook
some important factors that may enable or constrain effective climate policy
formation.

This project will develop of new tool for international climate policy analysis
based on agent-based modeling (ABM) that facilitates a more realistic and
simultaneous treatment of the diverse forces which influence multi-party
decisions. The model will represent both the international climate negotiation
process, as well as the key dynamics of domestic economies relevant to energy
and climate change. Some key questions to be explored with our model include:
Are there patterns of innovation, adaptation, or climate damages that emerge
from an ABM representation of an economy that are obscured by conventional
assessments? Does an ABM that accounts for heterogeneity of beliefs and
incentives at the national level and heterogeneity of power and vulnerability at
the international level explain the negotiation outcomes historically observed?
Does the design of effective international negotiation structures depend on the
degree of heterogeneity occurring either between or within national economies?

This research will help inform stakeholders -- including citizens, interest
groups, businesses, governments, and international organizations -- so that they
better understand the opportunities in a globally connected network of decision
makers.