* 0962436
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: When Does Evaluation Information Lead to Performance-Based Decision Outcomes at Development Banks?
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Erika Weinthal, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 01/31/2011
* USD 15,555.00

International organizations like development banks implement development
programs in the world?s poorest places. Evaluation information about past
programs can assist development banks in choosing the types of projects that
will achieve the best results given scarce development financing. However,
despite the commitment that development banks have made to evaluate their
programs, there is very little evidence available about when and why evaluation
information is actually used to improve decision-making. This research examines
the factors that promote or impede the use of evaluation information in resource
allocation decisions. Environmental programming has been a priority for
development banks since the early-1990s and the environmental outcome of
projects has been one of the most consistently measured types of evaluation
information across many different programming sectors. As a consequence, the
research focuses on environmentally-targeted and environmentally-risky projects.
Project evaluations completed by four development banks since 1990 will be coded
for several measures of environmental performance. This data will be used to
model whether development banks decrease environmentally-risky financing to
recipient countries and project types that failed to achieve environmental goals
in the past and increase environmentally-targeted financing in cases where past
efforts have been successful. These models will be combined with data from
development bank staff interviews to produce one of the first rigorous tests of
the factors that promote or impede the use of evaluation information in
development bank decision-making. This research adds to existing knowledge about
effective evaluation use in large organizations by going beyond self-reporting
methods and actually verifying when and why evaluation impacts decision
outcomes. Given the large sums of money being spent on both development
assistance and evaluation, it is vital to understand what external political
factors and internal organizational procedures support decision-making that
fully utilizes evaluation results.