* 0962973
* IRNC: ProNet: ACE - America Connects to Europe
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2017
* John Hicks, Indiana University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,266,522.00

Proposal Summary&lt;br/&gt;ACE proposes to provide multi-gigabit bandwidth and
services connecting researchers in the US with their counterparts in Europe that
will continue to serve current needs well but also extend the transatlantic
exchange into further scientific fields and disciplines. ACE will deploy several
10Gbps waves between Europe and the US, starting with 40 Gbps and growing over
the lifetime of the award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indiana University (IU), as the
lead institution, will function as a cooperative partnership with Delivery of
Advanced Network Technology to Europe (DANTE), Trans-European Research and
Education Networking Association (TERENA), New York State Education and Research
Network (NYSERNet ), and Internet2. DANTE is the operator of the pan-European
network GÉANT, which interconnects all of the national R&amp;E networks in
Europe, acts as the operating partner in several intercontinental research
networking projects across Europe and Asia, and has long provisioned and
operated multiple 10Gbps links across the Atlantic to interconnect its European
partners with North American networks. NYSERNet is a partner in Manhattan
Landing Exchange Point (MAN LAN) and is the optical terminus for many US
telecommunications carriers and transatlantic cables. MAN LAN is owned and
operated by Internet2 in partnership with NYSERNet and with NOC and engineering
services from the IU Global NOC. Internet2 is the leading US research and
education networking organization, representing 300 member institutions and
connecting thousands of US educational, research, cultural, and related
institutions, with partnership agreements with nearly 60 R&amp;E networks around
the world. Through cooperative partnership with NYSERNet and the DANET/GÉANT
community of more than 34 national R&amp;E networks that will be reachable
through these connections, the ACE award will provide the best economies of
scale in transatlantic connectivity, supporting a very broad community of
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One explicit goal of the ACE project is to develop
tools and mechanisms to facilitate close operational integration among these
network operators. IU and Internet2 have extensive experience in joint software
development and deployment centered on the perfSONAR and dynamic circuit
networking activities. As a part of DICE, the ACE project will immediately
deploy, expand, and enhance services in security, measurement, identity
management, and operational integration in coordination with ongoing DICE
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;As part of the
DICE collaboration, the ACE partners will expand and enhance services in
security, measurement, identity management, and operational integration. Close
cooperation among the DICE participants? efforts will maximize US-EU
connectivity, increase collaborations (particularly with respect to security),
ensure deployment of accurate and useful measurement technology, deploy dynamic
circuit services to meet the needs of high-bandwidth applications, and decrease
costs by eliminating duplication of effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;This project will procure significant additional bandwidth
between the US and EU to support a wide range of collaboration between
scientists and engineers. In addition, it will support collaboration on
technical, operational, and planning exercises that are critical in supporting
science and engineering research. Through cooperative partnership with DANTE and
the GÉANT community of more than 34 national research and education networks,
the ACE project will provide the best economies of scale in transatlantic
connectivity, supporting a very broad community of
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating diversity with research and education is
a strong component of the proposal. IU will partner with the existing Gerald L.
Bepko Internship Program at IU, which has as its goal of identifying, connecting
and working with students in populations under-represented in information
technology, to extend educational reach and integrate diversity into the ACE
program.