* 0962564
* Exploring Hoogland, Haasgat and the Plio-Pleistocene landscape of the Schurveberg Mountain Region, South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,08/31/2011
* Justin Adams, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 84,939.00

Interpreting the environments and mammal species in South Africa during the
Plio-Pleistocene, including primate and human lineages, relies on a detailed
understanding of the physical setting of deposition (cave geology), the
distribution of mammals and environments on the landscape (paleobiology and
paleoecology), and the process of converting biological materials into fossils
(taphonomy). Current interpretations of the South African fossil record are
largely based on deposits from the low-relief, geographically-proximate
Blauubank Valley sites. However, recent research outside Blauubank has
highlighted both greater biological variation in mammal communities and in
geologic and taphonomic processes, warranting further excavation and analysis of
novel deposits to guide our broader interpretations of the South African fossil
record. This project makes a significant contribution towards understanding the
factors underlying interpretations of the South Africa fossil record through two
primary objectives. First, through excavation of deposits at the Hoogland and
Haasgat cave systems located in the topographically high-relief Schurveberg
Mountains. This represents the first comprehensive analysis of the geology of
the 2-3 million year old deposits in this poorly sampled geographic region, and
the animal species occupying this landscape during a critical phase in the
development of modern mammal and vegetative communities. Second, systematic
survey and sampling of paleontologic deposits across the Schurvebergs and
transitional foothills will establish the geological and paleoecological history
in this region, and be combined with data from Hoogland, Haasgat, and other
South African localities to provide comprehensive interpretation of the South
African fossil record.

This interdisciplinary research project makes a broader impact by training South
African team members in paleontological research methods that will allow them to
advance as independent scholars. Our project invests in local scientific
infrastructure by expanding and modernizing paleontology laboratories at the
Transvaal Museum (Pretoria), impacting current and future South African and
international paleontological research. Furthermore, the general South African
public will be reached through an exhibition of excavated fossils at the
Transvaal Museum, highlighting the importance of local paleontology in
understanding past environments and human origins.