* 0962074
* Understanding copepod life-history and diversity using a next-generation zooplankton model
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Andrew Pershing, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2014
* USD 490,669.00

Evolution has shaped the physiology, life history, and behavior of a species to
the physical conditions and to the communities of predators and prey within its
range. Within a community, the number of species is determined by both physical
properties such as temperature and biological properties like the magnitude and
timing of primary productivity, and ecological interactions such as predation.
Despite well-known correlations between diversity and properties such as
temperature, the mechanisms that drive these correlations are not well-
described, especially in the oceans. The investigators will conduct a model-
based investigation of diversity patterns in marine ecosystems, focusing on
calanoid copepods. Diversity changes on both sides of the Atlantic suggest three
main hypotheses, relating copepod diversity to environmental stability,
productivity, and size-based predation. To test these, the investigators will
develop a novel model of copepod population dynamics. The model treats
developmental stage and mass as continua, leading to a single partial
differential equation for abundance as a function of stage and mass. This
approach facilitates the use of algorithms from computational fluid mechanics to
resolve numerical dispersion problems that characterize many copepod abundance
models. This new modeling framework will be tested by building a model for the
species Calanus finmarchicus and Pseudocalanus newmani to compare the results of
the model with prior observations and models for two contrasting ecosystems, the
Gulf of Maine and Gulf of St. Lawrence. The model formalizes trade-offs between
temperature-dependent development, mass-dependent and temperature-dependent
growth, and mass-dependent mortality. A series of 1-D simulations will be
conducted, encompassing a range of environmental conditions. Each simulation
will be initialized with many distinct "species," where a species is described
by a set of parameters specifying key physiological and life history parameters.
These will be coupled to a nutrient-phytoplankton-microzooplankton model and
integrated for many years. This procedure will produce a community of copepods
adapted to conditions in each simulated environment. By studying how the modeled
copepod communities respond to changes in physical conditions, productivity, and
predation, mechanisms accounting for copepod diversity patterns will be tested.

The project will lead to improved models for important copepod species that can
be incorporated into ongoing and future ecosystem forecasts. The information on
copepod biogeographic limits developed by this study could support estimates of
copepod distributions under climate change. The model will be designed to work
in a basin-scale model. By allowing adaption to physical and biological
conditions, the emergent copepod communities should provide more realistic
estimates of the impact of climate change. The project will support the
professional development of one graduate student and one postdoctoral associate.
It will also engage one undergraduate summer intern each year. Concepts related
to this project will be communicated to the wider public on a blog at
SeascapeModeling.org.