* 0963987
* Collaborative Research:  Atmospheric Processing of Iron--Does Particle Size Influence Iron Solubility?
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Brian Majestic, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 12/31/2011
* USD 89,710.00

This project will examine the influence of particle size on atmospheric
reactions of iron and, in turn, the influence of particle size on iron
solubility. In particular, how particle size affects iron solubility during
atmospheric processing by two different mechanisms will be investigated. First,
the effect of particle size on iron solubility during photoreduction of iron in
cloud waters will be determined. Photochemical reduction of aqueous iron has
been well studied in authentic and simulated cloud waters, however, particle
size has never been considered as a variable but may be important because only a
restricted aerosol size fraction can form cloud condensation nuclei (CCN).
Previous laboratory studies focusing on particles too big or too small to act as
CCN may under- or overestimate the soluble iron resulting from photochemistry in
real atmospheric systems. Second, the influence of particle size on iron
solubility during reaction with gaseous sulfur dioxide will be investigated.
Exposure of iron phases mixed with sodium chloride will be studied at two
relative humidities (20% and 80%) representative of dry continental and wet
marine environments, respectively. This will allow determination of whether gas-
particle or liquid-particle reactions are more important during iron-sulfur
interactions. Following exposure to sulfur dioxide, the iron isotope composition
of the dissolved iron fraction will be determined and used to elucidate
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be a valuable contribution
to understanding iron solubility in continental and marine aerosols. The results
will be relevant to the broader question of how atmospheric iron affects ocean
productivity and, hence, its relation to the global carbon cycle. Iron is a
limiting nutrient in many parts of the open ocean and substantial effort has
been put forth to determine the availability of iron in atmospheric particulate
matter to marine life. This study will also advance the training of the next
generation of atmospheric scientists. The project will fund one Ph.D. student at
Arizona State University (ASU), with this research being the core of his/her
thesis work. In addition, one undergraduate student each year from Northern
Arizona University (NAU) will work with the principal investigators and the
Ph.D. student at ASU. The Department of Chemistry at NAU is a non-Ph.D. granting
department. Therefore, collaboration with ASU researchers will provide
undergraduate students at NAU training in research approaches and techniques
that are not normally possible at NAU. Furthermore, NAU is among the national
leaders in granting degrees to Native American students. These unique
demographics will be drawn upon to recruit environmentally-focused Native
American undergraduates through the Institute for Tribal Environmental
Professionals at NAU.