* 0963217
* Lamont Center for Biogeochemistry: Renovation of the Biology and Paleo Environment Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Peter DeMenocal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2014
* USD 7,243,260.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the renovation
of the second floor of the "New Core Lab" at the Lamont Doherty Earth
Observatory in order to create the Lamont Center for Biogeochemistry. This will
enable the institution to support collaborative activities in an increasingly
inter-disciplinary field and to make it easier for researchers to share high-end
analytical facilities. It will allow the use of modern biogeochemical research
techniques that are difficult to use in the current
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program of work includes interior
renovation, plumbing, HVAC, electrical, building controls, fire protection,
casework and other smaller items. The project will replace the mechanical and
electrical infrastructure that serves the second floor. This will include all
new electrical distribution and piping. The plumbing systems serving the
laboratories will also be replaced, but the vast majority of the work will be on
the heating, ventilating and cooling side. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovated
facility will help to satisfy the need for interdisciplinary research that
bridges across the biological, atmospheric, geological, oceanographic, and
hydrological sciences and that increases our understanding of the two-way
coupling between biological systems and the physical and chemical
characteristics of soils, sediments, air, or water. Examples of the type of
research that will be done in the renovated facility includes: the
reconstruction of past hydroclimate conditions using oxygen isotope measurements
from trees without annual rings and the study of the Asian monsoon for the past
millennium using tree-ring widths, density, and isotopic indices; the use of
uranium series geochemistry to reconstruct deep-sea particle fluxes and past
changes in Antarctic upwelling and productivity; estimating changes in deep-
ocean carbonate chemistry during the last glacial cycle; the reconstruction of
past variations in ocean circulation, sea-surface temperature gradients, and
terrestrial climate using geochemical analyses of foraminifer shells in deep-sea
sediments; the timing and abruptness of ice sheet instability events; the
reconstruction of past changes in ocean acidity and hence atmospheric carbon
dioxide levels using boron isotopes in planktonic foraminifera and coral; the
response of planktonic ecosystems to physical forcing resulting from global
climate change; the microbial assemblage in deep-sea sediments, the pattern of
active and pathogenic microbes in the Hudson River estuary, and the microbes
associated with soil carbon sequestration. The proposed renovations will also
provide facilities that will be used to provide research experiences for
undergraduates and high-school students.