* 0963742
* CIF:  IHCS:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Design and Implementation of Position-Encoded 3D Microarrays
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Arye Nehorai, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2015
* USD 838,820.00

This research involves design and building of a three-dimensional (3D)
microarray device, with position-controlled microspheres, to perform
simultaneous, efficient, and accurate screening of complementary DNAs, RNAs, and
protein receptors on a single platform. This new device is portable, self-
contained, automatic, and cost effective. Applications of this device include
medical screening, drug discovery, and gene sequencing. In particular, it
performs inexpensive disease diagnosis and provide insight into the molecular
basis in different patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In existing 3D microarrays,
microspheres are placed randomly within a substrate. This random placement of
the microspheres makes their packing inefficient and their data processing
complex. To overcome these drawbacks, the investigators design and build new
microarrays with position-controlled microspheres. They analyze the statistical
accuracy in estimating the target concentrations by computing performance
bounds, and apply the results to select the minimal distance between the
microspheres and the best operating temperature, while ensuring desired optimal
estimation accuracy. The minimal microsphere distance enables high packing, and
the optimal temperature reduces the cost. The investigators implement the
position-controlled microarray using a microfluidic approach; particularly, they
emplace the microspheres using a hydrodynamic trapping mechanism and using on-
chip microvalves and pumps. The long-term goal is to integrate this device with
image sensors, electronics, and optofluidic imaging to build a complete lab-on-
a-chip system.