* 0963239
* Improving Research Capabilities in Chemistry, Physics, Computational Science and Environmental Science at The College at Brockport, SUNY, a Primarily Undergraduate Institution
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Markus Hoffmann, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,569,393.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will renovate laboratory
space in Smith Hall, which was first occupied in 1968. Smith Hall houses the
Chemistry, Physics, and Computational Science Department and the aquaculture
laboratory of the Environmental Science and Biology Department. The building
does not have air conditioning, and lacks hood space, adequate power, and a
vacuum and distilled water distribution system. These infrastructure issues are
the target of the proposed renovation. The effort is part of a larger renovation
project funded by the State University Construction Fund that is limited to
asbestos abatement and energy efficiency improvements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
renovation of the research laboratories will benefit at least eleven faculty
members who have a strong track record in securing extramural funding and
publishing in peer-reviewed journals. The renovations will enable and improve
research infrastructure which is heavily used for undergraduate student
training. Several faculty members are involved in research concerning ionic
liquids, which are salts that are liquid at or near room temperature and have
received increasing attention because of their unique properties and their use
as neoteric solvent in chemical synthesis and processing. Other faculty
collaborate on research to grow and characterize layers of thin films of
superconducting metals or are working on computational aspects of mathematical
knot theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 50% of SUNY Brockport science graduates
go on to graduate school. These students will benefit from improved research
facilities and be better prepared for success in graduate school. Improved
facilities will further help in recruiting research-active faculty, helping to
grow and expand SUNY Brockport's thriving program.