* 0963767
* Collaborative Research: Assembling the Euteleost Tree of Life - Addressing the Major Unresolved Problem in Vertebrate Phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Juan Lopez, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2013
* USD 392,213.00

This project will involve investigators from eight institutions working to
resolve evolutionary relationships within the euteleost fishes, which represent
over one third of vertebrate diversity. An important component will be education
of the public on the importance, evolutionary history, and diversity of these
animals. Phylogenetic analyses will employ DNA sequence data from 20 genes in
1,500 species representing all euteleost families, and approximately 450
morphological characters from 300 euteleost lineages. Resulting phylogenetic
hypotheses will be used to facilitate understanding of the evolution of fish
diversity and re-assess and revise the systematics of euteleosts. Research on
the euteleost tree of life will be integrated into science education by using
euteleost phylogeny as a framework for exploring the evolution of morphological,
genetic, developmental, and behavioral diversity of fishes. This will be
developed as an instructional guide, a "Fish ToL Activity Book," directed at
upper elementary and middle school children and disseminated in non-formal and
school settings working in partnership with the National Science Teachers
Association Press and the National 4-H Afterschool Council. Undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdocs will participate directly in the research
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The euteleosts include some 346 families, 2,935
genera and 17,419 species. Over two thirds of all fishes and nearly a third of
all vertebrates are euteleosts, which include most of the economically important
fishes such as salmons, basses, cods and tunas. This study will facilitate
informed predictions about the poorly known characteristics of most euteleosts
and will considerably improve the evolutionary context for understanding model
organisms such as zebrafish, pufferfish, cichlids, medaka, and stickleback,
which are central to the burgeoning fields of functional genomics, genetics and
evolutionary developmental biology.&lt;br/&gt;