* 0963511
* ARI-R2:  Repair and Renovation: Advancing Research in Biodiversity Science
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Frederick Maddox, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,512,426.00

Abstract

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Funds are provided to update the University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute's
facilities in Dyche Hall. The Biodiversity Institute (BI) has achieved national
and international leadership in biodiversity science in research/ research-
training. This project will advance four cardinal transformations: (1) create a
research infrastructure that is flexible and adaptable to a rapidly evolving
landscape of research approaches, tools, techniques, and instrumentation; (2)
provide previously unavailable research capabilities, e.g., cloning DNA,
digitizing morphology for computational phylogenetic analyses; integrating
natural systems and human systems modeling schemas for forecasting the impacts
of environmental change; (3) keep the BI's community of scholars/collaborators
at the frontiers of transforming knowledge discovery in biodiversity science.
Each will expand the BI's scope and scale of research/training in biodiversity
science, and create integrative, collaborative and teambased research and
research-training environment; and (4) keep the BI at the frontiers of training
students as systems biologists across genes to ecosystems and their informatics
realms. The BI, in partnership with five KU academic departments, is a global
leader in the research/training of the next generations of biodiversity
scientists, with 50 to 60 graduate students in residence annually. Further, the
project will enable the BI to: expand its hands-on lab training in molecular
techniques to undergraduates, including underserved minorities at a local tribal
university; and bring biodiversity science to K-12 and public audiences via the
BI's Natural History Museum.

The funds will provide for: (1) the expansion and consolidation of the Genomics
Complex from 3 disparate labs into 5 integrated facilities with enhanced
capabilities for sequencing, and new capabilities for cloning, biocomputation,
and cryogenic management of more than 80,000 biotic tissues, an irreplaceable
genetic research resource; (2) new Biotic and Morphology Analysis labs for
discovering organismal characteristics that complement and test genetic
research; (3) a new GIS Analysis lab for synthesizing and predictive modeling of
environmental phenomena; and (4) a new, 5-fold larger Server Room with high-watt
density server racks, dedicated power and air-cooling systems for expanded
archiving and serving the data for this research and research-training.