* 0963450
* Renovation of Scientific Research Laboratory Facilities at Duquesne University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Philip Auron, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,692,880.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will renovate and upgrade
specific existing research laboratories and facilities in the Richard King
Mellon Hall of Science at Duquesne University. The renovation will include:
plumbing upgrades; replacement of worn bench tops and casework; replacement of
outdated and inefficient hoods; upgrade/replacement of inadequate existing HVAC;
and most importantly safety upgrades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
renovations will result in more efficient and safer research environments in the
individual research laboratories of six investigators as well as in a shared
facility. These research groups, with funding through the National Science
Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, and the Department of Energy, are
studying a diverse array of significant chemical and biological problems,
including: the generation of metallated nitriles, a study of the role of metal
ions in biological processes, the quantitative determination of lipid species in
biological samples, metrology problems related to environmental and homeland
security, developing an understanding of the physiology and biochemistry of
bacteria that transform metal and metalloids, and the study of molecular
evolution in nonhuman primate genes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every research lab
included in the proposed renovation has undergraduate researchers as part of the
research group. A dynamic summer research program typically brings 40-45
undergraduate researchers to Duquesne for a 10-week intensive research
experience each summer. An NSF-funded Research Experiences for Undergraduates
program is in its 6th year of providing undergraduate students with a summer
research experience integrating computational and experimental approaches to
research problems. Undergraduates are supported through University funding to
enable and encourage presentation of their research at national meetings. For
the past 5 years, an active Project SEED summer program has brought 19
economically disadvantaged high school students, more than half of them African
American, to the Duquesne campus for enriching summer research experiences. It
is anticipated that both the students in REU program and students in SEED
program will greatly benefit from the renovated laboratories.