* 0963277
* Union College Renovation Project for Faculty and Undergraduate Research Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Stephen Romero, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 02/28/2013
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will renovate outdated laboratory space on the third floor of
Butterfield Hall on the campus of Union College to create a Center for
Neuroscience. The Center for Neuroscience will co-locate the neuroscience
faculty research labs, enabling the core faculty to run their research program
more effectively and share scientific resources more efficiently. An anticipated
outcome of the enhanced facilities is increased interactions between
neuroscience program faculty with each other and with students as well as
collaborative research opportunities with student and faculty in the computer
science, electrical and mechanical engineering, and bioengineering programs
which are adjacent to the new Center's location.

Faculty in the renovated labs will conduct research and research training in
areas of neuroplasticity, human cognitive abilities and behavioral dispositions,
gender differences in spatial cognition, cognitive genetics, neural control of
behavior, and basic molecular mechanisms underlying neurological disorders.
Research techniques to be enabled by the Center include intracellular recording
and dye injection of individual neurons, high-seed analysis of flight behavior,
behavioral methodologies, neuroimaging, and electrophysiological techniques.
Examples of research activities proposed for the new Center for Neuroscience
include elucidating brain changes, i.e. neuroplasticity, that are involved in
acquiring a new cognitive skill, understanding the individual differences in
human cognitive abilities and the neural mechanisms that underlie them,
investigating the neural control of behavior in flying insects to understand the
structure and function of neurons involved in visual control of stable flight,
and studying the basic molecular mechanisms underlying specific neurological
disorders.

With the new Center for Neuroscience, the College's students will have access to
cutting-edge, technologically advanced, and diverse research opportunities that
are usually only available to graduate students and post-doctoral research staff
as much larger institutions. The Center will enable the College to accommodate
the growing research and research training needs of the neuroscience
interdisciplinary program, which was created in response to student demand in
2003. Additionally, the renovated research facility is expected to be used by
participants of Union's Summer Science Workshop, a program for rising high
school students traditionally underrepresented in the sciences and those facing
economic disadvantages.