* 0963331
* Sustaining and Revitalizing Research Facilities:   Electrical System Upgrade in the Olmsted Hall of Biological Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Marianne Begemann, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,304,004.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vassar College, an undergraduate
liberal arts college with a long tradition of supporting faculty research and a
commitment to educating students in the theory and practice of scientific
research, will continue the transformation of research and research training by
completely upgrading the electrical service and replacing the emergency
electrical generator in Vassar's largest science building, the Olmsted Hall of
the Biological Sciences. This will assure adequate electrical power for current
equipment, future infrastructure upgrades, sophisticated new equipment, and
increased computational power. The electrical service upgrade will support the
research of fourteen current tenure line biology faculty members, including five
hired in the past five years, all of whom have active and vibrant research
programs. In addition, the upgrade will support the work of new hires that are
anticipated in the next three to five years. Core research facilities that are
shared with other science departments and that are housed in Olmsted Hall will
be direct beneficiaries of the updated electrical service. Furthermore, the
electrical service upgrade of Olmsted Hall will prepare the building to serve as
the core of an integrated science center.