* 0963183
* Engineering Infrastructure Renovation for Sustainability Research
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Mani Srivastava, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 01/31/2015
* USD 7,500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the renovation
of sections of Boelter Hall, part of UCLA's School of Engineering and Applied
Science. The building houses the departments of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, Civil and Environmental Engineering, and Computer Science. The
unifying theme of the space to be renovated is its use for "sustainability
research." Four research "collaboratories" will be created and core mechanical,
electrical and plumbing infrastructure will be renovated to support these. The
collaboratories are: a Structural Sustainability Collaboratory, a Bio-
Sustainability Collaboratory, an Energy and Water Sustainability Collaboratory,
and a Sustainable Enviro-Bio-Nano-Technology Collaboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovated facility will be used for research in
technologies for renewable and alternative energy production and storage, and
environmental engineering. Some of the research goals include: the development
of the biosynthesis of pharmaceuticals to replace current processes involving
organic solvents and to convert renewable resources into pharmaceuticals; a
study of the effect of biofuel combustion products on mammalian cells; the
discovery, development and optimization of new methods for designing metabolic
pathways, new enzymes for biosensors, and new biodegradable polymers;
understanding microbial processes at the sub-cellular level; the
biotransformation of pollutants, nanoparticles, and pathogens to solve hazardous
waste problems and improve public health; and understanding how site-specific
physiological and hydrogeochemical conditions and engineered manipulations
affect biodegradation activities, microbial community structures, and the fate
and transport of pollutants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing
infrastructure for research, the renovated facility will be used by
undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral researchers for research
training. The outcomes of some of the research activities may translate into
technologies that industry can commercialize and that society can use to provide
new energy streams, enhance environmental stewardship, and mitigate the adverse
consequences of environmental change.