* 0963226
* Renovation and Upgrade of Research Space in Founders Hall, Lincoln University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Jennifer Benne, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2012
* USD 313,639.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Lincoln University, Jefferson City Missouri, is a historically black, 1890 land-
grant, public, comprehensive institution. Lincoln's mission is to provide
excellent educational opportunities including theoretical and applied learning
experiences to a diverse population within a nurturing, student-centered
environment. Lincoln University's Department of Life and Physical Sciences has
expanded its research program and is renovating Founders Hall, the science
building, to upgrade existing space to accommodate research activities and
undergraduate research training. The proposed renovations would convert the
current spaces into fully operationally wet labs for research and also to
upgrade two previously converted spaces housing research. Renovations will
include electrical and plumbing installation and upgrades, installation of
permanent bench tops and cabinets, asbestos removal, and the addition of new
fume hoods. These spaces are currently allocated to five research areas
supported by the Department of Life & Physical Sciences including: (1) arthropod
vectors and disease ecology (2) adaptive interferometry using photorefractive
multiple quantum wells (3) bioenergy production from algae (4) nanotechnology
and biosensor production and (5) synthesis of metal complexes of quinone-based
compounds. Renovation of these spaces will increase the quality of space for
research activities and student projects while providing increased access to
research equipment and resources.