* 0963535
* Research Laboratory Infrastructure Improvements in the Electrical Engineering and Physics Building at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Xinhua Bai, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2013
* USD 852,217.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves renovation of the
Electrical Engineering and Physics building at South Dakota School of Mines
&amp; Technology (SDSM&amp;T) in support of productive research activities under
safe conditions. The improvements to the following systems are expected to
exceed the current safety, environmental and operational requirements of
research activities that are carried out at this building: a) ventilation system
including humidity and temperature controls; b) cooling water to operate lasers
and cryogenic equipment and c) fire safety and safety monitoring system. The
improvements would directly contribute to the efficacy, productivity, quality
and quantity of research and research training by enabling a transition to safer
and more productive research laboratories. The following research activities
will be enabled and/or enhanced by the improvements and renovation: a)
development of advanced materials for next generation solar cells; b)
fundamental studies in biophysical processes for the conversion of low cost
biomass feedstock to fuels; c) development of low-cost printing of electrical
circuits, microwave antennas, and grid lines for solar cells using
nanomaterials; d) development of advanced spectroscopy methods, including
Vibrational Sum Frequency Generation spectroscopy to study nanothermites; and e)
theoretical and experimental studies of semiconductor and ferroelectric
materials. In addition, the improvements are expected to contribute to the
development, participation in and utilization of a number of large-scale physics
experiments including high-energy cosmic ray and muon physics experiments
associated with the IceCube project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity is
expected to advance teaching, training and learning, as well as research
activities of graduate and undergraduate students at SDSM&amp;T. In addition,
these facilities are used for many outreach activities including collaborative
activities with neighboring American-Indian institutions of higher learning such
as Sinte Gleska University on the Rosebud Sioux Reservation. The University
maintains a permanent Native American outreach program, serving the nearly all
Native Americans in South Dakota. In addition, these renovated research labs
will be accessible directly to a wider research community. The rooms in the
building also host undergraduate research experiences for SDSM&amp;T and other
students from outside the campus.