* 0963172
* Revitalizing Mount Wilson Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Harold McAlister, Mount Wilson Institute
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,486,837.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will permit the renovation
of several research facilities at the Mount Wilson Observatory (MWO). This
observatory was founded in 1904 in the San Gabriel Mountains of Southern
California, remains an active research site in spite of the night sky
illumination from the Los Angeles basin. The original 60- and 150-ft solar
towers, which established the field of solar physics, are used by teams from the
University of Southern California and UCLA to study the sun's surface activity
and magnetic field as well as probing its interior using the techniques of
helioseismology. UC Berkeley operates the Infrared Spatial Interferometer, a
mid-infrared 3-telescope facility with a unique capability for studying
supergiant and giant stars and their dusty environments. Mount Wilson is home to
Georgia State University's Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy whose
CHARA Array is the world's highest resolution optical
interferometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Observatory has been managed since 1987
under an agreement with the Carnegie Institution of Washington, owner of the
original Observatory facilities, by the Mount Wilson Institute (MWI), a non-
profit organization incorporated in California with offices in Atlanta. MWI
seeks to renovate certain facilities that date from the Observatory's beginnings
that have received no major attention in decades. These tasks include painting
and repairs of solar towers and the original night-time telescopes presently in
danger of serious malfunction due to lack of such maintenance, repair of tanks
and delivery systems used for supplying potable and fire-fighting water, and
reduction of vegetation that fuels forest fires. Many of these tasks involve
human safety and all are fundamental to the continued operation of Mount Wilson
Observatory as a scientific research site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing
research efforts from Mount Wilson all involve the training of the next
generation of astronomers and further public awareness of astronomical research.
Undergraduate students are associated directly with four principal projects as
well as with a special two-week summer program. MWI has updated the Astronomical
Museum on the mountain to more clearly depict the historical contribution from
MWO as well as better inform the public of its contemporary science programs.