* 0963056
* Solid State Proton Conductors 15; Santa Barbara, CA; August 15-20, 2010
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2011
* Sossina Haile, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2011
* USD 26,640.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The goal of this project is to advance the field of
solid state protonics by providing a venue, the 15th International Conference on
Solid State Proton Conductors (SSPC-15), for information exchange by researchers
at all levels. Since their inception in 1980, the SSPC conferences have, been
held in Europe. In 2008, with a change in venue to Kyoto, Japan, the organizers
made an effort to truly internationalize the conference. The series now comes to
North America, and an even broader community can be exposed to this important
area of science. By bringing together traditional protonics researchers and new
recruits, we anticipate the creation of new collaborations that can address
important areas in energy sciences, fundamentals of proton incorporation and
transport, and protons in biological and geological systems. Beyond increasing
participation amongst current researchers not traditionally active in this
field, they aim, by providing partial support for travel and registration fees,
to ensure a representative participant
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Solid state protonics is a
burgeoning field focused on the fundamental mechanisms and eventual applications
of proton transport through solid materials. It has relevance to topics ranging
from electrochemical energy systems to biological processes and geological
phenomena, and is particularly important today given the rising urgency of
energy solutions and the key role of solid state protonics in energy
technologies such as fuel cells and batteries. The first North American meeting
of the SSPC series (SSPC-15) will be held August 15 - 20, 2010, on the campus of
the University of California, Santa Barbara. Approximately 150 participants are
anticipated, comparable to previous recent meetings. The relatively small size
(with no parallel sessions) and serene location will facilitate extensive
discussion amongst participants. Active announcement of this conference to
relevant professional societies will be used to ensure a diverse group of
participants. The conference proceedings will be compiled in a special issue of
the journal Solid State Ionics that will appear 8-9 months after the conference
is concluded.