* 0963407
* Next Generation Biological Engineering Research Through Renovation of Laboratories at Auburn University
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Steven Taylor, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 02/28/2014
* USD 4,623,008.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the renovation
of research laboratories in a building known as the Corley Annex. This is used
by faculty in Biosystems Engineering and collaborating units. This gut
renovation will upgrade the research space to contemporary levels of laboratory
mechanical, electrical, and plumbing infrastructure and will result in a series
of research laboratories and support spaces for the biological engineering
program. The latter include laboratories for: a) Biomaterials Processing and
Conversion; b) Advanced Biological Systems; c) Biosystems Automation; d)
Biomaterials Characterization; e) Food Safety Engineering; f) Bioanalysis; g)
Chemical Analysis; and h) Fabrication, an enhanced Instrument Support Facility,
and new controlled-environment rooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovated
facility will be used for research in 1) bioenergy and bioproducts engineering;
2) ecological engineering; 3) food safety engineering; and 4) biosystems
automation for natural resource management. It will enhance the existing
collaboration between the Biosystems Engineering and Chemical Engineering
departments. Specific examples of planned research activities include developing
new techniques for processing and pre-treating biomass for the production of
liquid fuels or electrical power; finding new techniques for converting biomass
to intermediate products suitable for more efficient transport and further bio-
refining; determining the fate and transport of emerging contaminants in the
environment; quantifying the impacts of climate variability and change on water
resources; developing innovative food processing and packaging techniques to
extend shelf life of food products; refining food traceability systems to insure
food safety; developing sensors and controls to reduce the use of fertilizers
and pesticides; and developing data collection systems to accurately measure
biomass removals and to guide the subsequent application of nutrients to insure
long-term sustainability of agricultural and forest
lands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will improve the Nation?s research
infrastructure by adding new capability to solve problems in biological systems
with emphasis on critical societal needs for producing renewable energy,
maintaining supplies of clean and abundant water, and improving natural resource
management. The renovated facility will support an expansion of the existing
collaboration in food engineering with Tuskegee University. The research
training capacity and capabilities of the renovated facility will support newly
approved graduate degrees in Biosystems Engineering.