* 0963621
* A Sustainable Energy Concepts Professional Development Model for Rural Schools and Its Extension to a Systemic Approach for Integrating STEM Research and Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2010,02/28/2017
* Timothy Sands, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,250,000.00

The Purdue University Innovation through Institutional Integration (I-3)
project, "A Sustainable Energy Concepts Professional Development Model for Rural
Schools and Its Extension to a Systemic Approach for Integrating STEM Research
and Education" brings together an NSF/EHR Noyce award with other Purdue
University programs around the I-3 integrative themes for broadening
participation and the integration of research and education. It is an innovative
effort to establish a systemic approach which connects interdisciplinary STEM
research activities with educational pursuits and has a deliberate focus on
broadening participation in STEM disciplines in rural communities. The project
model is designed to engage teachers in rural high schools with researchers and
their research activities. Rural teachers and their students will be involved in
global "grand challenge" research endeavors, initially associated with biofuels
and sustainable energies, in order to spark interest in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a two-tiered approach: 1. The education
and research integration model which consists of two parts: a) a professional
development program that engages rural pre-service and in-service high school
teachers in Indiana around sustainable energy research activities; and b)
support of teachers in transforming their curricula and classroom practice by
incorporating concepts of sustainable energy. 2. Refinement and establishment of
a systemic approach for integrating research and educational activities using
this model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purdue University is leveraging its existing
strengths in interdisciplinary research and educational engagement through the
integration of the following projects: the NSF funded Noyce Scholars program for
Preparation of Rural High School STEM Teachers; the Woodrow Wilson STEM Goes
Rural Initiative; the Department of Energy Energy Frontier Research Center:
C3Bio; the existing I-STEM (Indiana STEM) Resources Network; and the Purdue
Rural Schools Network. The project is coordinated by the Discovery Learning
Research Center, an educational research center at Purdue, in collaboration with
the Office of the Provost and the Office of the Vice President for
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model development component of this project
provides summer experiences for teams of in-service and pre-service teachers
through short courses in sustainable energy topics, developed in coordination
with the scientists of C3Bio. These teams take part in (and receive graduate
school credits for) a problem-based learning (PBL) summer course in which they
develop their own PBL units on sustainable energy to use in their classrooms.
During the academic year, teachers continue their interactions with one another,
as well as with Purdue scientists and program personnel, through regional
summits, web-enabled meetings and social networking. Each year, the leadership
team reviews evaluation data towards developing a generalizable framework for
integrating research with education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project directly
impacts approximately forty rural in-service teachers, eighty pre-service rural
teachers and all of their students. An additional approximately 400 rural in-
service teachers and their students are indirectly impacted through academic
year outreach activities of the project. The ultimate outcome of this project is
to develop a systemic approach to integrating research with education, allowing
Purdue University to sustain the transformation of STEM education through the
continued integration of cutting-edge STEM research with education using the
refined project model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development, design, and
evaluation will provide descriptive and empirical program models that can be
replicated/modified in other situations. In addition, the project will
contribute to the research base on rural STEM education. This includes
identifying and understanding factors that have an impact on improving
preparation and retention of teachers in rural schools, as well as on the
preparation and recruitment of rural students to STEM disciplines.