* 0963501
* Research Infrastructure Upgrade-Micron Engineering Center
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Cheryl Schrader, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,870,343.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The College of Engineering at Boise State University has experienced rapid
growth since its inception in 1996, due to exceptional student interest and
community support. Located in a vibrant high-technology manufacturing community
and the largest metropolitan area in Idaho, the college has expanded from
initial enrollments of 650 to over 1,800; degree offerings have increased from
three to 24, including masters and Ph.D. program options; three new engineering
departments have been added; and research activity has grown significantly. The
College's Micron Engineering Center (MEC) building comprises four stories and
69,000 gross square feet, providing laboratory and office space for the
engineering programs. The initial design of the MEC building anticipated
research predominantly focused on design and characterization of electronic
devices. With growth in the college's programs and the addition of new faculty,
an emerging research emphasis has been placed on electronic materials processing
and characterization, with collaborations developing in emerging research areas
including novel memory materials, energy production, biotechnology, and micro-
nano machinery. This has created a significant demand for research laboratories
that can support "wet lab" activities. To meet this need in part, the university
has systematically upgraded the MEC building to provide wet lab capabilities,
adding four additional wet labs for a total of eight. At this time, the college
still needs adequate laboratory space to accommodate additional growing research
needs. In previous laboratory upgrades over the past eight years, the base
building systems had adequate expansion capacity to allow for the additional
HVAC and electrical requirements of the renovated laboratories. At this point,
however, not only will the individual laboratory space require renovations to
support specific research activities, but the base building systems
correspondingly need upgrade. Under this award, Boise State University will
renovate twelve laboratories in the MEC building, totaling 11,640 square feet.
Renovations include increased electric distribution; installation of a building
chilled water system; installation of chemical fume hoods, chemical storage
cabinets, sinks and safety showers; development of ground floor vibration
isolation; and installation of general laboratory utility distribution systems.

Intellectual Merit: Sixty one funded research programs and 29 researchers
utilize the MEC facility. Additional wet process laboratory capacity is required
to allow for further growth in the emerging research areas of materials, device
fabrication, and characterization. Renovations to the MEC laboratories will
impact current researchers in the college, and enable opportunities for college
growth in faculty. This award provides 15 additional fume hoods in the MEC
building, significantly expanding the ability to grow research activities.
Upgrades to the MEC facility will allow researchers to expand their individual
careers, train additional students, and contribute to the research goals and
discoveries of the nation.

Broader Impacts: Boise State University serves the city of Boise and adjacent
metropolitan area and provides research training at all academic levels.
Students at all levels have opportunities to gain research experience as early
as their freshman year, and maintain their involvement on a project throughout
their undergraduate and graduate career. These renovations will allow Boise
State University to broaden participation in engineering research to
underrepresented students. The university participates as a subaward in an NSF-
supported Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) award and
recently received an NSF-supported Science Talent Expansion Program (STEP)
award. Together, these programs will provide research assistantships for 140
underrepresented and lower division students. With the increased research
capacity provided by the facility renovations, Boise State University will be
able to increase the involvement of students in meaningful, next-generation
research, impacting their ability upon graduation to investigate, develop and
lead scientific discoveries as the next generation of engineering leaders.