* 0963395
* ARI-R2: Renovation of the Physical Sciences Laboratory Building
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* John Cable, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,985,557.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests partial support
for the renovation of the Physical Sciences Laboratory Building (PSLB) at
Bowling Green State University of Ohio. This is the main research facility of
the Department of Chemistry and Center for Photochemical Sciences at Bowling
Green State University, and houses several research groups that have received
external funding from several agencies. The research productivity of these
groups has been affected by an inadequate and antiquated heating, ventilation,
and air conditioning (HVAC) system in PSLB. This building now suffers from
excessive temperature extremes and large thermal fluctuations, particularly in
the summer. The building also has problems with vibration from the supply and
exhaust fans, which are beyond their original service life. These problems
result in a significant amount of instrument downtime and unsafe working
conditions. Significant renovations will be made to the building's air handling
systems in order to increase cooling capacity, improve filtration, provide new
supply and exhaust air valves, retrofit existing fans to variable speed drive,
and improved electronic controls. Other upgrades will include replacing the
existing pneumatic controls on the heating and cooling plants, and the first
phase of a fume hood replacement program that will replace 66 existing fume
hoods with energy efficient variable volume fume hoods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovation is expected to improve the conditions for
research on materials and devices for fast detection of explosives using
luminescent microporous materials, programmable photophysics in metal-organic
chromophores, low-power photoluminescence and photochemical upconversion,
single-molecule protein dynamics and interfacial electron transfer dynamics,
metal-peptide nanoassemblies, and real-time monitoring of photoinduced
rearrangement and energy flow in small polyatomic molecules in solution. This
renovation will also reduce energy consumption on campus, which will have
indirect benefits for research and education.