* 0963509
* Modernization of Multi-Scale Characterization, Analysis, and Synthesis Facility for Materials and Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Vishwanath Prasad, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,046,053.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award supports the renovation and modernization of approximately 2,900
square feet of space within the University of North Texas' (UNT) Center for
Advanced Research and Technology (CART), located in the university's Discovery
Park (about 4.5 miles north of the main campus). As part of CART, UNT will
create a modern, model facility, called the UNT Nanofabrication Analysis and
Research Facility (NARF), which is to be an open-access "one-stop-shop" for
advanced device fabrication and analysis across multiple length and time scales.
The renovations will consolidate currently spatially distributed, advanced
characterization and analysis instruments; upgrade the space to include high
speed cyber connectivity permitting remote access and control of these
instruments; and integrate this space with a clean room and technology
incubator.

Intellectual Merit: NARF will use "open system design" architecture to maximize
collaboration and shared use of equipment, "integration for fabrication" to
maximize entrepreneurial activities characterized by co-location of a clean room
and technology incubator, and a "community/school-friendly" setting, where
researchers share results and explain their work in real-time or via distance to
visitors. The facility will host a unique trio of tools consisting of a dual-
beam focused ion beam instrument, a high resolution transmission electron
microscope, and a local electrode atom probe, capable of true atomic scale
analysis of the structure and chemistry of materials, as well as many other
advanced instruments, into direct proximity of one another. NARF will foster
fundamental research involving nanoscale characterization and analysis applied
to a wide variety of materials systems and devices, and will allow for the first
time at UNT, true 3D characterization of the nanoscale structure and composition
of specific components and failure sites in semiconductor devices, as well as
interfaces in hybrid materials for aerospace, biomedical, and energy-related
applications.

Broader Impacts: One of the primary impacts enabled by NARF will be the research
training of graduate and undergraduate students, as well as post-docs and
external researchers from industry, in the use of sophisticated characterization
and analysis equipment. NARF will provide researchers a range of different
equipment under one roof and allow them to appreciate the novel research
possibilities afforded by these various techniques. Such an impact is not
possible if the equipment is isolated and located at geographically scattered
locations across the campus, as it is currently.