* 0963448
* Sustainable Energy Solutions via Systems-Based Research: Modernizing the Sustainable Energy Research Infrastructure in Durland Hall
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* James Edgar, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,598,997.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the renovation and
reconfiguration of approximately 5,237 square feet of research laboratories at
Kansas State University's Durland Hall into collaborative research suites for
bioenergy and energy efficiency research. The renovation will create research
laboratory space that is designed around an open concept for research by
multiple researchers and graduate students working on multiple projects. More
specifically, the renovation will consist of demolishing or renovating: walls,
doors and hardware, floor and ceiling finishes, ventilation duct work, exhaust
and supply units, power distribution systems, lighting, plumbing, and fire
protection. Overall, the proposed renovation will construct two flexible
Chemical Engineering laboratories for chemical preparation, research, and
computation. All new systems and space being constructed will be energy
efficient and flexible for future expansion and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The development of
sustainable and economically viable energy sources is one of the key
technological challenges currently facing science and engineering. New
technologies historically have been advanced through focused research on
numerous components in academic and industrial "silos" and the subsequent
integration of these discoveries into an efficient system. Because each
component was independently developed, integration can take years and require
significant refinement of the individual technologies. For example, significant
resources may be focused in one facility member's lab to produce ethanol from
cellulosic feedstock, but the very significant energy need of ethanol/water
separation is not addressed. Another researcher may try to address the
ethanol/water separation in another lab. The synergy of connecting these issues
may naturally arise if two doctoral students worked side by side in the same
space, not in laboratory "silos." Using the new laboratory suites, researchers
will have the tools to develop solutions to one of the grand challenges facing
engineers in the 21st century: Sustainable Energy Production. Research
activities that will use the renovated facility include an NSF-supported IGERT
award on Integrating the Social, Technological, and Agricultural Aspects of
Sustainable and Renewable Biorefining, an NSF-supported REU site on Earth, Wind,
and Fire that relates to alternative fuels, and the Kansas Center of Innovation
in BioRefining and BioEnergy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: These
laboratories will allow for the refinement of a new research and research
training model with a systems-based focus that thoroughly integrates students
from various disciplines in collaborative research spaces. The institution plans
on documenting its findings in this area, publishing them in journal articles,
and presenting them at national conferences.