* 0963066
* NYSERNet Research and Education network renovations
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2012
* John Kolb, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 03/31/2012
* USD 0.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to renovate the
backbone networking infrastructure of NYSERNet, the New York State Education and
Research Network. NYSERNet operates a state-wide optical and Internet Protocol
(IP) network serving more than thirty research and education institutions in New
York State, providing connectivity within the state and to regional, national
and international networks. NYSERNet provides a critical component for data-
intensive, compute-intensive and collaborative research in the state, and an
avenue for distance education, conferencing and related activities. NYSERNet's
collocation point in New York City is home to the northeast nodes of Internet2,
National Lambda Rail, ESnet and the U.S. Large Hadron Collider Network
(USLHCnet), and houses the international Manhattan Landing (MAN LAN) peering
fabric. Both the optical and IP layers will be enhanced by: increasing
connection capacity in those cities that have limited usable connections;
updating the network with new control cards; adding redundant processors to
backbone routers; and upgrading the existing GigE backbone to 10GigE between the
principal nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upgraded network will provide enhanced
capacity for New York State researchers participating in national and
international science research projects that use high-bandwidth network
connections to transport the data needed in their research activities. Examples
include the analysis of data from the Large Hadron Collider and the use of the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory to look for gravity wave
signatures from astrophysical events such as the merger of black holes or
neutron stars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NYSERNet members include not only
universities but K-12 school districts, museums, and libraries. These use the
network for distance education, classroom enrichment, and curriculum
development. A majority of the state's K-12 Regional Information Centers
participate in NYSERNet and the network supports a distributed distance learning
project that links K-12 schools in western and central New York with college and
university classes.