* 0963807
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Modeling, Design and Emulation of P2P Real-Time Streaming Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,10/31/2012
* Lei Ying, Iowa State University
* Continuing grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 10/31/2012
* USD 208,000.00

Emerging trends suggest that a significant share of Internet traffic will be due
to real-time streaming applications. However, given the unpredictable nature of
popularity of any content and the significant swings seen in user demand,
provisioning a centralized content distribution system that can guarantee the
strict quality of service constraints needed for real-time streaming is a very
difficult task. Therefore, this project studies modeling paradigms and systems
design for utilizing end-user resources for real-time streaming in a peer-to-
peer (P2P) fashion. The rationale is that P2P networks can dynamically adapt to
changing network conditions and service requirements more easily than
centralized content distribution systems.

This research effort takes a holistic approach in which, on one hand, we study
fundamental performance limits of peer-to-peer streaming and design distributed
algorithms to achieve these limits. On the other hand, we use these algorithms
as building blocks to construct practical protocols that are implemented and
validated on an emulation testbed. We bring together a rich set of analytical
tools drawn from stochastic processes, optimization and control theory to merge
them with real-life multimedia issues of video coding, frame dropping and trans-
coding as well as practical implementation issues. Besides the technological
impact of developing viable video-streaming ideas for an increasingly networked
world, our project also informs and educates both students and the broader
society with curriculum development, outreach and integration of under-
represented groups.