* 0963924
* Collaborative Research: Norwegian-United States IPY Scientific Traverse: Climate Variability and Glaciology in East Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Eric Steig, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 01/31/2013
* USD 349,484.00

0538495 Albert

This award supports a project of scientific investigations along two overland
traverses in East Antarctica: one going from the Norwegian Troll Station (72deg.
S, 2deg. E) to the United States South Pole Station (90deg. S, 0deg. E) in
2007-2008; and a return traverse starting at South Pole Station and ending at
Troll Station by a different route in 2008-2009. The project will investigate
climate change in East Antarctica, with the goals of understanding climate
variability in Dronning Maud Land of East Antarctica on time scales of years to
centuries and determining the surface and net mass balance of the ice sheet in
this sector to understand its impact on sea level. The project will also
investigate the impact of atmospheric and oceanic variability and human
activities on the chemical composition of firn and ice in the region, and will
revisit areas and sites first explored by traverses in the 1960's, for detection
of possible changes and to establish benchmark datasets for future research
efforts. In terms of broader impacts, the results of this study will add to
understanding of climate variability in East Antarctica and its contribution to
global sea level change. The project includes international exchange of graduate
students between the institutions involved and international education of
undergraduate students through classes taught by the PI's at UNIS in Svalbard.
It involves extensive outreach to the general public both in Scandinavia and
North America through the press, television, science museums, children's
literature, and web sites. Active knowledge sharing and collaboration between
pioneers in Antarctic glaciology from Norway and the US, with the international
group of scientists and students involved in this project, provide a unique
opportunity to explore the changes that half a century have made in climate
proxies from East Antarctica, scientific tools, and the culture and people of
science. The project is relevant to the International Polar Year (IPY) since it
is a genuine collaboration between nations: the scientists involved have
complementary expertise, and the logistics involved relies on assets unique to
each nation. It is truly an endeavor that neither nation could accomplish alone.
This project is a part of the Trans- Antarctic Scientific Traverse Expeditions
Ice Divide of East Antarctica (TASTE-IDEA) which is also part of IPY.