* 0963244
* Renovation of the Integrative Biology Research Facility at Indiana University South Bend
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Andrew Schnabel, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 604,170.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are provided to fund
the Integrative Biology Research Facility (IBRF) at Indiana University South
Bend (IUSB). These renovations will greatly advance the potential for research
and research training in biology at the University. The current IUSB research
facility cannot support the increasing need for undergraduate research training
that is being driven by student demand, campus initiatives to broaden research
opportunities, and state and regional initiatives to increase job opportunities
in biotechnology and the life sciences. The small labs cannot accommodate more
than 2-3 researchers at a time and are inadequate for modern research programs
that require multiple techniques and types of equipment. Therefore, research
spaces that are shared by all biology faculty and are currently of limited or no
use in research will be renovated. The IBRF would provide (i) a greenhouse with
dedicated research space, (ii) three rooms dedicated for equipment used in
molecular biology, microscopy, and microbial culture, and (iii) field studies
lab that can accommodate research teams of up to 10 people. The renovated IBRF
will allow immediate expansion of one-on-one biology research training, but more
importantly will drive curricular changes that will integrate research training
into our upper-level course offerings and broaden participation in research
activities.