* 0963388
* Smithsonian's Global Change Research Facilities for Large-Scale Ecological Forecasting
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Jonathan Langley, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,690,423.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project involves the renovation of the Smithsonian Environmental Research
Center's (SERC's) field monitoring network and environmental data acquisition
system, an integrated, distributed facility designed for long-term environmental
research on the Rhode River. SERC uses the Rhode River's watershed and sub-
estuary as a model system to measure the environmental responses of linked
ecosystems in a coastal landscape to climate variation and human impacts. The
individual components of the facility are used for monitoring the flow of air,
water, and materials through the linked ecosystems that comprise SERC's model
landscape. The Rhode River is a 'perched watershed' that sits on top of an
impervious clay layer. The clay layer prevents water and chemicals of the Rhode
River's watershed from exchanging with the deeper aquifers that are fed by other
parts of the larger Chesapeake watershed. As a result, changes in the volume of
water and its chemical characteristics reflect the effects of local climate,
atmospheric deposition and land use activities within the watershed. Such
measurements across the linked ecosystems in the watershed reveal the landscape-
scale response to climate or land use management.

The types of research activities and topics pursued using the Rhode River field
facility include: -- Studies that measure and model the watershed discharges of
water, sediment, and nutrients as a function of precipitation, land use, and
geological features. These provide information on sources, sinks, and
transformations of nutrients and other chemicals such as mercury, and their
variation with changes in the quantity and timing of precipitation. -- The long-
term responses of C3 and C4 plant communities to rising CO2 based on field
manipulation of atmospheric CO2 concentration. -- The combined effects of
elevated CO2 and elevated estuarine nitrogen on soil surface elevation. -- The
pathways by which mercury enters seafood, combining studies of the atmospheric
deposition of mercury, mercury transport and methylation in small watershed, the
fluxes of mercury and methymercury through marsh and streams, and the
accumulation of methylmercury in terrestrial and aquatic biota. -- Studies of
what regulates source and sink processes as dissolved organic matter is
transported from wetlands and tidal marshes to the coastal ocean. In addition to
providing infrastructure for research by SERC personnel, the facility to be
renovated is also a resource for an array of collaborative research and research
training programs undertaken by academic partners. Undergraduate students,
graduate students and post-doctoral researchers participate in research using
the facility. The research conducted can help determine the effectiveness of new
environmental policies. The renovated infrastructure will support research that
can lead to improvements in the management of watersheds and estuaries. Two of
the watershed discharge measurement stations to be renovated will be used for
K-12 education and public education on watershed research. The proposed upgrade
to SERC's data transmission network will enable real time transmission of field
data, which will facilitate sharing data via internet with collaborating
scientists, students, and the public.