* 0963222
* Renovation of Wet Labs and Cyber-Infrastructure to Enhance Integrated Research and Teaching in Aquatic Science at SUNY-ESF
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Donald Leopold, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,470,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funds for State
University of New York, College of Environmental Science and Forestry (SUNY-ESF)
to modernize The Center for Integrated Research and Teaching in Aquatic Science
(CIRTAS) facility and Thousand Islands Biological (TIBS) field station. Funds
will be provided to renovate existing wet labs at CIRTAS and a supporting wet
lab at TIBS, and cyber-infrastructure to better link these facilities. CIRTAS is
a shared-use facility housed in ESF's Illick Hall. It spans several departments,
and was formed in 2006 to foster multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary
collaborations, improve a shared resource facility for research and training,
and strengthen linkages between aquatic research on the main campus and at the
affiliated Thousand Islands Biological (TIBS) field station. TIBS is a primary
research and student training site. The current experimental wet labs at the
CIRTAS facility and TIBS are inadequate for current research and research
training programs. This infrastructure project will greatly enhance research
capabilities by (1) allowing research requiring sterile and clean techniques;
(2) preventing cross-contamination and improving decontamination of facilities
and waste-water; (3) improving temperature control for experimental rooms; and
(4) upgrading cyber-infrastructure to facilitate collaborations between research
teams and classes working at CIRTAS and TIBS by installing a high-speed data
link at TIBS and a dedicated line and firewall to allow CIRTAS to host a server
for data sharing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed renovations are important
for successful investigations of ecological and evolutionary processes linking
diseases, non-native species, and toxins; they also allow the study of a wider
taxonomic range of organisms and the use of modern tracers and genetic tools.
Improved data and teleconferencing connections between CIRTAS and TIBS will
allow investigators to link field observations with controlled experimental
studies. CIRTAS and TIBS will be used to cross train graduate students in
Chemistry, Environmental Biology, and Aquatic and Fisheries Science. The
facilities currently support training programs for undergraduate students from
groups traditionally under-represented in science (including the Research
Experiences for Undergraduates and Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental
Biology programs). The staff work closely with state agencies and managers to
include relevant results from research at CIRTAS and TIBS in management plans.
Personnel are directly involved in public outreach, including stakeholder and
teacher workshops, public presentations, and SUNY's "ESF in the High School"
program. With the additional capacity at CIRTAS for streaming data from TIBS
field sensors, the PIs will increase the facilities' web presence to include
field and lab exercises for teachers, as well as searchable and real-time data
for scientists and other stakeholders.