* 0963204
* Updating IT Infrastructure: Reducing Energy Consumption and Enhancing Data Flow to Researchers
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2010,09/30/2013
* David Gallaher, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2013
* USD 525,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While cryospheric research at National
Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) documents evidence of climate change, it is
ironic that the carbon footprint of its computing systems is large. NSIDC is
installing an energy-efficient, carbon footprint reduction upgrade to its
research computing facility that includes reconfiguring the layout of its
computer equipment; replacing conventional air conditioners with indirect
evaporative cooling systems; installing a roof mounted solar power array; and
upgrading connectivity to the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upgraded
facility positively impacts NSIDC's scientists conducting cryospheric research;
assures the flow of critical data to hundreds of off-site scientists; expands
NSIDC's IT systems reliability and ability to provide internet web services such
as rapid data browse and online data analysis. It also illustrates several ways
how similar data centers can reduce carbon footprints and sustain the
cyberinfrastructure critical to future scientific
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSIDC's scientists are working on NSF, NASA,
and NOAA funded research addressing the Earth's cryosphere - its snow and sea
ice cover, permafrost, glaciers and ice sheets - both as a key indicator and as
a driver of climate change. Science questions include: why is the Arctic's sea
ice cover shrinking at a faster rate than expected; how will Arctic warming
affect the permafrost and could warming lead to release of carbon presently
stored in these frozen soils; and how is the Antarctic ice sheet
changing?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several local partners join NSIDC in this effort.
An undergraduate engineering research project is evaluating this energy
conservation project and will develop a website to make monitoring and design
support data available to the public. The National Renewable Energy Laboratory
(NREL) is co-authoring a technical report, to distribute the concept to other
data centers across the country.