* 0963718
* Collaborative Research:  Modeling the Efficacy of Inventory for Extreme Event Preparedness Decision Making in Interdependent Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Joost Santos, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2013
* USD 153,006.00

Making decisions to prepare for disruptive events, potentially of an extreme
nature, must consider infrastructural, economic, and social consequences. All of
these consequences have interdependent effects, e.g., a consequence experienced
in one infrastructure sector may cause ripple effects due to the interconnected
nature of U.S. infrastructures. The intellectual merit of this study is to
develop a methodology which integrates sector-specific inventory models with an
analysis of such interdependent effects. As such, the cost-benefit effectiveness
of maintaining inventory (and thus restoring the ability of sectors to meet
demand, or vital services in the case of public sectors) need to be measured.
The research develops a modeling enterprise, which accounts for model parameters
that vary over time and may be uncertain (i.e., the ability to understand the
effects of many disruptive events is highly uncertain). This modeling enterprise
serves to understand, and to some extent predict, recovery following disruptive
events as well as to improve the ability to make decisions to prepare for such
events ahead of time. A graphical user interface is programmed to integrate
data, model formulations, and scenario templates, which facilitates the analysis
of two separate case studies: (i) Oklahoma ice storm, and (ii) Virginia
hurricane. This effort supports research pursuits for students at both
undergraduate and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application of the
integrated methodology provides insights to making decisions with multiple
objectives in mind, answering policy questions such as: (i) what portfolio of
key sectors would give the greatest "bang for the buck" in terms of investments
in inventory? And (ii) what criteria can decision makers use in balancing
inventory in terms of economic metrics (e.g., cost reduction), social metrics
(e.g., evenly-dispersed management of disruptions across all sectors), and other
applicable metrics? This research generates significant broader impact
contributions: (i) inclusion of emergency preparedness policy makers to advise
the research, (ii) impact analysis of extreme events on underprivileged
communities, (iii) development of a web portal for discussion of research
findings with other institutions, (iv) publications in specialized journals and
presentations at national conferences, and (v) educational training programs and
initiatives that explicitly involve minority students.