* 0963979
* A Study of Architectural Models for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/26/2009,12/31/2013
* Wei Zhao, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2013
* USD 199,988.00

The focus of this project is on cyber-physical systems (CPS) -- physical and
engineered systems whose operations are integrated, monitored, and controlled by
a computational core. Applications of CPS include, for example, critical
(physical) infrastructure control (electric power, water resources, gas and fuel
distribution, transportation, etc.), highly dependable medical devices and
systems, traffic control and safety, advanced automotive systems, process
control, and manufacturing, energy conservation and environmental control,
avionics, distributed robotics (tele-presence, tele-medicine), and
manufacturing.

Traditional frameworks for designing and configuring computing and networking
systems do not capture the complexity of CPS systems -- principally because many
of the abstractions developed for computing and networking deliberately abstract
away essential properties of the physical world. Existing real-time operating
systems (mix of operating systems, middleware, and general-purpose virtual
machines) are not sufficient to support the complexity challenges of emerging
classes of cyber-physical systems because of the mismatch between traditional
computation abstractions and properties of physical processes. Some current
technical approaches partially bridge the abstraction gap (such as real-time
operating systems, middleware technologies, specialized embedded processor
architectures, and specialized networks). However, current research and
development of cyber-physical systems calls for non-incremental, revolutionary
approaches, where new abstractions are built from the ground up. These
abstractions must enable reasoning at every level for high-confidence system
composition and addresses issues such as time-criticality, safety, and security.

In response to the need for a CPS framework, this SGER project will investigate
architectural models with the goal of helping the research community to develop
a cyber-physical system vision that integrates both computer science (real-time
systems; embedded systems; software and system verification, validation, and
certification; computing technologies; wireless and wired networking; sensor
nets) and the traditional physical sciences and engineering disciplines
(control, physical sensors and actuators, physical system design and
engineering, materials, even biology and nanotechnology). Such models are likely
to provide a platform for future cyber-physical systems design that brings these
interacting elements into a single focus.

This project will also sponsor several meetings (workshops, symposia, summit,
etc) that aim at providing a forum for engineers and scientists in academia,
industry and government to present their latest research findings in any aspects
of cyber-physical systems, and, consequently, allow the community to define and
enhance the research agenda for this important emerging field.

The primary intellectual merit of the proposal resides in analyzing existing
cyber-physical systems and developing abstracted architecture models that will
enable future cyber-physical systems design and realization.

The broader impact of the proposed work is on the research community at-large,
through the project focus on issues related to cyber-physical systems. The
advancement achieved through this Cyber-physical system research is expected to
improve the research and development capabilities in the nation and contribute
to increased global competitiveness.