* 0963365
* Hancock Technology Center Research Laboratory
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Roger Norton, Marist College
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2013
* USD 696,931.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The new Marist College technology research lab provides students and faculty
access to cutting edge technologies for research and research training projects.
It supports applied research projects with industry and academic partners and
also provides a research training environment for over 600 members of the
Enterprise Computing Community that was formed through a NSF CPATH award.
Faculty members use the facilities to conduct research in a wide variety of STEM
areas, including mathematical modeling of ocean currents and wave propagation,
data mining for the detection and prevention of errors in the coding of medical
diagnoses, application of computationally intensive routines to address problems
in classical thermodynamics, and exploration of the use of cutting edge large
system technologies such as virtualization and cloud computing to help small to
medium-sized companies become more efficient and cost effective. Many of the
research questions explored in the new lab are introduced by industry partners.
These applied research collaborations are aimed at solving real-world business
problems. Undergraduates and graduate students also benefit by learning the
discipline of inquiry based research and experience the rigor of scientific
methods and practices. Students learn firsthand how to apply new skills through
their participation in research projects with faculty as well as academic and
industry partners. Researchers will disseminate their findings through peer-
reviewed journals and presentations at national conferences. Students will also
present their work at both regional and national conferences. Applied research
results will bring practical benefits to individual companies and by extension
to the marketplace.