* 0963209
* Investigating the Operational Meaning and Occurrence of Institutional Integration and Innovation in NSF's I-cubed Activity
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2010,02/28/2017
* F Merlino, Westat Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,248,299.00

This research project focuses on how awardees in NSF's Innovation through
Institution Integration activity ("I3") operationalize the meaning of
"institutional integration" and "innovation" and seeks to quantify the nature
and evolution of these campus-wide collaborative networks. The project examines
the extent to which changes occur in activities (planning, budgeting,
scheduling, evaluating), organizational/social identity (identification with a
single NSF program/and or group of people working on a grant as opposed to
identification with NSF efforts more broadly and the people engaged in the
work), and mental models or schema (shared cognition about the nature of the
problem, what needs to be addressed, and appropriate strategies for addressing
them). This work is also looking at the extent to which the selection of
particular themes identified in the I3 solicitation and around which projects
must build integration - broadening participation, critical educational
junctures, globally engaged workforce, integration of research and education,
and research and evaluation - appear to affect project outcomes and success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodologically, the project employs two complementary
approaches, Social Network Analysis (SNA) and case studies, to examine
institutional integration of NSF programs. SNA, a methodology that has only
recently been applied to educational issues, provides a new way to study the
interactions among individuals from disparate NSF programs within an I3
institution. The research project studies networks as they are implicit in a
wide range of social phenomena, and can provide an important perspective on the
I3 activity and the partnerships that are so central to it. The guiding
assumption in the logic of SNA applications is that the overall structure of a
network has consequences not only for its individual members, but also for the
group, community, and institutional culture. Therefore, SNA provides a tool for
describing and assessing the quality of relations among people and understanding
the pattern of connections. To create a more comprehensive picture of not only
the "what" but also the "why," the research includes case studies of I3
projects. These studies are developed from 3-day site visits to the I3 projects
by a multidisciplinary team composed of content (institutional change,
organizational development) and evaluation experts, and include key informant
interviews with individuals directly or indirectly involved with the project and
review of documents.