* 0963753
* RAPID: Ecosystem Reconstruction under Climate Change Conditions following Fire
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2012
* Robert Sinsabaugh, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 150,055.00

Research at the Sevilleta LTER site in central New Mexico is concentrated on
studies in desert grassland and shrubland communities, emphasizing biodiversity,
species interactions and climate change. Aridland ecosystems are governed by key
abiotic and biotic drivers, especially climate variability, fire, plant-microbe
interactions, nutrient dynamics, and herbivory. On 4-5 August 2009 a lightening-
caused wildfire burned approximately 3200 ha of native desert grassland,
including several key long-term experiments that evaluate the potential impact
of climate change on Chihuahuan Desert ecosystems. With this funding the
investigators will monitor the interaction of microbial populations and desert
grasses in their monsoon rainfall manipulation experiment to assess recovery
rates of plant-microbial interactions. They will relocate a flux tower in
unburned grassland and gather more detailed information on soil respiration and
CO2 efflux in burned and unburned grasslands during post-fire succession, as
well as in their nighttime warming and winter rainfall experiment. This will
provide important information related to how desert ecosystems affect greenhouse
gas emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Climate change is likely
to alter the dynamics of ecosystems globally. This research will allow the
investigators to assess system response to a type of natural disturbance, fire,
that is likely to occur more often in the future. The research takes advantage
of existing background and infrastructure to assess carbon loss and storage in a
desert ecosystem. The project will support two undergraduate students from UNM,
a minority serving institution, as well as provide a one-year research
assistantship to a UNM graduate student. In addition, participants in this
research include two faculty members at non-PhD granting institutions (Jose
Herrera at Truman State University and Andrea Porras-Alfaro at Western Illinois
University).