* 0963418
* The 'Effects' of Civil Rights Policy: A Comparative Analysis of Voting Rights, Equal Employment, and Fair Housing Legislation
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Nicholas Pedriana, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 04/30/2012
* USD 42,104.00

Between 1964 and 1968, Congress enacted three far-reaching civil rights statutes
banning racial discrimination in voting, employment, and housing. Not all were
equally effective, however. Civil rights policy scholars concur that voting
rights was by far the most successful of the three; that fair housing policy was
a general failure; and that equal employment policy achieved a moderate level of
effectiveness. This proposal is thus motivated by a straightforward research
question: why did each of these major civil rights laws experience such
divergent outcomes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator proposes to answer
this question by conducting a comparative analysis of voting rights, equal
employment, and fair housing enforcement. Challenging conventional political
institutional theories of civil rights policy outcomes, the author proposes a
law-centered explanation derived from on-going disputes within law and society
scholarship. The author argues that how the text of each statute was legally
constructed and interpreted by lawmakers, agency administrators, and federal
courts holds the key to understanding why some civil rights policies did
better/worse than others. Specifically, the author proposes the following core
hypothesis: divergent outcomes in voting rights, equal employment, and fair
housing policy can be explained by the extent to which each policy incorporated
and codified the group-centered "effects test" for defining, proving, and
remedying unlawful discrimination. The group-centered effects test focuses on
systemic group disadvantage rather than individual complaints, discriminatory
consequences rather than discriminatory intent, and substantive group results
rather than formal procedural justice. The data will consist predominantly of
primary historical documents - both governmental and nongovernmental - to be
collected at various archives in the Washington, D.C. area. The data will be
analyzed with the use of analytic narrative to guide empirical and theoretical
comparisons across these three cases of civil rights policy
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will illuminate the connection
between legislative intent and legislative effects. The findings will contribute
to a better understanding of how the design of legislation matters for insuring
implementation that achieves the legislative purpose.