* 0963120
* Renovation of Lawrence Tech's Next-Generation Life Sciences Research Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Hsiao-Ping Moore, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,342,276.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award will provide funds to renovate research laboratories in the Science
Building of Lawrence Technological University, which was founded in 1932. Its
College of Arts and Sciences was established in 1967. This project involves the
renovation of laboratories that have not been altered or upgraded since their
original construction in the late 1960s. The ARI project includes the complete
renovation of three existing research laboratories. The renovations will
transform Lawrence Tech's antiquated Life Sciences Research Laboratories (LSRL)
into a state-of-the-art research facility that promotes research and research
training activities in the Metro Detroit Area. The LSRL constitute a shared
facility that supports faculty and student research from an interdisciplinary
Life Sciences Group encompassing five academic departments and two colleges at
Lawrence Tech. It also supports collaborative research with a myriad of Michigan
institutions including several major public universities, medical schools,
hospitals, and life sciences companies. A number of Lawrence Tech's outreach
programs utilize this facility for research training purposes involving a
diverse array of community colleges, high schools, and education-based non-
profit organizations, including the highly successful University High School -
Lawrence Technological University (UHS/LTU) partnership and the Detroit Area
Pre-College Engineering Program (DAPCEP).