* 0963529
* Modernization of Research Laboratory Space at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Jennifer Reithel, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,865,381.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the renovation of
an existing biological field station through the construction of a new
laboratory building to replace the facilities currently provided by two existing
buildings, the Murray Lab, a pre-fabricated log structure, and the Willey Lab.
It will be more cost-effective to construct a replacement building than to
refurbish the existing structures. The new building will provide the same amount
of research space as is present in the two buildings being
replaced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rocky Mountain Biological Lab is an
independent, non-profit research organization that mainly consists of a
biological field station in Gothic, Colorado. RMBL manages 1300 acres of private
land and has a permit for scientists to work in the millions of acres of
adjacent public lands. In 2009, 33 tenure-track scientists (or equivalent), four
postdoctoral scientists, 18 graduate students, one technician, three teachers,
and 60 undergraduate researchers used the laboratory spaces that will be
upgraded by this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examples of the type of research
projects that will benefit from the renovation include: the role in cloud
formation of aerosols emitted directly and indirectly by plants; how abiotic and
biotic factors, such as nitrogen cycling in soils, interact to affect ecosystem
structure and function and how natural disturbances and anthropogenic impacts
such as climate change, species invasions, and herbivory shape these
interactions; studies of biological responses to climate change, such as how
plant and animal phenology, abundance, and climate are interrelated at a single
site, whether the relationship between plant flowering dates and snowmelt is
changing over time, and how montane communities respond to climate change;
whether endosymbionts (fungi) increase host (non-native grass species) abundance
and the mechanisms by which they affect host abundance; and the degree to which
the diatom Didymosphenia geminata, which is blooming around the world, is
causing a regime shift in the ecosystem structure and functioning of
streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facility to be renovated provides research
infrastructure that supports scientists from a diverse range of institutions.
Its research season provides research training for a significant number of
undergraduate and graduate students. RMBL has a strong relationship with an
Hispanic-serving community college that helps bring community college students
into RMBL programs.