* 0963297
* Renovation of Interdisciplinary Labs
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Benjamin Rusiloski, Delaware Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2012
* USD 707,569.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will renovate three science laboratories in the Mandell Science
Building on the Delaware Valley College campus to provide an Integrated
Multidisciplinary Science Education and Research Facility. The new facility will
provide modern research and research training space for the chemistry and
biology departments as well as provide a laboratory dedicated to
interdisciplinary science that will involve several of the College's other
science departments. The project will support student research projects that
will be undertaken in the new Student Research course, which is designed to
provide meaningful research experiences for the College's primarily
undergraduate student population and complement the existing Employment Program
internships. The three laboratories will be renovated to include new casework,
flooring, lighting, plumbing, fume hoods, and safety equipment along with
updated computer connectivity. The chemistry and biology departments will each
occupy a renovated laboratory in the facility to use for discipline-focused
research and for incubation of interdisciplinary research that will then be
allocated dedicated research space in the interdisciplinary research laboratory.
The chemistry and biology labs will also support research training of
undergraduates, many of whom will pursue their research ideas further in the
Student Research course with a faculty advisor. The facility will enable an
array of opportunities for the faculty and students to collaborate on research
questions including studies of organic electronic materials, model-based design
and synthesis of oligionucleotides for nanoscale circuits, mechanisms of biomass
accumulation in plants, and the phylogeny of Protura and how they are related to
other soil arthropod groups. The renovated laboratories will significantly
improve the quality of and access to undergraduate research opportunities at
Delaware Valley College. Students conducting research in the facility will be
better prepared to make the transition to graduate schools or to employment in
research-related jobs. The region's biotechnology, pharmaceutical, and chemical
industries already rely on the College for some of their technology workforce.
The project will provide the science faculty members with the opportunity to
expand their research activities and thus simulate more student interest in the
sciences in general. Because of the demographics of the College's student body,
nearly two-thirds of those students impacted will be women.