* 0963289
* Renovation of Science Research Facilities at Indiana State University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Eric Glendening, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,503,562.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Indiana State University is a RUI-eligible institution highly engaged in
undergraduate research training. This award will provide funds to the renovation
of research laboratory space in the Science Building at Indiana State University
in support of their undergraduate and graduate research programs in biology,
chemistry, and geology. The 50-year-old Science Building houses the University's
programs in the natural sciences, including biology, chemistry, geology,
physics, and science education. The project will renovate seven research labs
that support graduate and/or undergraduate research in organic chemistry and
pharmacology, geochemistry, dendrochronology, paleoceanography, molecular
ecology, and evolutionary physiology. Several of the labs present safety
concerns by contemporary standards due to poor laboratory layout, lack of
sufficient and appropriate storage, inadequate air flow in antiquated fume
hoods, and missing safety features, such as eyewashes and showers. Plans for
renovating these laboratories include the following: (i) new ceilings, floors,
recessed doorways, and repair of walls with some reconfiguration; (ii) new
casework, bench tops, and shelving; (iii) installation of fixed laboratory
equipment and fume hoods; (iv) installation of ADA-compliant bench space; (v)
new electrical services and plumbing; (vi) improved temperature control and
exhaust; and (vii) new safety features including eyewashes and showers. The two
chemistry labs targeted for renovation include an organic chemistry research lab
that will be reconfigured to provide additional organic chemistry research space
and space for biochemistry. Geology lab renovations will create two rooms that
separately support wood and rock processing activities. The four rooms of the
Geochemistry Lab will be reconfigured as three rooms with a new doorway. Lastly
one additional room on the first floor will be renovated to be the
Paleoceanography Laboratory. There are the two labs targeted for renovation on
the second floor: the Molecular Ecology Lab and the Ecological and Evolutionary
Physiology Lab. These renovations will support a highly productive faculty and
significant undergraduate research programs.