* 0963469
* The College of Charleston Center for Social Science Research
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Thomas Ross, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will renovate and expand existing research space in the Bell
Building on the campus of the College of Charleston to create a new Center for
Social Science Research (CSSR). The new center will be a state-of-the art space
designed to facilitate collaborative research and research training in many of
the College's research programs in the social sciences, including biological
anthropology, archaeology, cultural anthropology, cognitive science, human
development, and neuropsychology. The project will relocate several existing,
but inadequate, social science research laboratories to the Bell Building to be
part of the Center for Social Science Research - in particular, archaeology and
biological anthropology laboratories as well as several psychological research
labs that are currently located in former private homes throughout the campus.
Within the CSSR, the psychological research spaces will include cognitive
testing labs, psychology testing labs, data collection rooms, and individual
testing rooms. The anthropological research spaces will include a renovated
cultural anthropology lab, a relocated archaeology wet lab to be shared with the
biological anthropology research program, and a computer lab for data analysis
to be shared with the psychology programs. The CSSR will providee an array of
opportunities for the faculty and students to collaborate on research questions
in the social sciences ranging from the role that the cognitive mechanisms of
executive control and automaticity play in decision-making and memory, to the
mechanisms involved in relational learning, behavioral fluency, and behavioral
history (e.g. resurgence), to the function of stone tools and their relationship
in space in reconstructing the principal economic activities in past societies.
The Center will improve the quality and capacity of and access to the social
science research infrastructure at the College and increase its impact on the
nation's social science research enterprise. Undergraduate and graduate students
will have additional research training opportunities available to them,
including an array of interdisciplinary research projects. Broader participation
in social science research by the local and regional communities is expected
because the social science research laboratories will be centralized in a
building that is accessible to persons with disabilities and adjacent to a large
parking garage.