* 0963247
* Building on the past, for the future: research laboratories for the Paleontological Research Institution
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2012
* Warren Allmon, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The award will support renovation of four research spaces at
the Paleontological Research Institution (PRI) to create a set of modern,
functional, adaptable, and safe shared laboratories conducive to the type of
research supported by PRI's collections, library, and other research resources.
The renovations will position PRI to leverage its collections, research, and
outreach strengths in 21st Century paleobiology, by building basic
infrastructure to support current research and allow PRI to sustain and advance
its level of cutting-edge, fundable research into the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratories to be renovated include: BioLab which will be
the PRI 'clean lab' for microscope work (including dissection, microfossil
processing, sorting bulk samples, etc.); WetLab (= Aquarium Lab) which will be
the PRI 'live room' for the maintenance of living aquatic invertebrates (no
vertebrates, aquatic or terrestrial, will be maintained under the present
configuration); PaleoLab which will be the PRI 'dirty lab' for processing field
collections and rough specimen preparation; and PrepLab which will be dedicated
to fine specimen preparation, using rotary tools and air abrasion (mini-sand
blasting), and for specimen molding and casting. This lab also serves as a
museum exhibition, in that all research activities that occur here are in full
view of the visiting public through three large windows into the Museum
gallery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all research at PRI has outreach components
built into it. PRI has an outstanding and ambitious outreach program that makes
extensive use of its specimen collections to help K-12, public, and college
audiences better understand the nature of the historical sciences. The
laboratory renovations will allow PRI to greatly improve and expand upon
existing programs that reach the public, school groups, teachers, and others.
The renovations will facilitate bringing Museum visitors 'into the lab' through
interactive specimen preparation. PRI will also document laboratory activities
with on-going research using in-house technology such as videography to document
lab activities, for use in public exhibits, teacher professional development
resources, and online virtual exhibits.