* 0963095
* ARI: Enhancing MREN Optical Communications Infrastructure for e-Science
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Joe Mambretti, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,374,132.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will renovate part of the
Metropolitan Research and Education Network (MREN). It will provide gateways to
forthcoming, next-generation national and international research and education
networks and also provide access to customizable services, such as dynamically
configurable circuits, for individual research groups. The renovated network
infrastructure will support switching for all major high-end network services.
Core services will, in general, go directly to photonic interfaces, which will
provide a high-capacity, high-performance transport. The primary switch will
also support alien waves for interoperability with optics implemented within
other research networks that are based on optical transport.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide infrastructure support for network research,
for experimentation with cloud services and other forms of distributed
computing, and for large-scale, data-intensive research activities. The latter
projects either generate large amounts of data, aggregate large amounts of data,
or integrate data from diverse sources. Examples of research fields affected,
include high-energy physics, astronomy and astrophysics, climate science,
fusion, materials science, proteomics and metabolomics, chemistry, scientific
visualization, and, more generally, research that makes use of national-scale
high-performance computing and high-throughput computing resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing infrastructure for research, the project will
be to help ensure that universities in the upper Midwest have access to advanced
cyberinfrastructure. In addition to basic research, the networking resources
will support collaboration between researchers over continental and global
distances. They will also support educational activities such as distance
learning.