* 0963449
* Renovating Mid-Atlantic Crossroads Network Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2010,01/31/2013
* D. Peter O'Neil, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 01/31/2013
* USD 1,442,919.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a renovation of
Research and Education metro network facilities operated by the Mid-Atlantic
Crossroads (MAX), augmenting current 10 Gigabit per second (Gb/s) optical
transport and Ethernet switch capabilities with 100Gb/s technology. MAX proposes
to procure three dense wave division multiplexing (DWDM) systems with 100Gb/s
transponders. Two will link nodes in McLean, Virginia and College Park, Maryland
to a 100 Gigabit Ethernet switch at the Next Generation Internet eXchange-East
facility. The third will initially be setup and configured for testing in the
MAX machine room laboratory. Once an additional pair of fibers has been built
out between College Park and Baltimore in early 2011, this node will be
installed in a Baltimore Point of Presence in support of the research and
education efforts of institutions in the Baltimore area.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide infrastructure support for network research
and for large-scale, data-intensive research activities. The latter projects
either generate large amounts of data, aggregate large amounts of data, or
integrate data from diverse sources. Examples of research fields affected
include Earth and environmental science, transportation, linguistics, various
computer science topics such as networking, imaging, data curation, and
visualization, computational public health epidemiology, and computational
research in areas such as computational fluid dynamics, simulations of materials
properties, fluid-structure interactions in complex biological systems, direct
and large-eddy simulations of turbulence, aero-acoustics, combustion, reacting
flows, micro-fluidics, and thermodynamic modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
providing infrastructure for research, the project will enable undergraduate and
graduate faculty in the region to strengthen and expand their collaborations
with colleagues throughout the region, and the world, on cutting-edge research
and education projects.