* 0963923
* Formal Power Series and Algebraic Combinatorics: An International Combinatorics Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Matthias Beck, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2011
* USD 49,430.00

In August 2010, the twenty-second international conference Formal Power Series
and Algebraic Combinatorics (FPSAC) will be held at San Francisco State
University. The unique and continuing success of the annual FPSAC conferences
stems in part from their considerable interdisciplinary breadth - linking
leading researchers in combinatorial mathematics with strong researchers in
allied fields drawn from pure and applied mathematics, theoretical computer
science, physics, and biology. The principal mathematical topics featured in
FPSAC 2010 will be: algebraic, geometric, and enumerative combinatorics, and
their relations to other areas such as algebraic geometry, commutative algebra,
representation theory, K-theory, geometric group theory, and symplectic
geometry. There will be nine plenary lectures, and approximately 30 contributed
talks and 40 poster presentations selected through a strict refereeing
procedure. After a second round of refereeing, a special issue devoted to the
conference proceedings will be published.

A distinguishing characteristic of FPSAC conferences is the concerted effort to
recognize and encourage outstanding young scientists. At least one plenary
speaker is an "emerging star," and talented young researchers are well
represented among the speakers selected for contributed talks. Another special
feature of the FPSAC conferences is a continued tradition of inclusiveness. The
conference seeks to draw substantial participation from underrepresented groups.
Furthermore, English, French, and Spanish have been designated as offcial
languages for FPSAC 2010 to promote a diverse pool of participants. About 200
participants from all over the world are expected. Attendance at this conference
will be exceptionally valuable for graduate students and junior researchers. The
Bay Area has a long history of research in discrete mathematics, and San
Francisco State University has a strong, internationally recognized
combinatorics group. FPSAC 2010 promises to be an excellent opportunity for
young researchers to make both domestic and international contacts that are
likely to be of great value in developing their careers.