* 0963904
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research:  Geometric Network Analysis Tools:  Algorithmic Methods for Identifying Structure in Large Informatics Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Satish Rao, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 06/30/2013
* USD 418,011.00

There has been an enormous amount of work in recent years
directed&lt;br/&gt;toward understanding the structural and dynamical properties
of&lt;br/&gt;"informatics graphs" or "complex networks." Most of this work has
been&lt;br/&gt;on small to medium-sized networks, and it has led to an
improved&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the properties of networks arising in many
graph&lt;br/&gt;mining applications. In spite of this, formulating appropriate
models&lt;br/&gt;for and answering even basic questions about larger
informatics&lt;br/&gt;graphs remains challenging. For instance, recent work has
shown that&lt;br/&gt;dynamic properties as well as basic structural properties
of large&lt;br/&gt;informatics graphs are not reproduced even qualitatively by
popular&lt;br/&gt;network generative models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will use traditional and recently-developed&lt;br/&gt;approximation
algorithms for the graph partitioning problem as&lt;br/&gt;"experimental probes"
of large informatics graphs in order to&lt;br/&gt;characterize in a more robust
and scalable manner the structural and&lt;br/&gt;dynamic properties of very
large informatics graphs. This will&lt;br/&gt;include extending and implementing
recently-developed algorithms such&lt;br/&gt;as "local" spectral methods and
algorithms that intuitively&lt;br/&gt;"interpolate" between spectral and flow-
based methods, as well as&lt;br/&gt;revisiting in light of new applications
traditional methods such as&lt;br/&gt;the global spectral method and ideas
underlying the popular package&lt;br/&gt;Metis. A central goal will be to
provide the analyst with tools that&lt;br/&gt;have sufficient algorithmic and
statistical flexibility to&lt;br/&gt;characterize the local and global
structures of large networks in a&lt;br/&gt;rich and robust
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of the proposed work lies in
extending recent&lt;br/&gt;theoretical and algorithmic developments and applying
them to very&lt;br/&gt;real-world problems. The Broader Impact of the project
lies in&lt;br/&gt;enhancing interdisciplinary education at Berkeley and Stanford
and&lt;br/&gt;more generally. This will involve the organization of meetings
and&lt;br/&gt;courses that will include the opportunity for research
projects,&lt;br/&gt;including by students from underrepresented groups, that
focus on&lt;br/&gt;bridging theoretical methods and real-world applications.
For&lt;br/&gt;further information see the project web page:&lt;br/&gt;URL:
http://cs.stanford.edu/people/mmahoney/graphmining/