* 0963223
* Department of Chemistry Laboratory Renovation in Support of Faculty-Student Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Quang Shen, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 08/31/2013
* USD 795,561.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to renovate
laboratory space in Wynn Hall at Colgate University. Wynn Hall has previously
been used for teaching and research. The proposed renovation will create two
private biochemical research laboratories and a shared biochemistry/molecular
biology facility to be used for research and research training. In addition, a
shared computer modeling and simulation facility and a new laser laboratory are
being proposed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five faculty members, one postdoc, and
numerous undergraduate students will conduct research in the proposed facility
on a variety of biochemical topics, including structural and functional studies
of catalysis and allostery in carbonic anhydrase; chemical modification of
photosynthetic proteins; C-linked glycopeptide synthesis and conformer
evaluation; gas phase conformation of six-membered rings; and spectroscopy,
structure, and dynamics of model tropospheric aerosol particle surfaces. The PIs
have a strong publication record including undergraduate students in the author
lists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance infrastructure for research
and in particular collaborative projects between students and faculty. The newly
revised curriculum led to an increased number of majors, and the remodeled
facilities will serve as a motivator to attract students to chemistry.