* 0963485
* Revitalization of the SJC Chemistry Instrumentation Laboratory
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Eric Miller, San Juan College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will revitalize the
chemistry laboratory at the San Juan College (SJC) located in Farmington, New
Mexico. The project includes the creation of a clean room complete with laminar
flow hoods for culturing of cells, installation of two new fume hoods and
refurbishment of the instrumentation lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laboratory
will be used for research activities and research training. The new capabilities
will greatly enhance the research capacity of the SJC Chemistry Instrumentation
Laboratory. More specifically, the new capabilities will enable rapid progress
on research into silicon microsphere-terminated conducting polymers for neural
interfaces, funded through the New Mexico INBRE program. The goal of this
research is to extend room-temperature silicon work to biomaterials
applications. The project is organized into four thrust areas: polymer growth,
electrodeposition of silicon onto conducting polymer, patterning structures, and
cell attachment and bioactivity. The laminar flow hoods will allow for cell
culturing as well as patterning microstructures. The hoods and clean area will
allow a high level of contamination control needed for the research that will be
done at SJC. In addition, the laboratory will have increased capacity to perform
a variety of research activities including biological and chemical
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enhanced laboratory will provide access to
the state-of-the art research facility and thus, enhanced research experiences
for undergraduate students, many of who are from underrepresented minority
groups. San Juan College has the fifth-highest Native American enrollment among
all universities and colleges (including tribal colleges) in the United States,
and is the fourth highest-ranked two-year institution for awarding Associate
Degrees to Native American students. The student body is comprised of 26% Native
American students, 13% Hispanic students and 61% other ethnic groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, this project will enhance the expertise of the
faculty at a two-year college while enhancing the quality of future scientists
and engineers in the transfer pipeline.