* 0963988
* IDBR: Development of CytoIQ, an Adaptive Cytometer to Measure the Noisy of Dynamics of Gne Expression in Individual Live Cells
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2012
* Jean Peccoud, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 05/31/2012
* USD 176,373.00

The Virginia Bioinformatics Institute at Virginia Tech is awarded a grant to
develop Cyto.IQ, an adaptive imaging system specifically designed to
characterize the noisy dynamics of gene expression and other molecular
interactions in individual live cells. Cyto.IQ analyzes microscopic images on
the fly to produce statistical plots and other quantitative indicators capturing
important parameters of the cell physiology. The instrument has the capability
to optimize the frequency of image acquisition and the total number of images
taken using machine learning algorithms. It finds an optimal tradeoff between
the cost of an experiment and the information it generates using a priori
knowledge of the expected gene expression dynamics and previously acquired data.
The control software is able to determine what cells to observe and when to
observe them to ensure a fast convergence of statistical estimators while
minimizing adverse effects of light exposure, and the overall duration of the
experiment. &lt;br/&gt;Cyto.IQ is specifically designed to meet the needs of
systems biologists, bioengineers, or biophysicists who are developing
quantitative models of gene networks. Due to the noise affecting gene expression
mechanisms, this rapidly growing community of users needs an instrument to
observe the state of many individual cells over time. Current methods used to
extract this type of data out of time-series of images collected using standard
imaging platforms are inherently inefficient. They represent a major obstacle to
the refinement of our understanding of the dynamics of cellular processes.
Cyto.IQ increases the productivity of scientists working in this field by
reducing the time it takes to perform an experiment and the number of
experiments needed to collect suitable data sets. &lt;br/&gt;The adaptive
control software is open source and available from www.cytoiq.org.