* 0963212
* Stanford Summer Institute in Political Psychology 2010-2012
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Jon Krosnick, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2014
* USD 310,165.00

Political psychology is a thriving field of inquiry with roots in political
science and connections to a range of other social sciences. Political
psychologists attempt to understand the psychological underpinnings, roots, and
consequences of political behavior. Some of this work attempts to understand
political phenomena by applying and enhancing theories developed through
research done in psychological laboratories. Findings regarding mediation and
moderation of real-world effects have often led to extensions and revisions of
political and psychological theories. Other political psychology involves the
development of completely new theory to provide psychological accounts of
political phenomena, thus contributing to basic understanding of how the mind
works in the important context of politics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In light of
the vitality of the field and growing graduate student interest, the idea of
establishing a summer training institute in political psychology was developed.
The Summer Institute in Political Psychology (SIPP) is a 3-week program designed
to advance the research capabilities of graduate students from around the world
studying political science, psychology, and other social sciences. The Summer
Institute has aimed to enrich the graduate training of participants by offering
a broad and intensified complement to the classroom training that is usually
available at graduate institutions. By bringing together a large set of faculty
offering lectures on a diverse set of topics, SIPP exposed graduate students to
(1) a broad range of research literature in political psychology, (b) the
research styles and approaches of an array of scholars working in political
psychology, and (c) training in the varied set of research methods employed by
political psychologists, as well as (d) creating inter-disciplinary networks
among the participants to support their on-going research efforts and cement
their long-term commitments to social science scholarship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the best ways to enhance research productivity in
political psychology over the long term is to recruit and train talented,
energetic, and motivated cohorts of scholars to join the field. SIPP does just
this and thus enhances the vitality of political psychology's contributions to
social science literatures.