* 0963082
* Renovation of the Natural Sciences Research Facility
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,09/30/2013
* John de Banzie, Northeastern State University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 09/30/2013
* USD 623,791.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from the Academic Research
Infrastructure Program will be used to renovate the Natural Science Research
Facility (NSRF) at Northeastern State University. The NSRF is an approximately
2,500 square foot building located 200 yards from the main science building on
the NSU Tahlequah campus. The renovation will repair structural damage, expand
the laboratory space and update benches and cabinetry. The walls defining the
conference room and office spaces will be removed to produce a large, open-
laboratory space. Within the expanded laboratory space, four fume hoods and four
large benches with appropriate utilities will be installed. The instrument and
storage rooms will be renovated to accommodate shared instruments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this project will enhance
understanding in several important areas including energy storage devices,
marine and freshwater ecosystems, and cellular interactions during infection
processes. The renovated facilities will increase these researchers' rate of
progress and facilitate collaboration. Undergraduate students will benefit by
contributing to the research projects, including Native American students who
comprise 28% of the student body.