* 0963175
* The Thermal Biology Institute Research and Education Facility Renovation
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,815,163.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Thermal Biology Institute (TBI) has
been in existence for approximately ten years and focused on extremophile
research primarily related to the hot spring environments of Yellowstone
National Park. TBI is a multidisciplinary research center with faculty (~twenty)
spread across three colleges and seven departments at MSU as such our multi-
investigator research and training facility located on the 6th floor of MSU's
Leon Johnson Hall is of paramount importance for facilitating and maintaining
multi-investigator research projects within the center. The renovation of the
main 6th floor laboratory space will include: replacement of flooring, lighting,
ductwork, cabinets, fume hoods, door frames and window sealant; refurbishment of
electrical, plumbing, heating, cooling, air-handling, hood ventilation and
temperature control systems; removal of asbestos; reconfiguration of lab benches
&amp; spaces; installation of a fire sprinkler system and network wiring. The
renovation of the cold room will include replacing this room with a pre-
manufactured cold room to improve working conditions (light and space) and
efficiency. A new temperature controlled computer server room will house
existing computers that support the genomics and informatics activities of the
institute. TBI is home to several multi-investigator NSF supported programs
including an Integrated Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT)
program in Geobiological Systems, a Research Coordination Network on Yellowstone
data collection and data sharing, several past and current Microbiology
Observatory project on Yellowstone microbiology. TBI researchers have a long
track record in training undergraduates and have involved over seventy
undergraduates in various research projects over the past five years with a
number of those supported by NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
program. In addition, TBI has a long tradition of successful outreach and
communicating science to public audiences and has made significant impacts in
formal and informal education using the engaging living laboratory of
Yellowstone National Park as tool to help people understand and see the value of
science.