* 0963459
* Regional Network Renovation: Upgrading the 3ROX Virtual Research Environment
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Gwendolyn Huntoon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,535,012.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will renovate the regional
research and education network facilities operated by the Three Rivers Optical
Exchange (3ROX), a small regional network serving research institutions in
Pennsylvania and West Virginia. 3ROX connects the campus networks of the major
universities in the region, as well as educational organizations such as local
colleges, school districts and museums. Current 3ROX participants include
Carnegie Mellon University, the Pennsylvania State University, the Pittsburgh
Supercomputing Center, the University of Pittsburgh, Waynesburg University and
West Virginia University, as well as intermediate units serving a total of 188
school districts in western and central Pennsylvania, including the Pittsburgh
Public School District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3ROX will expand the existing
optical network to support up to 40 separate waves and will incorporate an
additional node into the existing three-node ring. The renovation will enable
3ROX to support the use of 100 Gigabit Ethernet circuits and make waves and
virtual circuits available on request to research projects that have a temporary
need for them. The renovation includes the enhancement of the existing
management control plane and installation of a router capable of supporting 100
Gigabit Ethernet connections to the wider R&amp;E network. These enhancements
will enable users that connect to 3ROX to take advantage of the more advanced
services being provided by the national backbone research and education
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some examples of research activities that are
likely to benefit from the network connection are: high-energy physics research,
including detector development for the Large Hadron Collider, the development of
the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope project, molecular and materials simulation,
seismology and earthquake engineering, and numerous projects that use the
storage and computation capabilities of the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center.
Also benefiting will be those computer scientists in the universities served by
3ROX who use national and international virtual network research test beds such
as PlanetLab, OpenFlow and Emulab. New activities that will benefit from these
upgrades include faster and more reliable access to large scientific datasets,
major computer science research initiatives such as GENI and research on new
network protocols and control technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional
impacts of the 3ROX regional network include: the provision of local, regional
and national research and education connectivity to over 188 school districts in
western and central Pennsylvania, containing over 800 individual schools with
almost 400,000 students and 28,000 teachers; the distribution over the network,
to K-12 schools, of software modules authored at the National Resource for
Biomedical Supercomputing that dynamically illustrate commonly taught concepts
and images from static textbooks and include computer simulations that address
these concepts on a quantitative level; the provision of network access to
external science, engineering and technology resources for the Pittsburgh
Science and Technology Academy, a recently-opened, special focus school within
the Pittsburgh Public School System that is dedicated to students who are
interested in science, technology, engineering and mathematics; and a program
entitled Computation and Science for Teachers for high school science teachers
in western Pennsylvania to prepare them to become leaders in the effective use
of modeling and simulation tools in the classroom.