* 0963396
* Infrastructure for Interdisciplinary Research in Earth and Space Science at the Carnegie Institution
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Linda Elkins-Tanton, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,093,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The award will provide funds for infrastructure renovations
needed to house new analytical and computational instrumentation for
interdisciplinary research in the Earth and space sciences. The new
infrastructure will enable Carnegie Institution researchers, together with a
large community of visiting scientists, to pursue more effectively a broad sweep
of fundamental research addressing the origin and evolution of stellar and
planetary systems, the geochemical cycles of planetary volatiles, the evolution
and dynamics of the Earth?s interior and surface, Earth?s energy resources, the
origins of life, and the coevolution of the geo- and biospheres. The new
infrastructure will support analytical micro- and nanocharacterization and
imaging laboratories, together with associated sample preparation facilities,
including a focused ion beam workstation, a transmission electron microscope,
X-ray nanoscopes, an ultramicrotome, an ion mill, optical microscopes, and
micromanipulators. Our objective is to collocate novel new instruments with
existing instruments (that are currently in deficient lab facilities) into a
unique cross-disciplinary research laboratory targeted for advances in planetary
and solid-Earth science, astrobiology, studies of deep carbon reservoirs on
Earth, and materials science problems related to energy. Renovation of an
existing computational laboratory is needed to accommodate large clusters of
multi-core processors, critical for future theoretical research in astrophysics,
computational seismology, geodynamics, and molecular dynamics. This renovation
will mesh with a campus-wide installation of a much faster (up to 10 Gb/s)
internal network to support the growing data bandwidth needs of laboratory and
theoretical research. Space targeted for renovation meets strict electromagnetic
field and vibration requirements to house even the most sensitive state-of-the-
art microanalytical instrumentation, but lacks adequate temperature control and
power. Together with institutional contributions, NSF support will revitalize
this otherwise outmoded space, with updated environmental controls that will
allow full-time operation, additional electrical power, and instrument-specific
utilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovated facility will serve as a unique
research center for the broad scientific community. The new infrastructure will
allow the installation of new and existing analytical instruments that will
enable precise and sensitive characterization of a broad range of Earth, space,
and technological materials. It will be a user-friendly facility that will be
frequented annually by more than 100 scientists, including Carnegie staff,
postdoctoral fellows, visiting scientists, graduate students, and high school
and undergraduate interns. Benefits of the new facility will also extend to the
international mineral physics and high-pressure communities through the NSF
COMPRES consortium and two DOE centers headquartered on the Carnegie Institution
campus and serving 24 partner universities across the country, and to
researchers and students from other institutions in the region. The new facility
will also directly benefit the Deep Carbon Observatory, a Carnegie-based
consortium sponsored by the Sloan Foundation, planned to involve 400
investigators at 80 institutions in 24 countries. The upgraded facility will
have significant impact on the research programs in many fields, including
geochemistry, experimental petrology and geophysics, cosmochemistry, high-
pressure physics and mineral physics, diamond technology, geobiology, molecular
evolution, extrasolar planets, and astrobiology, thereby promoting
interdisciplinary science and collaborations, and providing unique new
educational opportunities for students from high school to postdoctoral levels.