* 0963014
* Climate Control of Eaton/Lansing Research and Research Training Labs
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Christine R. deDenus, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,087,832.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This proposal seeks funding to extend an existing chilled water loop to the
Eaton/Lansing science complex at Hobart and William Smith (HWS) Colleges. The
complex serves 35 research laboratories, 5 research and teaching laboratories,
and related support space. Air handling for each space will be integrated into
the campus-wide HVAC control system. Constructed in 1954, the building was not
designed for summer research and originally did not contain dedicated research
spaces. Since the facility was opened, laboratory climate control was addressed
on an ad hoc basis and incorporated window-mounted A/C units. As a result, the
climate control infrastructure is inadequate to meet the needs of research-
active faculty and their students at this primarily-undergraduate
institution.The faculty of HWS, and in particular the most recently hired
faculty, run federally and privately supported research programs. Adequate
research facilities will enable more productive (uninterrupted) research,
especially with students, and help to attract research active new hires.

Research to be undertaken in the renovated facility will include utilizing
zooplankton to resolve questions concerning species establishment and community
composition; developing new molecular wire candidates incorporating materials
that may be used to replace current silicone chip technology; and researching
topics of thermal noise and higher-order statistical noise in gravity wave
detectors.

The project will enhance infrastructure for research. The renovation will
improve research facilities with a positive effect on research productivity.
Heightened research productivity is expected to increase the number of students
involved as well as to lengthen the duration of the summer research program.
Instrumentation is expected to operate more reliably in a stable environment,
thus also increasing research productivity and competitiveness.