* 0963058
* IRNC: ProNet: GLORIAD
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Donald Riley, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Thompson
* 04/30/2016
* USD 5,604,251.00

Proposal Summary

The GLORIAD project will include cooperative partnerships with its longstanding
partners in Russia (Kurchatov Institute), Korea (KISTI), China (Chinese Academy
of Sciences), the Netherlands (SurFnet), the Nordic countries (NORDUnet and
ICELINK), Canada (CANARIE), and Hong Kong (HKOEP). In addition, it develops new
partnerships with Egypt (ENSTINet and TEGROUP), India (Tata and the National
Knowledge Network), Singapore (SINGAREN), and Vietnam (VinAREN), and further
cooperation with STARLight, TRANSPAC, National Lambda Rail (NLR), and Internet2.
Numerous other research and education networks will be connected in Southeast
Asia, Africa, Middle East, Central Asia, and the Caucasus region through the
development of open, optical network exchanges in these locations. Expanding the
US-China network capacity and providing hybrid, dynamically provisioned services
enables a new range of advanced applications, It furthers US-Nordic partnership
in cyberinfrastructure development, connects scientifically vital polar parts of
the globe that are not yet connected, and provides a new possibility for
furtherance of US-Russia science collaboration. GLORIAD will also explore and
create new opportunities for network development in Africa.

GLORIAD will demonstrate proactive US leadership in cyberinfrastructure by
extending US reach to global scientific communities as it builds a more open,
decentralized global network architecture for science and education. This
project builds on network measurement, monitoring, and security tools that focus
directly on secure networking and on improving individual user performance. It
furthers GLORIADs program to create a standards-based, open-source,
decentralized method of network operations, the distributed virtual network
operations center (dvNOC), and to enable a new approach to governance and
management of cyberinfrastructure.

Intellectual Merit The GLORIAD project advances cyberinfrastructure services and
metrics, broadens the global community working on measuring and mitigating
customer-based infrastructure performance, and furthers the model of
distributed, decentralized management of cyberinfrastructure resources.
Additional connectivity and bandwidth allows greater access to cutting edge
research in the US, Egypt, South East Asia, Central Asia, Caucasus, Africa, and
Muslim-majority countries. It advances research in pragmatic network deployments
and operations. The extension of performance tools will have the potential to
strongly impact research and education network deployments.

Broader Impact GLORIAD?s broadest impact lies in contributions as an
infrastructure for research and education. The project will foster
collaborations among disciplines and institutions. The network provides
unprecedented bandwidth and dedicated services for US researchers to collaborate
with counterparts in India, Hong Kong, Singapore, Egypt, Vietnam, South East
Asia, Africa, and Central Asia/Caucasus region. GLORIAD has a long track record
of fostering partnerships between public-private entities that address major
science problems and can potentially reach tens of thousands of people.

GLORIAD is committed to diversity in all activities, and aims to support US
national interests by providing network access to Muslim-majority countries and
underserved regions of the world. GLORIAD?s broad dissemination of information
will enhance scientific and technological understanding by offering tools and
information for new users. GLORIAD will bring this information to a diverse
group in various languages and levels of expertise, from expert to student to
the policy community and the general public.