* 0963776
* Conference: 2010 Visual System Development Gordon Research Conferences, 2010 at II Ciocco,in Lucca, Italy
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2011
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 05/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

The challenge to understand the molecular basis of the evolutionary origin and
development of the eye and visual system has intrigued scientists for centuries.
The eye and visual system has long been recognized as a fascinating and uniquely
informative model in which to explore how sensory structures develop. Vision is
a highly specialized sensory function that demands an exquisitely organized and
highly structured neural system, and it is this precision that creates an ideal
experimental system to uncover principles of development and evolution. The
community of scientists who study development of the eye and visual system have
come to rely on the Visual System Development GRC as a 'must attend' event that
provides a high level of information and a valuable forum for
exchange.&lt;br/&gt; The aim of the Gordon Research Conference on Visual System
Development is to bring together investigators studying the development,
disease, and the evolution of the visual system. The meeting provides an
environment that stimulates discussion and interaction across disciplines and
among students, early-career investigators and leaders in the field. The goals
of this biennial conference are to generate an understanding of common
principles that regulate visual system development in diverse species, to share
the latest and most exciting new results, and to stimulate new ideas and
collaborations that impact our understanding of eye development. In addition,
through this meeting there is an effort to apply our growing knowledge of eye
development and maturation to the fields of regeneration and stem cell biology.
Support from the NSF will help enable outstanding young scientists to attend
this high-profile international meeting, to present their research findings to
the international scientific community, and to interact with the leaders in the
field. In particular, the funds requested from NSF will be used to facilitate
participation by U.S. students and postdocs from a variety of backgrounds.