* 0963319
* Upgrade and Renovation of Drexel Microfabrication Facility (MFF)
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Kenneth Barbee, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,111,170.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the renovation
of the Drexel University Microfabrication Facility (MFF). Parts of the facility
will be renovated to the standards of Class 100 and Class 1000 clean rooms.
While the MFF houses a number of micro-fabrication and nano-fabrication
instruments acquired through recent Major Research Instrumentation awards and
other sources, the existing MFF is a low-dust environment rather than a true
cleanroom and this limits the types of research that can be done
there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovated facility will be used for research in
the areas of micro- and nanofluidics, Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems and Nano-
Electro-Mechanical Systems, bioreactors, tissue engineering, biomechanics and
biophysics, biosensors, lab-on-a-chip technology, surgical engineering,
neuroengineering, optoelectronics, solar cells and alternative energy, colloidal
suspension dynamics, and novel nanoelectronic devices, all of which require
micro- and nanofabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facility provides research
infrastructure. The facility will be used by researchers from both Drexel and
the wider Philadelphia region. The project will support the research of a number
of young faculty members from several different engineering departments. The
users of the renovated facility will include undergraduates, graduate students
and post-doctoral research associates. The MFF will be also be used in a number
of outreach programs, including training and mentoring K-12 teachers and
students from the Delaware Valley region.