* 0963925
* CIF: Medium:  Interference Alignment and the Rate-Reliability Tradeoff of Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Syed Jafar, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2015
* USD 825,115.00

Modern society is increasingly relying on wireless networks. Spectrum is the
most valuable resource in a wireless network. How to share this limited resource
among different users is one of the main challenges. When different users share
the same spectrum, their signals cause interference to each other. Therefore,
the most distinctive feature of wireless networks is the phenomenon of
interference. In this research, we place special emphasis on practical
considerations to ultimately find new ? realistic ? methods to deal with
interference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent development is the idea of
interference alignment which has shown that the capacity of wireless networks
may be significantly higher than previously believed. Since higher rates
invariably come at the cost of lower reliability, the emerging capacity results
present only half the picture. This research is motivated by the need to
complete this picture by evaluating the benefits of interference alignment
schemes on the performance of wireless networks when both rate and reliability
are of concern. The research follows three main thrusts. First, we examine the
rate-reliability tradeoff of interference alignment schemes from the traditional
coding perspective which places emphasis on low decoding complexity, usually at
the cost of a restricted notion of optimality. Second, we examine the rate-
reliability tradeoff of interference alignment schemes in the Shannon framework
which allows strong definitions of optimality, usually at the cost of unbounded
delay and complexity. These two thrusts are the stepping stones to the final
thrust to reconcile the findings from the two distinct perspectives and use the
collective insights to develop new physical layer schemes that can operate at
the frontier of the rate-reliability tradeoff.