* 0963073
* IRNC-SP: Sustainable Data-Handling and Analysis Methodologies for the IRNC Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/28/2014
* USD 731,803.00

Measurement of operational Internet infrastructure involves navigating more
complex and interconnected dimensions (logistical, financial, methodological,
technical, legal, and ethical) than measurement in most scientific disciplines.
These challenges impede the collection, coordination, curation, and sharing of
data sets to support network architectural, engineering, security, and
operations research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make three
contributions to the IRNC community's measurement efforts: hosting structured
discussions of how to most effectively share IRNC data and statistics; adapting
exiting traffic and topology measurement technologies for IRNC community needs
based on the resulting feedback; and applying two innovations in data
stewardship to IRNC measurements. The measurement software improvements will
include support for emerging IPv6 and DNSSEC, anonymization and aggregation for
privacy protection, and data formats used by the majority of the IRNC operators,
such as netflow output from routers. It will also (optionally) install, deploy,
and manage IPv6-capable active measurement nodes at each interested IRNC site.
The data stewardship contributions include: (1) experimentation with a recently
developed framework for privacy-sensitive data sharing; and (2) prototyping a
dissemination (reporting) format aimed at incenting broader participation in
globally coordinated Internet measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will help IRNC operators better understand their networks, and will advance the
quantity and quality of data available to researchers in a number of sub-
disciplines of network science. The impacts include strengthening activities in
network modeling, simulation, analysis, and theoretical research, enabling the
IRNC program to play a formative role in the emerging discipline of network
science, and enhancing NSF's leading role in sustainable stewardship of
cyberinfrastructure.