* 0963185
* Advanced CyberInfrastructure for High Performance, Data Intensive Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Alexander Szalay, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Irene D. Lombardo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,337,272.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This infrastructure project will
renovate a data center in the Bloomberg Center on the Homewood Campus of Johns
Hopkins University. The data center space will be refurbished to provide a
flexible, stable, energy efficient environment for the high density of computing
equipment needed to support research and research training in the Krieger School
of Arts and Sciences, Whiting School of Engineering and Sheridan Libraries. The
power capacity will be increased by a factor of six and the network connections
from the renovated space to the campus networking core and to Internet2 will be
increased from 1 GigE to 10 GigE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovated space will
be used to assemble and house state-of-the art equipment that will transform the
scale and types of calculations that can be performed, directly affecting
research by 36 faculty from a dozen departments. This will enable more
sophisticated calculations that will advance understanding of materials,
turbulence, astronomy, environmental science, climate, high-energy physics, and
biological systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovated data center will provide
an energy efficient facility for data intensive computing, with rapid network
access for researchers across the Homewood Campus and beyond, serving as a focal
point for interdisciplinary activities in computational science and engineering.
The ten-fold increase in the speed of the Internet2 connection will benefit
remote users of data repositories stored in the center, as well as researchers
in the Schools of Public Health and Medicine. The renovated center will provide
the space and network bandwidth needed to host databases and research programs
of broad use and interest, including the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, the U. S.
Virtual Astronomy Observatory, SkyQuery, Pan-STARRS, and the Data
Conservancy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training students to use new computational
tools and algorithms effectively will have an important impact on the nation's
industries and on research in universities and in national laboratories. The
renovated research and training facility will be central to research training
initiatives, exciting young students about possible careers in science and
engineering and aiding in recruiting a diverse pool of interested students. As
an example, students in the JHU IGERT on modeling complex systems will use the
expanded data center and the 100Teraflop Graphics Processor Laboratory, enabled
by the renovation, to implement and apply new algorithms. JHU is committed to
expanding participation in science and engineering activities, such as through
the IGERT project, which is partnering with women?s colleges and other
universities with a high percentage of students from underrepresented groups.