* 0963750
* Neural Mechanisms Underlying the Effects of Stress on Brain Cognition and Development
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Adriana Galvan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 05/31/2013
* USD 411,258.00

People are often forced to make decisions under stress. This is particularly
true during adolescence, a developmental period with significant social,
emotional and stressful changes. Increases in adolescent life stressors are
paralleled by compromised decision-making and impulse control, both of which are
subserved by brain regions that undergo significant maturation during this
developmental window. With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr.
Adriana Galvan is investigating the effects of daily stress on cognition and
brain function in adolescents and an adult comparison group. Daily stress is
monitored via a personal digital device that adolescents carry. It provides
daily measures of stress over two weeks. On a day when adolescents report a high
level of stress, and on a separate day when they report a low level of stress,
they visit the laboratory to receive a functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) brain scan. While receiving the brain scan, they perform computer games
that are designed to measure decision-making and impulse control behavior. In
addition, their stress hormone levels related to brain function are measured. By
taking this multi-method approach, Dr. Galvan is learning how daily stress
influences cognitive neurodevelopment in adolescents. She predicts that stress
will result in worse decision-making and impulse control in both adolescents and
adults. However, this effect is exaggerated in adolescents, who are even more
susceptible to the effects of high stress days.

This research can have significant implications beyond providing evidence for
the effects of stress on neurodevelopment. It can provide a broader
conceptualization of why adolescents respond differently to their environment,
and how this difference eventually influences the poor decision-making that is
characteristic of adolescence. The field is in critical need of an integrated
approach to brain-environment interactions. Further, this work will be the first
of its kind to merge daily monitoring tools together with functional brain
imaging and can, therefore, serve as a methodological template for other areas
of cognitive neuroscience, beyond developmental work. The understanding of
neural correlates of decision-making in development also provides an important
baseline for understanding impairments in this very basic cognitive process, as
manifested in a broad range of poor developmental outcomes and psychiatric
disorders, including drug addiction, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder,
anxiety, and schizophrenia, all of which have frequent onset in adolescence. In
addition, understanding the teenage brain will undoubtedly contribute to social
policy decisions that hinge on age and maturation, including the juvenile
justice system, driving laws, teenage pregnancy, and educational policies. As
such, this project has broad health and societal implications. Finally, this
research project provides training opportunities for students at the
undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral levels, and is committed to advancing
the training of students from underrepresented groups.