* 0963728
* Special meeting: Penn State - Goettingen International Summer Schools in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Juan Gil, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 03/31/2013
* USD 360,000.00

The "Penn State- Göttingen International Summer Schools in Mathematics" will be
held during Summer 2010 at Penn State University, during Summer 2011 at the
Georg-August-Universität in Göttingen, Germany, and during Summer 2012 at Penn
State University. The summer school will be scheduled for three weeks and will
have a different thematic focus each year. The first two weeks will concentrate
on educational activities, while during the third week an international research
conference will be held on the featured topic. The target audience for the
project is undergraduate and beginning graduate students in mathematics who are
based in the U.S. and in Germany. The summer schools integrate education and
research and offer international experiences in instruction and collaboration
for students at an early stage of their mathematical career. During each summer
school, faculty from both Penn State and the University of Göttingen will
conduct lecture courses and supervise student work. Students will work in
international teams to accomplish theoretical work, work in a computer lab, and
carry out comprehensive projects. The program will also facilitate networking
between students and researchers. Students will experience the research
atmosphere in the field at the international research conference. Part of the
conference program will be an information forum about graduate work and graduate
school application procedures and selection criteria.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
summer schools will contribute to attracting and retaining talented students to
pursue graduate work and mathematical careers in academia, industry, and
government, both in the United States and in Germany. They will provide
international education and research experiences, promote the exchange of ideas
and mutual understanding of different disciplinary cultures, and will enhance
the ability of the participating students to engage in international
collaborations in their future professional careers.