* 0963355
* Renovation of Existing Research Space Supporting Multiple Chemical Disciplines and Alternative Energy Research in a Predominantly Undergraduate Institution
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Gija Geme, University of Central Missouri
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 08/31/2013
* USD 451,813.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to
renovate existing research space in the research facilities for the Department
of Biochemistry, Chemistry and Physics at the University of Central Missouri
(UCM). In addition, a new Center for Alternative Fuels and Environmental Systems
(CAFES) has emerged from the Department to better serve the scientific needs of
central Missouri communities. The CAFES is currently facilitating projects on
alternative energy production, environmental issues and analytical support. The
renovated space will improve the conditions for many different research groups.
Work in the renovated facility will include the synthesis of azzaromatic
N-oxides, computational and synthetic studies of thiacyclooctatetrenophanes,
arsenic and selenium binding studies specific to natural organic matter
functional groups, alternative energy projects such as biologic aerobic and
anaerobic digestion, fuel formulations, synthetic biodiesel modifications and
development of new analytical methods for fuel typing. Undergraduate researchers
in the department and CAFES will monitor nutrient and micronutrient
concentrations in soil and runoff water during the production of biomass.
Biochemical research projects that will be housed in the renovated space will
include investigations of nucleic acids that can form triple helices, which will
be categorized as either intermolecular or intramolecular
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovated facility will support training
programs for undergraduate research students and will allow the department to
expand K-12 outreach programs including the ACS-SEED program to provide
opportunities to underrepresented groups. CAFES as part of the Department of
Chemistry will facilitate external collaborators from throughout the region. The
program will also use the facility and the CAFES to reach out to external
collaborators, which may include researchers in small colleges, universities,
small businesses, industry, and government agencies.