* 0963375
* BIPAS - Bifurcated Infrastructure Promoting the Advance of Science: Revitalizing LSU's Data Network Infrastructure
* O/D,OIA
* 07/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Joel Tohline, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,998,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to renovate the
research component of Louisiana State University's (LSU's) campus network. The
network includes a bypass feature which allows traffic between researchers and
pre-cleared network addresses to bypass the institution's primary firewall and
traffic-shaping devices. Such traffic flows between the border router and the
campus network core through a router dedicated to bypass traffic, rather than
through the campus firewall and traffic shaper. This architecture was created by
LSU to address two primary concerns associated with the older network
architecture, lack of adequate bandwidth over the 'last mile' to researchers
with equipment generating or consuming large amounts of data in facilities in
distributed locations, and the hindrance to high bandwidth, low-latency data
flows imposed by various network security and integrity controls. The renovation
involves upgrading multiple levels within the campus network. The goal is to
upgrade the campus network in such a way that when, subsequently, a new high-
bandwidth, low-latency connection is required at some location on campus, this
can be deployed rapidly and inexpensively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upgraded
network will enhance research in many areas, including coastal modeling, the
visualization of coastal models, computational biology, relativistic
astrophysics, computer science, advanced networking research, and nontraditional
areas of computational study such as music, theatre, and the visual
arts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing infrastructure for research,
the upgraded network will also have an impact outside of science and
engineering, on research related to technologies for use in the arts and digital
media. The infrastructure will support research training since many of the
people using the network in research activities will be graduate and
undergraduate students.