* 0963028
* Collaborative Research: The Cariaco Basin Oceanographic Time Series Program
* GEO,OCE
* 07/31/2009,11/30/2014
* Frank Muller-Karger, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/2014
* USD 1,587,521.00

This award will provide funds to continue operating the oceanographic time
series started in November 1995, in the Cariaco Basin at 10ยบ 30'N, 64ยบ 40'W, for
five years. CARIACO (CArbon Retention In A Colored Ocean) is one of three ocean
biogeochemistry time series stations supported by the National Science
Foundation (NSF). The time series addresses the scientific objective of
understanding ocean processes that affect the flux of particles sinking to the
bottom of the Cariaco Basin, by continuing collection of a carefully-selected
set of biological, chemical, geological and physical measurements. A key
objective of this effort is to serve the Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry (OCB)
and the paleoclimate research communities by maintaining an observing facility
in the Cariaco Basin. The facility permits studies of the temporal variability
and trends that span seasonal, interannual and interdecadal time scales,
provides a set of core observations and samples to share with the community, and
facilitates access to this unique oceanographic setting. CARIACO is a joint
research effort by scientists at three U.S. institutions supported by NSF
(University of Massachusetts at Dartmouth, Stony Brook University, and the
University of South Carolin at Columbia) in partnership with the Fundacion
LaSalle de Sciencias Naturales and the Centro Internacional de Ecologia Tropical
in Venezuela.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cariaco Basin is a 1,400-m deep
depression located on the Venezuelan continental margin in the southeastern
Caribbean Sea, openly connected to the surface tropical Atlantic Ocean above a
shallow (~140 m) sill. Because of slow turnover, decomposition of sinking
material leads to anoxia below about 250 m. These conditions preserve an
excellent sediment record that is used by the international community to study
Holocene and late Pleistocene changes in climate. Understanding processes that
affect the sinking material is the key to understanding the "biological carbon
pump" that transfers materials from the surface ocean to the bottom, and to
understanding the ocean?s role in past, present, and future climate. In this
regard, CARIACO aids in the interpretation of the climate history preserved in
this sediment record. The CARIACO program also seeks to educate the public about
this relationship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The scientific
program is guided by the following hypotheses: (1) The sinking flux of
particulate matter contains a record of event- to interannual-scale changes in
upper ocean conditions, including upwelling, ventilation, productivity, and
terrigenous input events. (2) Changes in nutrient availability results in
ecosystem shifts that are preserved in the chemistry and amount of sinking
particles. (3) Temporal changes in the hydrography of the basin are directly
related to regional wind variability, the passage of Caribbean Sea eddies near
the sill, and circulation changes in the Atlantic Ocean. (4) Bacterial
production and carbon decomposition near the oxic-anoxic transition zone are
controlled by lateral transport of dissolved oxygen at mid-depth (ventilation
events). (5) Chemoautotrophic bacteria near the oxic-anoxic transition zone
alter the composition and amount of the vertical particulate flux and the
dissolved organic matter concentration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CARIACO generates
observations used to assess variability in lateral transport and upwelling,
forcing and variations in water column chemistry, phytoplankton, zooplankton and
bacteria community composition, variations in primary productivity and bacterial
production (chemoautotrophic and heterotrophic), and resulting changes in water
column chemistry and the composition and quantity of particulate flux sinking to
the bottom. This program uses intensive traditional oceanographic and
meteorological techniques, as well as modern tools including satellite and
molecular observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: CARIACO addresses
some of the highest priorities identified in the U.S. government's Ocean
Research Priorities Plan and Implementation Strategy and the Strategic Plan for
the U.S. Climate Change Science Program. The uninterrupted, long-term tropical
record is of value to investigations of the relationship between climate change
and large-scale ocean biogeochemistry. Many scientists believe the tropics play
a pivotal role in these basin-wide processes on a variety of time scales
including those relevant to society. CARIACO measurements will also help
understand processes that affect regional fisheries and catastrophic weather
patterns. CARIACO has established a policy of open sharing of data, samples, and
infrastructure, to facilitate the conduct of broader studies or of process
studies in the Cariaco Basin by third parties. This project brings together an
international workforce of physical, chemical, geological and biological
oceanographers. It has technology transfer and human resource development
impacts, providing an opportunity for scientists, technicians and students from
Latin America to participate in logistics planning, fieldwork, data analysis,
and joint publications that address issues of local and global relevance. These
exchanges also have an important educational impact on U.S. students including
minorities. The Venezuelan government considers CARIACO among their most
important oceanographic research programs, and will continue significant funding
to local participants.