* 0963835
* CIF: Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Advances in the Theory and Practice of Low-Rank Matrix Recovery and Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Emmanuel Candes, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 04/30/2016
* USD 490,324.00

This project concerns one of the fundamental challenges
facing&lt;br/&gt;contemporary science and engineering today, namely, the
efficient&lt;br/&gt;processing and analysis of massive amounts of high-
dimensional data,&lt;br/&gt;such as images, videos, web pages, and
bioinformatics data. In short,&lt;br/&gt;data now routinely lie in thousands or
even billions of dimensions. On&lt;br/&gt;the one hand, massive data collection
is motivated by 1) scientific&lt;br/&gt;discovery and 2) the need for better
engineering systems. On the other&lt;br/&gt;hand, the difficult task now is to
conduct meaningful inference in&lt;br/&gt;such high dimensions, and draw correct
conclusions from limited&lt;br/&gt;amounts of sample data and with limited
computational&lt;br/&gt;resources. Fortunately, scientific or engineering data
often have very&lt;br/&gt;low intrinsic complexity and dimensionality. This
project addresses&lt;br/&gt;the opportunities offered by this common situation,
establishes&lt;br/&gt;conditions under which reliable inference is actually
possible, and&lt;br/&gt;develops computational tools for extracting key
information from huge&lt;br/&gt;data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary project is expected to have three outcomes: 1)&lt;br/&gt;the
development of innovative mathematics needed to study the recovery&lt;br/&gt;of
data matrices from partial and corrupted information 2)
the&lt;br/&gt;development of effective algorithms for recovering low-rank
matrices&lt;br/&gt;and performing accurate dimensionality reduction with
corrupted data&lt;br/&gt;and 3) the development of novel applications in which
these techniques&lt;br/&gt;are expected to considerably advance the state-of-
the-art. With these&lt;br/&gt;new tools, scientists and engineers will be able
to efficiently&lt;br/&gt;extract correct information from data, which was
previously&lt;br/&gt;inaccessible or intractable by conventional techniques.
This will&lt;br/&gt;enable the development of far better computer vision systems
for face&lt;br/&gt;recognition, better compression schemes of video sequences, a
better&lt;br/&gt;understanding of gene expression data, or better search engines
for&lt;br/&gt;web documents and images.