* 0963709
* US-Mexican Workshop: Self-Assembly in Biology and Materials Science. An International Workshop on Current Problems in Complex Fluids; Huatulco, Oaxaca, Mexico; June 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Mathias Loesche, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/2011
* USD 39,017.00

This award supports a research workshop, organized jointly by Mathias Lösche
(Carnegie Mellon University) and Jaime Ruiz-Garcia (Universidad Autónoma de San
Luis Potosí), to highlight recent progress in our understanding of self-assembly
processes in the life sciences and to identify implications derived from this
knowledge for design of synthetic materials. The meeting will take place in an
interdisciplinary setting that focuses on the interface between biological
physics and quantitative biology. An important goal is to provide an environment
for the establishment and continuation of collaborative research initiatives
between the Mexican and U.S. scientific research communities working in these
areas. The workshop will be held in Huatulco, Oaxaca, Mexico, June 8 to 11,
2010. The Mexican science agency CONACYT will support the Mexican
participants.&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will include research presentations and
discussions focused on the following topics of relevance in biology:
Supramolecular Biological Structures Controlled by Nucleic Acids; Colloidal
Self-Assembly in Functional Materials and Membranes and Soft Matter in Reduced
Dimensionality. It will foster communication and contacts between a diverse
group of senior researchers, which are the leaders in their respective fields,
and young researchers, such as tenure-track faculty, post-doctoral fellows and
graduate students from the U.S. and Mexico. In the selection of invited
attendees, proper attention has been paid to bringing together a group of
researchers in which women and minority faculty members are well represented.
Similar efforts are being made to the selection of student participants. This
award is being jointly funded between the Division of Materials Research and the
Office of International Science and Engineering of NSF.