* 0963559
* Enabling Inclusive Western States NSF Research via Next Generation Networking - the Northern Tier
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Bonita Neas, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,157,498.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, proposed by the regional
optical network, Pacific Northwest Gigapop, will replace an ad hoc system of
connections to a tier of states in the northwestern United States with a fiber-
based network capable of supporting multiple gigabit connections and extending
from Seattle through Minneapolis to Chicago. It will upgrade connection points
that various campuses en route will be able to connect to. These add/drop points
are located at Yakima, Spokane, Missoula, Bozeman, Billings, and Fargo. The
partners and campuses affected include the Pacific Northwest GigaPoP (PNWGP),
the University of Washington, Heritage University, Washington State University,
University of Idaho, University of Montana, Montana State University, North
Dakota State University, the University of Minnesota, and the Starlight
facility. The renovation also includes an optical switch at a PNWGP location in
Seattle that will enable advanced networking research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable researchers to transport
efficiently large amounts of data between institutions in the north-western U.S.
and over the national wide-area network. This will facilitate access to high-end
computational and data resources used by researchers at north-western
institutions. The upgrade will also provide scientists some flexibility to
obtain dedicated bandwidth for specific research applications and will allow
higher bandwidth connections to international research networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examples of research areas that will benefit from the
regional networking renovation include: astronomy, high-energy physics, the
history and three-dimensional geometry and kinematics of active and ancient
orogenic belts, solar physics, biologically-inspired nano-materials,
computational biology, and investigations of the material properties of
seashells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing infrastructure for
research, the renovated network will be a resource that facilitates distance
education and collaboration.