* 0963969
* IDBR:  Universal Base-Station for Wildlife Radio-Tracking and Telemetry
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* David Winkler, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2014
* USD 249,992.00

Radio-enabled tracking tags have dramatically enhanced our knowledge of wildlife
behavior over the last 3 decades, and new types of tags are being developed
which capture and transmit dramatically more information about their behavior.
Advances in microelectronics have also reduced the size and increased the
lifetime of tags, increasing the number of species that can be tagged.
Unfortunately these various tags use a wide variety of frequencies, coding
schemes, and communication protocols, requiring an entirely new base station for
each new tag. This makes new deployments more expensive, disallows sharing of
monitoring stations between overlapping studies, and requires that that
biologists in the field carry a base station for every tag type in
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a general-
purpose radio transceiver for behavioral ecologists and others that can be
easily configured to communicate with any existing wildlife tracking tag, as
well as with foreseeable future designs. Our approach is based on software
defined radios, where most of the parameters of the radio are configured in
software, allowing a single piece of hardware to cover multiple types of tags.
In this project we will develop working prototypes able to cover at least 3
different existing avian tags, and show them working in the field. We will also
develop a mode where signals can be captured, but not decoded, to allow tag
signals from different researchers to be captured by the same physical
basestation, and then distributed to the various researchers to be decoded.
Finally, we will ensure that the resulting outputs are in a format that allows
smooth upload of captured signals to databases such as
MOVEBANK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure that our 'universal base stations' are
available to other researchers, we will post on the internet all board designs,
parts lists and software we develop, as well as documentation of all designs and
software. Our goal is that UBS designs be accessible not only to researchers,
but also to amateur birders and other 'citizen scientists', allowing them to
contribute to research, as well as enhancing their birding experience (or
example, by allowing them, after detecting a tagged bird, to look up 'their
bird' in a database and learn more about it's particular behavior and movement.
To further this goal, we will attempt to develop a smart-phone interface to our
UBS, to allow birders in the field to capture and upload data from tags they
encounter via their phones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While this work will provide a
valuable tool for biologists, both professional and amateur, it will also
provide valuable educational experience for engineering students. Parts of this
project will be incorporated into class projects, and much of the design work
required will be completed by undergraduate and Masters of Engineering students
completing as design projects required for graduation. Because this project
requires teamwork, has specific concrete goals and specifications, and clear
end-customers (field biologist who are collaborating on this project), this
project will provide invaluable experience in preparing students planning on
working in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For more details, see:
http://molnargroup.ece.cornell.edu/research.html