* 0963071
* Divvy: Robust and Interactive Cluster Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Virginia de Sa, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 310,000.00

This project will develop software for the application of rapid, robust, and
interactive dimensionality reduction and clustering algorithms to real-world
datasets. The software, called Divvy, will provide parallel visualization of
multiple dimensionality reduction and clustering techniques, flexible domain
knowledge integration, customizable exemplar and outlier visualization, and
dynamic indicators of cluster quality using theoretically sound cluster quality
measures. Divvy will leverage recent advances in parallel and graphics
processing unit computing in order to deliver near real-time calculation of
partitions on many datasets. Divvy also will be used as a platform for
psychophysical studies that investigate the role and behavior of human
researchers in the data-analysis process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Machine learning
techniques are increasingly essential for scientific analysis in many different
fields. As datasets increase in size and dimensionality, scientists need access
to tools that can help them quickly and easily perform exploratory data analysis
and visualization. Divvy will allow a user to rapidly interact with and
visualize the results of many different dimensionality-reduction and clustering
algorithms through an intuitive interface. By collecting a broad set of cutting-
edge machine-learning tools in one user-friendly interface, Divvy will enable
substantial improvements in data analysis methodology for researchers outside of
machine learning and related fields. This project will support workshops and
tutorials at conferences outside the machine learning field in order to
evangelize recent machine learning techniques and encourage adoption of Divvy.