* 0963584
* I3: Strengthening the Professoriate at Iowa State University (SPISU): A Campus Network to Enable Strong Science and Diverse Communities
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2017
* Mack Shelley, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2017
* USD 1,248,727.00

Intellectual Merit: Strengthening the Professoriate at Iowa State University
(SPISU) strengthens and diversifies the professoriate by creating a community of
scholars who focus on integrating broader impacts efforts into their research
enterprise. SPISU brings together campus programs, many NSF funded, that share
the mission of broadening participation of under-represented minorities and
women in STEM fields, with the goal of networking, integrating, and sustaining
the efforts of individual and multiple-investigator projects. The community also
includes post-doctoral scholars and advanced graduate students mentored by
faculty as they develop the awareness and skills needed to develop plans for
broader impacts to complement their research skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project supports these primary outcomes: (1) the creation of protocols and
policies that use a faculty member's broader impact work in annual performance
evaluations and the promotion and tenure process. The goal is to develop
evaluation tools and protocols that will add value to ISU processes and can be
implemented at other universities. (2) Through SPISU, faculty develop research
based broader impact programs that are based on the scholarship of best
practices. This raises the intellectual strength of broader impact plans that
faculty integrate into their research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The proposed activity focuses on developing a new generation of faculty
who integrate their broader impacts efforts with their research enterprise. The
participating programs, which include ISU ADVANCE, Iowa AGEP, and other programs
focused on K-grey education and diversity efforts benefit from a new group of
collaborating faculty. Developing new P&amp;T protocols and procedures to
include evaluation of broader impacts work also increases the level of effort
that faculty put toward broader impacts. Finally, as post-doctoral scholars and
advanced graduate students are included in the SPISU activities, they will be
trained for faculty positions as they develop broader impact plans that are
based on the scholarship of best practices. Partnering with ISU ADVANCE, Iowa
AGEP, and the Math Alliance, will ensure that women and under-represented
minorities are actively recruited to participate in SPISU activities.