* 0963146
* I3: The UCF Community Embraces the Knowledge-Based Economy
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Bruce Furino, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia James
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,045,130.00

The University of Central Florida Community Embraces a Knowledge-Based Economy
brings together NSF awards from the EHR STEM Talent Expansion program (STEP),
Engineering Education, and Research Experiences for Undergraduates around the I3
themes of broadening participation and the integration of research and
education. The project goals are to provide coherence to multiple internally and
extramurally funded STEM projects at the University of Central Florida (UCF) and
integrate STEM research and education activities. The project targets UCF
students, faculty, and staff by providing resources for communication, research,
education, professional development, STEM program improvement, and K-12
educational enhancement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are as
follows: increase STEM education program interactions, improve STEM fluency, and
integrate STEM research and education. Activities undertaken to accomplish the
objectives include increased program interactions through the development of the
UCF STEM Research and Education Council (STEMREC) and the comprehensive STEMREC
web-based management program. The innovative Science and Technology Gallery
encourages collaborations between science and non-science students and faculty
through science inspired art and design based on STEM research. Project
activities also include the integration of NSF research findings into service
learning, an annual "State of STEM" conference, and a variety of television and
web-based programming designed to encourage ongoing communication across the UCF
community and beyond. The project provides increased undergraduate student and
K-12 teacher research opportunities through grant supplements. The Summer
Faculty Development Conference promotes the integration of NSF STEM grant
findings into course content and applications. Finally, there is the potential
for new STEM courses, tracks, and minors in addition to K-12 student education
modules, demonstrations, and learning tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will reach over 550 undergraduates, faculty members, undergraduate researchers,
and classroom teachers. Communication via UCF television programming, web
broadcasts, and other electronic media further extend the project's reach in
addition to the Science and Technology Gallery displays in the local community.
A comprehensive mixed-methods evaluation will be conducted by the Program
Evaluation and Educational Research Group (PEER). Overall, the consistent
emphasis on the integration of STEM research and education activities, combined
with a creative project design will ensure that UCF students, faculty, and staff
are well prepared to meet the challenges of a knowledge-based economy.