* 0963914
* The Neural Correlates of Target Selection
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Preeti Verghese, Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2014
* USD 465,055.00

When we interact with our surroundings we are often looking at or reaching for
an object of interest that is embedded in the clutter of daily life. Successful
interaction with our surroundings requires that several processes work in
concert. These include image-related factors, such as, how the target of our
reaching differs from its surroundings, visual processes that organize the scene
into potential targets and background, and cognitive factors such as task
demands and prior knowledge of target. With funding from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Preeti Verghese and her colleagues are investigating how all of
these processes unfold over time, and how they interact to select a target on a
textured background. Their research uses psychophysics, as well as high-density
electroencephalography (EEG) combined with a process that localizes the cortical
sources of the scalp potentials to determine the neural populations that
implement these processes. The two aims address important questions about the
interaction of selective attention and segmentation processes: When attention is
directed to a target, how do the surrounding context and task requirements
influence how efficiently the target is selected? What is the time course of
this interaction: How does evidence for the target evolve over time, and how do
attention and task demands influence the way in which a target is segmented from
the background?

This study aims to understand the neural underpinnings of target selection in
the real world. As such it has relevance to activities of daily life. It is also
relevant to clinical populations with people who have difficulty with target
selection. These include people with damage to parts of the visual cortex due to
stroke, injury, or tumors that result in a diminished awareness of objects that
are represented by the affected parts of the cortex. This visual neglect is
particularly acute in the presence of other objects in the visual field.
Training is also a strong component of this research program. This research
project provides research opportunities for high school and undergraduate
students to gain exposure to science as summer interns. Because the research is
multidisciplinary, postdoctoral fellows are having the opportunity to train in
research areas that complement their doctoral research.

