* 0963653
* Student Travel Grant Program for the 2009 ASME Dynamc Systems and Control Conference, held October 11-14, 2009 in Los Angeles, CA
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* James Dabney, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 12/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

The project provides funds for student travel to the 2009 Dynamic Systems and
Control Conference in Los Angeles, CA, USA, to be held from October 12-14, 2009.
The DSCC is the second conference to be held by the Dynamic Systems and Control
division of ASME separate from the annual IMECE conference with an expected
level of participation of over 400 scientists, students, and practicing
engineers. The intellectual merit of the project is that it will enable US
students to participate in a high quality, peer-reviewed technical conference
that is attended by leaders in the systems and control area. With over 200
research presentations, numerous technical workshops, plenary lectures, and
group panel discussions by leaders on numerous special issues of importance 2009
DSCC will expose the students to the state-of-the-art and emerging areas of
research and technology in the systems and control area. The conference provides
a unique opportunity for students to present their work to their peers and
renowned researchers. The conference provides special activities for students
seeking to expand educational opportunities and for those nearing graduation to
seek employment in industry, academia, and government labs. The broader impact
of the project is that it will assist in training the next generation of control
researchers and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control systems are ubiquitous;
they can be found in such diverse areas as automated manufacturing systems,
automobiles, airplanes, refineries, power plants, electrical power grid,
Internet, communication, chemical processes, civil infrastructures, and
nanotechnology. With the wide spread use of engineering devices in the modern
society, control technology is playing an ever increasing role in the
advancement and modernization of these devices using low-cost sensors and
actuators. Control technology is a critical area for the US industry, the future
technological edge and security of the United States depends on keeping a pool
of trained scientists and engineers. The students funded under this project will
be future leaders of control technology. Participation from underrepresented
groups such as women, minorities, and disabled students is strongly encouraged.