* 0963566
* Enabling Hawaii to COMPETE: Seizing the Opportunity for Equitable Connectivity
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* David Lassner, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2012
* USD 9,838,151.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central component of
this project is the acquisition of a pair of 10 Gigabit per second optical
network circuits on the new Asia America Gateway (AAG) cable connecting Hawaii
and the U.S. mainland. At the Hawaii end, these circuits will be connected from
the AAG cable landing site on Oahu to the Hawaii Research and Education Network.
From the mainland landing site at Morro Bay, California, the AAG circuits will
be connected to the Corporation for Education Network Initiatives in
California's (CENIC's) Pacific Wave facility in Los Angeles and to Pacific
NorthWest GigaPOP's (PNWGP's) Pacific Wave facility in Seattle. The Seattle and
Los Angeles locations are peering points for major U.S. and international
research and education networks. This collection of Indefeasible Rights of Use
(IRU) will provide 20Gbps of connectivity between the Hawaii Research and
Education Network, major U.S. research and education networks, such as Internet2
and National Lambda Rail, and international networks in countries around the
Pacific Rim. It will support Hawaii's participation in major international
network projects supporting science and engineering research, as well as data-
intensive collaborations between researchers and facilities on Hawaii and
researchers and facilities in the continental United States. The latter include
a number of current and planned astronomical activities using facilities on
Mauna Kea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is often the nature of networking
infrastructure that it provides research opportunities not just for one small
community of researchers addressing a particular class of research project but
also enhances research productivity across a number of disciplines. The
following, summarized from the proposal, are some examples of research
activities that will benefit from the connectivity that will result from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geophysics: Global-scale convection of the Earth's
mantle and its associated volcanology is a complex, multi-scale phenomenon that
must take into account upper boundary stresses associated with tectonic plates,
huge contrasts in material properties (e.g., liquid magma to ductile solid rock
to brittle cool rock), a very large range of dynamic length scales, and phase
changes. University of Hawaii researchers investigate mantle convection using
sophisticated and data-intensive numerical modeling requiring high-bandwidth
access to national supercomputer centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astronomy: Mauna
Kea hosts thirteen telescopes operated by astronomers from eleven countries,
including optical, infrared, submillimeter and radio astronomy facilities. These
resources are used by astronomers in the continental United States and
throughout the world for discovery-oriented astronomical research. Successive
generations of telescopes generate a growing volume of digital imagery, much of
it analyzed remotely. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By reducing the need for individual
researchers to travel to the telescopes themselves, remote observation over
global research and education networks will enable scientists to be more
productive. In addition, the advanced connectivity proposed will make possible,
"the development of virtual observatories that integrate data from different
instruments to enable greater insight than would be possible through any single
experiment." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental sciences: With its unique
ecosystems, geology and mid-ocean setting, Hawaii is home to a number of
environmental research activities that, taken together, generate and maintain a
diverse collection of environmental science databases. The network connectivity
proposed will provide researchers outside Hawaii with better access to these
data which are important for research in a number of different environmental
science fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-end computing: The science and
engineering faculty members at the University of Hawaii make heavy use of high-
end computing in a number of areas of research. The national high-end computing
infrastructure for open science, provided by NSF and the Department of Energy's
Office of Science, is located in the continental United States. With time, such
research has become progressively more data-intensive, highlighting a need for
higher bandwidth network connections between Hawaii and the mainland to support
the transfer of input and output datasets of increasing size, as well as the use
of interactive visualization and computational steering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative research: In addition to some of the
examples above, University of Hawaii researchers play an important role in a
number of research collaborations. One example is the Science and Technology
Center for Microbial Oceanography--Research and Education (C-MORE). This
consists of six partner institutes (University of Hawaii and five on the
mainland) collaborating on research in ocean microbiology, including the ocean's
microbial biogeochemistry-energy web. One of the tools used is called the
OptiPortal, a bandwidth-hungry, advanced visualization and collaboration tool
that will expand understanding of the biogeochemical cycling of the ocean by
bringing together a variety of data sets from the institutional partners onto
one "canvas" for analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impacts
include the provision of infrastructure for research and education in science
and engineering, with an impact both in the United States and internationally.
For example, enhanced connectivity will not only promote research in the U.S.
but also strengthen astronomical research in a number of countries around the
world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed infrastructure provides opportunities
for the closer integration of research and education. NSF's investments in tools
for cyber-enhanced education have resulted in a variety of educational tools
that are intended for online use. The ability of the over 250 public schools and
campuses of higher education on Hawaii, to make use of the proposed network
connectivity will make it easier for these educational tools, hosted at sites
across the United States, to be used in education on Hawaii itself. Examples
include the resources of the academic Open Courseware Consortium. Federal
agencies and federally funded projects also make large volumes of data available
online that become the grist for research and learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Federally supported online collections of data critical
for contemporary research cover a wide range of fields and include GenBank, the
Protein Data Bank, the Entrez cross-database search engine, the environmental
science data holdings of the Federation of Earth Science Information Partners,
the Earth System Grid's climate model output holdings, the National Center for
Atmospheric Research's Research Data Archive, the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, the
Hubble Space Telescope Science Data Archive, and the output from the Large
Hadron Collider.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The campuses of the University of Hawaii
system are Native Hawaiian Serving Institutions. They also serve a wide cross-
section of traditionally underserved communities from other Pacific Islanders.
Through their participation in research activities that use the proposed
connections, students from these communities will have additional opportunities
for research training. Through access to research and educational web-sites
maintained on Hawaii, the proposed connectivity will also provide mainland U.S.
students with greater access to the science and culture of Hawaii.