* 0963547
* Renovation of Research Greenhouses at UC Santa Barbara for Ecological, Evolutionary and Developmental Studies
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Susan Mazer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,725,740.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to replace a cluster
of greenhouse bays on the UCSB campus. The current greenhouse has four bays, is
old and decrepit, and is scheduled for demolition. The University intends to
replace the existing facility with a new greenhouse complex located adjacent to
the old. This will have three components: (1) a three-bay greenhouse on the site
of a lath house that is to be demolished, (2) a small greenhouse what will
maintain alpine conditions, (the ?Alpine House?), to be newly built on a
currently open site, and (3) a second three-bay greenhouse to be built on a site
that currently holds two small buildings that will be demolished. The alpine
house is designed to simulate the temperature, light and humidity of high alpine
environments. The first component is already under construction as a separate
project. The current project is to construct the second and third components,
and to finish the interior of two of the three bays in the first component to
make them operational. The existing greenhouse will ultimately be
demolished.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new greenhouse facility will enable year-
round controlled environments and provide many options for experimental research
that are unavailable with the current greenhouse. It will be possible to control
light, watering regimes, and temperature, and to determine their impacts on
plant growth and reproduction. The replacement facility will make it possible to
exclude (or include) pollinators, pests and herbivores, and thus enable
ecological, genetic and evolutionary experimental research that requires a
controlled setting. The facility will be used for research on the specific
morphological, physiological, and demographic traits responsible for the
maintenance of plant diversity; the identification of the genetic basis for
adaptations to extreme environments and specific pollinators; tests of how
attributes of the physical environment influence plant distributions,
productivity, and phenology; and research on the genetic mechanisms underlying
plant recognition and responses to a variety of stresses such as drought. Work
will include studies of the genetic and environmental controls of the critical
events of flowering time, pollination, seed production, and germination. These
studies include the discovery and analysis of the morphological and biochemical
changes in floral structure that drive pollinator
specialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing infrastructure for
research, the facility will be used for research training of undergraduates,
graduate students and postdoctoral associates. Research that is likely to have
societal impacts includes research on invasive species and their biological
control, and research into the genetic mechanisms affecting seed quality and
germination (which is relevant to the mitigation of crop losses.) The facility
will be used to advance the development of a new model genomic system that will
be made available to the wider research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
campus has a number of activities designed to facilitate the recruitment and
financial support of members of underrepresented groups, economically
disadvantaged students, and highly talented undergraduates. Students in these
programs participate in plant biology research and will be able to take
advantage of research training opportunities in the new greenhouses. The
University?s Center for Biodiversity and Ecological Restoration provides
internship opportunities for undergraduates to provide hands-on botanical
activities to students in local public schools.