* 0963038
* Strategic Modernization of Undergraduate Research Facilities in Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Victor Townsend, Virginia Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2012
* USD 621,507.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award provides funds for Virginia Wesleyan College to modernize Blocker
Hall, the College's Natural Science Facility. The renovation will result in six
moderns labs dedicated to research and three joint teaching/research labs.
Upgrades will include replacement of electrical, plumbing, lighting, temperature
control, ventilation systems, and cyberinfrastructure. For some of the labs,
substantial changes to room configurations will be made.

Renovations to the facility will significantly increase the quality of faculty
research by enabling investigators to address more complex research questions,
thus broadening the scope of these activities. Modernization of the research
labs will diversify and enhance hypothesis-driven research activities in areas
that are not currently possible (scanning electron microscopy and ion
chromatography). The creation of dedicated research spaces that are usable by
faculty from different disciplines will also promote collaborations and enhance
the overall quality of research training across the natural sciences.
Modernization of the cyberinfrastructure will enable more effective
communication, thus increasing connectivity with the global scientific community
and fostering collaborative research through electronic media between the VWC
community and scientists worldwide.

Renovation of the facility will dramatically improve research training and the
pursuit of independent, hypothesis-driven research projects by students majoring
in biology, chemistry, earth and environmental sciences. Students will gain
invaluable experience with modern research tools, thereby providing
opportunities to develop critical skills and techniques. Renovation of Blocker
Hall will double the capacity for student research projects. VWC's student body
is very diverse (31% of natural science majors are minorities). The renovation
will have a positive impact on the participation of historically
underrepresented groups in independent research projects in the natural
sciences. Graduates from the College who participate in research training will
be more competitive for admission into graduate and professional programs and
will enhance their preparation for careers in natural sciences and science
education.