* 0963486
* Renovation for Climate Change &amp; Environmental Quality Laboratory at North Dakota State University
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2012
* Philip Boudjouk, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 650,550.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). North Dakota State University's Department of Geosciences is
expanding their research program and the laboratories renovated under this award
complement this expansion. The renovated space will bring scientists, including
two newly hired researchers within the Geosciences Department, to benefit
directly from the shared facility. The focus of the renovation will be for
research in climate change, environmental quality and Antartic geology.
Intellectual merit stemming from their work, and that of collaborating faculty,
includes the elucidation of southern hemisphere biogeography, in which
Antarctica's role as a center of evolution is mostly unknown, and continued work
to date major shifts in Antarctic climate from Oligocene through Pliocene time.
Work done by the environmental quality research group in newly renovated
laboratory space will further the understanding of how argillaceous matrices
such as expansive earth materials function for the remediation of wastewater.
Examples of additional research topics to be addressed include the exact timing
of North American deglaciation, focusing especially on the drainage of large
proglacial lakes and their relation to late glacial climate change and the
occurrence of naturally high levels of heavy metals such as cadmium and mercury
in glaciogenic soils found throughout the upper Midwestern United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include the
support of early career researchers, undergraduate and graduate student
research, a variety of outreach programs to tribal colleges and K-12 students,
and extensive international collaboration. The work also has societal relevance
in that the outcomes will offer direct constraints on the stability of
Antarctica's ice sheet during times when global atmospheric CO2 concentrations
were similar to those predicted for Earth in coming decades, and thus will
provide data to calibrate predictive models of sea-level rise. Additional
important outcomes will include the potential for many countries to address
environmental quality problems such as high fluoride, boron, and arsenic
concentrations in water, and high cadmium concentrations in soils.