* 0963081
* IRNC: SP Cultivating the International Research and Education Network Fabric: An Essential Underpinning of Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Dale Smith, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,637,838.00

Network Startup Resource Center (NSRC), University of Oregon IRNC:SP Cultivating
the International Research and Education Network Fabric: An Essential
Underpinning of Cyberinfrastructure PI: Dale Smith, co-PI: Steven Huter

The Network Startup Resource Center (NSRC) develops and enhances network
infrastructure for collaborative research, education, and international
partnerships, while promoting teaching and training via the transfer of
technology. This IRNC project focuses NSRC activities on cultivating
cyberinfrastructure via technical exchange, engineering assistance, training,
conveyance of networking equipment and technical reference materials, and
related activities to promote network technology adoption, and enhanced
connectivity in R&E sites around the world. The end goal is to enhance and
enable international collaboration via the Internet between U.S. scientists and
collaborators in developing countries.

The broader impacts of NSRC's activities are global in scope -- helping to
establish and improve underlying cyberinfrastructure, both physical (network
connectivity) and human which are necessary to allow international scientific
endeavors to flourish. Such resources are crucial to engage researchers in
developing areas of the world. As an additional benefit, the NSRC's work builds
goodwill for U.S. scientists, the NSF, and the U.S. government in universities,
research institutions, and network operator groups throughout the developing
world.

Regarding intellectual merit, NSRC's work advances knowledge and understanding
within the fields of networking, telecommunications and information technology
through the clarity of its focus: working to solve specific problems with people
in the research and education environments of developing economies that seek to
work together with their counterparts in the U.S. Improved infrastructure and
increased available bandwidth enable international researchers to document and
publish more local, indigenous data and publish more co-authored papers with
U.S. scientists. The improved communications resulting from these efforts
enhance collaboration between scientists and engineers on both ends of the
connectivity spectrum; this ultimately helps attract a wider variety of ideas,
information, talent, and resources to solving problems.