* 0963379
* Renovating and Expanding Research and Research Training Facilities in the Geosciences at Oberlin College
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Dennis Hubbard, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2013
* USD 885,929.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The award will provide funds to renovate and expand research
and research training facilities in the geosciences at Oberlin College. The
existing facility was built in 1908 as the college library and was renovated in
1989 to accommodate four faculty, based on a model where each person occupied a
large room that served as both office and research laboratory. Additional shared
spaces were outfitted: one for wet-chemistry, a small room with a single
research microscope, and a darkroom. This project will separate the office and
research space and unite all research into a centralized corridor housing six
laboratories. The lab cluster will facilitate cross-disciplinary work among
faculty and undergraduate researchers and efficient sharing of instrumentation
and equipment. Examples of research that will be advanced through the renovation
will include: 1) Determining pathways of decay in shell carbonate in marine
sediments; 2) Analyzing reef cores to better understand the record of coral reef
accretion and community structure in the past as context for the present crisis
on coral reefs; 3) Reconstructing metamorphic histories of subduction-zone
rocks; 4) Characterizing cements from 1.9Ga iron formations to gain insight into
the composition and temperature of Precambrian oceans; 4) Revealing how
deformation is accommodated at finer scales within larger structures along the
San Andreas fault system; 5) Refining the history of asteroid impacts on Earth
during Precambrian time by locating and tracing new stratigraphic layers of
impact spherules and characterizing these layers geochemically and
petrographically; and 6) Analyzing water quality and contaminant migration in
the glacial deposits of northeast Ohio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geology faculty
and students develop a strong sense of community during field trips and in the
classroom. Research activities in the present facility tend to isolate and
separate research students and faculty because research space is highly
fragmented. An updated and centralized research complex will enable faculty
research to expand to new research areas not feasible in the current
configuration, increase research efficiency, and will unite faculty and student
researchers into a single facility that will foster interdisciplinary work.
Given the high percentage of Oberlin geology graduates who go on to earn
advanced degrees in the geosciences and careers in higher education, improved
research training facilities will help strengthen the preparation of the next
generation of geoscience educators and research scientists.