* 0963050
* Renovation of the Graduate Center for Materials Research at Missouri S&amp;T
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Jay Switzer, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,829,800.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide partial
funding for the renovation and modernization of the heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC) system, updating the electrical system, improvement of fume
hoods and abatement of asbestos in the Graduate Center for Materials Research
(MRC) at Missouri University of Science and Technology. This building is
routinely used by over 150 personnel, including staff members, graduate and
undergraduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and visiting scholars. In 2009,
125 different projects were carried out at this Center. Research topics include
bioactive glasses, corrosion coatings for construction and transportation,
electrodeposited chiral films for spintronic devices, biosensors, and ultrahigh
temperature ceramics. However, lack of good temperature and humidity control in
the building is seriously affecting the productivity and timely completion of
these projects. To meet modern safety and environmental standards, many of the
lab fume hoods need to be updated, and asbestos containing materials will be
removed from the building. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MRC faculty members mentor
many undergraduate student in research activities that are supported by external
funding through such programs as the "Opportunity for Undergraduate Research
Experience." As part of outreach activities, MRC staff members mentor and
provide research training to over 1,300 K-12 students per year through the
Office of Pre-College Programs. The MRC staff also hosts a number of tours of
the MRC facilities and equipment by community and industrial groups. Another
outreach activity involving the MRC faculty is the ASM Teacher Materials Camp
held every summer during the last few years.