* 0963249
* Upgrading to a Sustainable Infrastructure for Research Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Robert Zimmerman, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Irene D. Lombardo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,701,988.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to enhance the
existing research computing facility and network connections at the University
of Arkansas Fayetteville campus. This award will provide the infrastructure
support for the planned HPC acquisitions to achieve a target core count of about
6000 cores, which require a target data center capacity of 300kW, and 10Gbps
networking connectivity in support of research computing. The renovations
include adding a new electrical service entrance, uninterruptible power
supplies, additional cooling capability, campus research network upgrades from
1Gbps to 10Gbps and a research network path from the campus to
INTERNET2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research that will be supported by the
renovated facility is of the highest intellectual merit. Research areas that
will be enabled by this infrastructure project include integrated nanoscience,
computational chemistry, computational biomagnetics, materials science, and
spatial science. Planned collaborative projects include the programming of
alternative architectures (including GPGPUs and multicore), and modeling,
measurement, and experimental evaluation of new parallel hardware and software,
including with industrial partners will be an outcome of this
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research to be supported by the renovated
facility has very broad impact. Insights from nanoscience research, as well as
the direct use of the so-called inverse method, will have great impacts on the
design of new and improved devices, such as actuators, sensors, and data
storage. Chemistry research will enable the prediction of acidities of drug-type
molecules, enabling the development of new drugs. The biomagnetics research has
the potential of developing a completely passive, non-invasive technique for
breast cancer detection. Nanocomposite research has broad impact on sensor
design and application, specifically sensors that employ polymer-based
nanocomposites as integral components. The spatial science research has broad
impact in the reliability of spatial data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arkansas
Research and Education Optical Network (ARE-ON) will connect all public four
year institutions of education in Arkansas. The renovated facility will be
available to all ARE-ON institutions and to collaborators in West
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We estimate that over the course of the grant
period more than 600 undergraduate students and more than 150 graduate students
will utilize the facility.