* 0963031
* Renovation of the Purchase College Molecular and Cellular Biology Research Suite
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Jan Factor, SUNY College at Purchase
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 378,489.00

Abstract This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

Funds are provided to renovate the Molecular and Cell Biology research facility
Purchase College, State University of New York. Established in 1967, Purchase
College is a four-year undergraduate institution with a record of research,
undergraduate student research training, and receipt of federal grants to fund
these efforts dating back to the mid-1970s. The lab facility is used for faculty
research and undergraduate research training. All undergraduate students are
required to carry out an eight-credit capstone experience involving original
research. Many students also do summer research in the College's labs, and/or
take independent research courses during the academic year.

The funds will permit: (1) Redesigning part of the Microscopy room by moving
some nonstructural walls, allowing for more efficient student research training
in the use of Electron Microscopes. (2) Reconfiguring the preparatory room: half
of it will become a facility for the analysis of digital microscopy images, DNA
sequence data and electrophoretic gel data. The other half will remain a
preparatory area. (3) The Molecular/Cell Biology area will contain a new bench
configuration, with numerous research stations and areas to properly contain
research equipment. All of the benches will be wired for networked computer
workstations.

The renovations will support ongoing fundamental research on macrophages,
thermophilic bacteria, marine invertebrate cellular defenses and environmental
responses, and cellular processes. The renovations will increase the research
efficiency and productivity. The renovation will enhance already productive
collaborative student/faculty research, as well as continue the undergraduate
research training being conducted by Purchase College. It will have a positive
impact on the local community colleges that send their students to Purchase
College for 5 weeks of intensive, independent research in Molecular and Cellular
Biology. The renovation will enable Purchase College's Biology faculty to
continue what has become a 30-year tradition of a research-based curriculum for
undergraduate students.