* 0963869
* Global Studies of Einstein Spacetimes
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Vincent Moncrief, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2013
* USD 223,500.00

This award supports projects to explore fundamental issues in Einstein's general
theory of relativity (GR). One project examines the evolution of spacetimes to
see if the development of singularities that signal the breakdown of GR can
occur in nature only inside black holes and, within black holes, can be visible
only to observers who run into them. This is called the Cosmic Censorship
Conjecture. This question will be addressed through continued development of
light­cone­ estimates for the Einstein equations that parallel those that have
already been developed for the Yang-­Mills-­Higgs equations. The objective will
be to show that space­time curvature cannot blow up (point­wise) in a (vacuum)
solution to Einstein's equations until the integrated (Bel­-Robinson) energy for
curvature blows up. Another project will be to continue the development of
improved numerical methods for the study of black hole collisions. Recent work
has established the regularity of the (conformally transformed) ADM evolution
equations at null infinity. This result and its potential generalizations will
be applied to actual numerical calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cosmic
censorship conjecture is often considered to be the main open mathematical
problem in classical general relativity. Cosmic censorship is the natural
analogue, for Einstein's equations, of the global existence property for
Minkowski space field theories and so it seems very plausible that techniques
that have proven successful in the analysis of the latter should have something
important to contribute to the former. In addition, any significant progress on
the development of improved numerical methods for the analysis of black hole
collisions can be anticipated to strongly influence the ongoing worldwide
efforts to numerically model these important astrophysical processes and
ultimately to impact LIGO and LISA observations. Much of this research should be
of interest to mathematicians. Development of improved numerical methods for the
computation of gravitational waves from colliding black holes could have an
impact on the experimental search for such radiation. Postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students are expected to play key roles in these projects.