* 0963989
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research:  Shaping, Learning and Optimizing Dynamic Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Sekhar Tatikonda, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 03/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

This project develops, from the ground up, a new theoretical framework for
analyzing and designing algorithms for dynamic ad-hoc wireless networks. This
proposal embraces network dynamics as an opportunity to be exploited, not an
adversity to be overcome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is based on four
inter-related thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;1. Incremental Topology Learning: Tracking
changes in the network much more efficiently than re-learning entire topology,
using sparse "error graph" representations.&lt;br/&gt;2. Topology and Traffic
Shaping: Controlling the "effective" wireless network topology so that (i) at
any instant of time it appears to be highly disconnected to scheduling
algorithms, but retains global connectivity over time; and (ii) modifying
traffic statistics to ensure statistical spatial correlation decay.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Warm-starting Distributed Algorithms: Message-passing algorithms that can warm-
start the optimization based on local knowledge of past solutions.&lt;br/&gt;4.
Proteus - A Mobile Robot Testbed: This project validates its approach via
implementation on a mobile robot testbed called Proteus, which is used to
optimize algorithms in a practical setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Industry is involved in this research from the start, via the WNCG Affiliates
program at UT. The research will be disseminated via publications in top-tier
venues, industry interactions, and specially organized workshops. Both graduate
students and undergraduate students, via a REU program at UT (with emphasis on
recruiting women and minorities), get exposure to both real-world wireless
networks (via the testbed), and cutting edge theory.