* 0963698
* 2010 Enzymes, Coenzymes, and Metabolic Pathways Gordon Research Conference in Waterville, NH on July 18-23
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Bruce Palfey, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 12/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Life is controlled by chemistry. The thousands of
vital chemical reactions that allow life are catalyzed by enzymes. Despite being
studied systematically for more than a century, it is still not clear how
enzymes accelerate chemical reactions. Enzymology has delved deeply into
uncovering the mechanism of catalysis in biology and now attempts to understand
reactivity in terms of macromolecular structure and in the dynamic motions of
macromolecules. Structures and their movements promote some chemically complex,
biologically critical reactions. Just as important, these same structures
prevent deleterious side-reactions. The elegant tuning of enzyme reactivity is
the result of evolution under selective pressure. Changing environments, or
changing metabolic imperatives, cause new enzyme activities to evolve. The task
of understanding how enzymes catalyze reactions, how their activity is
controlled, and how new activities can emerge requires insight from many
perspectives. This Gordon Conference on Enzymes, Coenzymes and Metabolic
Pathways will provide a highly interactive venue to present discuss and debate
the cutting-edge of enzyme research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Enzymes, Coenzymes and
Metabolic Pathways is now one of the most influential in the broad area of
enzymology. It gathers the leaders in the field, trainees at the student or
postdoctoral level, and those in between. The collegial, informal atmosphere,
coupled to the GRC non-disclosure policy, is extremely effective in fostering
the free exchange of ideas and cutting-edge results. The Enzymes GRC has truly
been the birthplace of many fruitful collaborations and new research directions.
The Enzymes GRC has also been a very effective mechanism for incorporating women
and underrepresented minorities into enzymology and the metabolic pathway
community. The event allows participants to build invaluable networks with
leaders in the field from academia, industry, and government. This year's
conference continues this tradition of inclusiveness, with a very high
proportion of speakers and discussion leaders being women and underrepresented
minorities. The conference also provides important networking opportunities and
intellectual development for graduate students and postdoctoral associated, and,
therefore, helps to sustain the field by developing new talent.