* 0963950
* The Dynamics of Place Making in Contested Cities
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Edward Snajdr, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 257,598.00

Dr. Edward K. Snajdr and Dr. Shonna Trinch (both of John Jay College of Criminal
Justice, City University of New York) will undertake research on the dynamic and
mutually transforming relations between local communities and urban development
projects. The research will be carried out on Atlantic Yards, New York City's
largest urban redevelopment project in the past 50 years. Atlantic Yards, which
will consist of a new professional basketball arena and a collection of high-
rise towers set to be built in a residential area of Brooklyn, offers a unique
opportunity to study the contested city, a space where different people compete
to define, create, and contribute to urban life.

The researchers will employ a combination of data collection methods, including
ethnography and particiant observation; interviews with representatives of all
stakeholders; repeated surveys of a random probability cluster sample of
households; and discursive and textual analyses of archival and web-based
information. These data will allow them to track changes in representations by
supporters and opponents; correlate changes in perceptions with other variables;
and build a model of how different processes of place-making unfold, interact,
and change over time.

Findings from this research will help to understand new patterns in contemporary
urban development, including the effects of new technologies of communication,
contributing to social scientific theories of urban life. The results of this
research will also be of use to policy makers, politicians, developers and
community groups to address a range of ethical, material, economic, cultural,
and social issues surrounding the process of urban redevelopment.