* 0963443
* Upgrading Middlebury College's Floating Laboratory: A State-of-the-Art Research Vessel
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Thomas Manley, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Bauke Houtman
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,731,377.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project replaces the R/V Baldwin, a floating research laboratory used by
Middlebury College in Vermont for hands-on, experiential, research training of
students on Lake Champlain. The R/V Baldwin has reached the end of its useful
life and will be replaced by a new, larger, more highly capable, "green", and
seaworthy vessel outfitted to allow college student and faculty research
projects to be carried out. Middlebury College is an undergraduate institution
that is widely considered as an important engine for educating and training
undergraduates who continue on to graduate school in the environmental sciences.
The new vessel will double the number of people that can be present on the boat
at any given time. Unlike the present vessel, which is restricted to shallow
parts of the lake, the new ship will be able to fully navigate the lake, which
will dramatically increase the types and numbers of research projects that can
be carried out. The new vessel will impact research in disciplines as diverse as
geology, biology, environmental science, and chemistry, enabling research in
areas as diverse as hydrodynamics, paleoanthropology, paleoclimate,
sedimentology, geophysics, aquatic ecology, and environmental chemistry. Broader
impacts of the project include increasing the infrastructure for
interdisciplinary science and the research training of large numbers of
undergraduate students at Middlebury College and other local colleges and
universities in Vermont, which is an EPSCoR state. It will also provide jobs in
Washington State where the ship will be built. Other impacts include improved
environmental assessment and monitoring of the 6th largest freshwater lake in
the nation; one that serves the recreational and economic needs of a large
number of people in the northeastern US. Research training of K-12 teachers who
will use the vessel will be implemented. Public outreach using data collected by
researchers using the vessel will be carried out through involvement with local
maritime museums.