* 0963298
* Radford University Department of Biology and Chemistry Facilities Modernization
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Kimberly Lane, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2013
* USD 399,750.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will renovate laboratory
space in Curie Hall on the campus of Radford University to create core research
facilities for the university's biology and chemistry programs. This renovation
is needed to allow more students to participate in undergraduate research,
improve the quality and scope of the research activities of the faculty and
students, provide a safer work environment, and increase collaborative efforts
between the biology and chemistry programs. The majority of the research space
in the building has not been renovated since its original construction nearly 40
years ago. For the biology research program, the renovation will provide a core
research facility in the basement of Curie Hall with two vivariums and
reconfigured space for shared research instrumentation. On the third floor of
Curie Hall, a core laboratory will be created for collaborative research in
chemistry and biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Faculty in the renovated core
labs will conduct research and research training in the areas of biology,
microbiology, cellular and molecular biology, biochemistry, chemical kinetics
and catalysis, analytical chemistry, and neuroscience. Examples of research
activities proposed for the renovated laboratories include studies of the neural
mechanisms that regulate appetite in an animal model, actions of the
neuroendocrine and immune systems, and their impact on behavior and cognition,
in free living species, investigation of the enzyme beta-glucuronidase which
catalyzes the cleavage of a glucuronide group from substrates and has major
implications in human health and cancer therapeutics, and development of a new
catalyst for esterification and transesterification reactions related to
biodiesel production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the core facilities for biology
and chemistry research, the Biology and Chemistry Department will be able to
continue its dedication to excellence in undergraduate research and education
through one-on-one student/faculty mentoring. The university serves a diverse
and motivated undergraduate population, which includes a significant number of
first-generation college students. The renovation project will provide better
laboratories to inspire more of these undergraduate students through research to
pursue graduate and professional post-baccalaureate education.