* 0963400
* Upgrade and Renovation of Plant Growth Facilities at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Doreen Ware, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2012
* USD 497,423.00

Abstract

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Funds are provided for Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL) to renovate and
upgrade existing plant growth facilities at our Uplands Farm Research Field
Station. CSHL has an extensive greenhouse complex offsite where seminal work in
Arabidopsis and crop plants has been conducted. The research focus on crop yield
and adaptation of crops to substandard conditions has global impact and this
will increase with these improved facilities. The greenhouses and growth rooms
are used to support the research programs and also support the plant genetics
teaching programs of the CSHL Dolan DNA Learning Center. These aging and
outdated facilities are inadequate to meet the demands of current genome driven
plant biology research. The infrastructural improvements will provide
appropriate growing conditions for a greater diversity of plant species and will
increase the energy efficiency of the facilities. In the proposed renovations,
CSHL intends to: 1 Replace boilers in two smaller greenhouses, and two boiler
burner units in the largest of the three greenhouses. 2 Install updated
evaporative cooling units in each of the three greenhouses. 3 Install automated
ventilation, sunshade, and irrigation systems in all three greenhouses. 4
Replace the aging, hazed acrylic sheathing on the largest greenhouse. 5 Renovate
and improve the head house of the largest greenhouse. 6 Replace the cooling unit
in the Field Station Laboratory with a modern and more efficient unit with an
economizer ventilation unit. 7 Replace outdated lighting fixtures in the
Arabidopsis growth facilities with improved, high-efficiency units and install a
dedicated heating loop.