* 0963411
* A Center for Ocean Biogeochemistry and Climate Change: Addressing the Role of Plankton in Ocean and Climate Change
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* William Balch, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2013
* USD 4,975,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project comprises the replacement
of aging and sub-standard space for research on ocean biogeochemistry and its
role in climate. NSF will fund the installation of a laboratory wing as part of
a new building being constructed on a campus of the Bigelow Laboratory in East
Boothbay, Maine. The new building is to be called the Center for Ocean
Biogeochemistry and Climate Change (COBCC). The research space will replace a
research area spread over several leased buildings that include trailers and
other structures inappropriate for modern biogeochemical research. The COBCC
will conduct research in air-sea interactions, cellular biogeochemistry, marine
optics, ocean biogeochemistry, ocean observing, radiochemistry, and trace-metal
geochemistry. Research in the COBCC will contribute to knowledge about the
relationship between climate and ocean ecosystems. Collaborative research
between COBCC scientists and biological researchers at Bigelow will provide a
better understanding of how the biology of single-celled marine organisms frames
ocean biogeochemistry. Examples of the type of research that will be conducted
in the renovated facility include:&lt;br/&gt; - the interconnected processes by
which essential elements are cycled through the ocean by marine
biota;&lt;br/&gt; - the key interactions between sunlight, water, atmosphere,
sediments and ice that determine basin-wide plankton ecology and biogeochemistry
at the interfaces of the ocean; and&lt;br/&gt; - the impact of a varying global
climate on ocean biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing
infrastructure for research, the COBCC will support research training for post-
doctoral researchers, undergraduate participation in research as part of
Bigelow?s Research Experiences for Undergraduates program, and high-school
student exposure to research through an annual, week-long, high school,
research-in-residence program. In the short term, the project will provide
employment for people in the construction trades. In the longer term, the
project should enhance Maine?s ability to attract research dollars through
competitive federal grant programs and through partnership with industry. It
will also provide employment opportunities for young researchers in Maine.