* 0963548
* Revitalizing Facilities for Research on Life in Extreme Environments
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Bradley Buckley, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funds to convert
10,745 square feet in Portland State University's (PSU) Science Building 2 (SB2)
into a Center for Life in Extreme Environments (CLEE). The renovations of
Science Building 2 (SB2) at PSU will enable a core group of CLEE researchers to
conduct research on the ecological and physiological effects of extremes in
temperature and pH and extremes in nutrient, water and oxygen availability that
spans all domains of life. Additionally, the space for the animal care facility
for aquatic organisms will be doubled to facilitate greater temperature control
and range for rearing fish from thermally extreme environments. The plan will
provide central laboratory support space, including flexible equipment rooms,
walk-in environmental control rooms and rooms dedicated to microscopy, cell
culture, growing thermophiles and clean-room research. The linear equipment room
will house autoclaves, glass wash facilities, and shared equipment and PSU's
thermophile and Oregon's Collection of Methanogens (OCM) culture collections. In
addition, the space will permit relocation of the microarray facility in this
area. By substantially improving the quality of research space available to CLEE
faculty, PSU will continue to lead international efforts to take an integrative
approach to investigating life in extreme environments across all three domains
of life. The improvements in the research facility will permit research
involving a more holistic understanding of the potential human impacts on, and
interactions with, species from environmentally sensitive habitats. The doubling
of the Aquatic facility with the capacity to rear coldadapted fishes will place
PSU as key center for such research. The consolidation of high temperature, high
biomass growth facilities will enhance biochemical, molecular and microbial
studies of thermostable molecules, thermophiles and their viruses. The
renovations will also broadly impact education at PSU. The University has a long
history of success in attracting and matriculating non-traditional and older
students in an urban setting and it will help expand undergraduate and graduate
research programs and will stimulate interdisciplinary research projects between
Chemistry, Environmental Science, Biology and Geology and other institutions in
the region.