* 0963261
* Renovation and Modernization of the Center for Interdisciplinary Molecular Biology Education, Research and Advancement at California State University, Sacramento
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Thomas Savage, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 755,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for
Interdisciplinary Molecular Biology Education, Research and Advancement (CIMERA)
is a research equipment facility shared among faculty from the departments of
Biological Sciences and Chemistry at California State University, Sacramento.
CIMERA is housed in an eight-room suite in the basement of Sequoia Hall
originally built as an animal care facility. The original design of the suite
limits its utility as a cell and molecular biology laboratory. Recent funding
for additional cell analysis and cell culture equipment, and recent expansion of
student/faculty research and research training activities, necessitates
expanding and updating the facility. Funds are provided to allow the CIMERA
facility to expand and modernize. The renovation involves (1) removing an
incinerator, unusual floor and loft, autoclave and cage washer to generate
additional space to allow expansion of the cell analysis and mammalian and
bacterial cell culture laboratories, (2) updating the ceiling, lighting,
flooring, electrical service and network connectivity to a standard appropriate
for a modern molecular cell biology laboratory and (3) updating the benches,
cabinetry and plumbing for use as a molecular cell biology laboratory. These
renovations will create: a modern cell analysis laboratory, an expanded the
mammalian cell culture laboratory, a large equipment room, a bacterial cell
culture laboratory, and a modernization of the molecular biology laboratory. The
facility provides basic cell culture, molecular biology and cell analysis
equipment that support the research programs of 16 faculty, addressing
fundamental problems such as the molecular events of vertebrate egg
fertilization, the structure and function of apolipoprotein A-I, cellular
differentiation during embryogenesis and fundamental techniques in forensic DNA
analysis. In addition, the facility supports five different research training
programs, several of which are targeted at underrepresented groups that provide
undergraduate and Master's-level students with independent or semi-independent
research experiences. These renovations will enhance the research programs of
participating faculty and the training of their students, resulting in the
ability to provide research experiences for approximately 20 additional
students. This project will advance individual faculty research programs
addressing fundamental problems in protein biochemistry, molecular and cell
biology and forensic molecular biology. Furthermore, the renovation will enhance
the research training of undergraduate and Master's level students by providing
a modern molecular and cell biology equipment facility. It will increase the
involvement of underrepresented groups in the sciences by providing specific
research training experiences to students from underrepresented groups at
Sacramento State and transferring from local community colleges.