* 0963361
* ARI-R2: The renovation and refurbishment of a class 10000 cleanroom at the Vanderbilt Institute of Nanoscale Science and Engineering core laboratories
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Dennis Hall, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 569,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will modernize the 10000
cleanroom facility in the Vanderbilt Institute of Nanoscale Science and
Engineering (VINSE) core laboratory complex. This 1635 square foot cleanroom
facility has been in continuous service since 2003. At present many faculty
members and students are working on different research projects using this
cleanroom facility including studies on solar energy conversion from electron
field emission, thermal transport in carbon nanotubes, biosensor synthesis
requiring e-beam lithography, and metal-insulator transitions that are modulated
by optics. For the continued safe use of this cleanroom facility, it is in need
of replacement of the following two essential components: 1) Toxic Gas
Monitoring System (TGMS); and 2) HEPA filter fan units (FFU). This proposal is
to replace the old TGMS unit with a new one, and make the cleanroom compatible
to the current standards. The new TGMS unit is expected to detect all of the
gases used or generated in a Semiconductor manufacturing facility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teaching, training and educational activities using the
Vanderbilt Institute of Nanoscale Science and Engineering (VINSE) core
laboratory complex are well defined and detailed in the proposal, and cleanroom
facilities play a key role in these activities. In addition, the NSF supported
IGERT program at Vanderbilt University with Fisk University provides opportunity
for underrepresented minority students to be trained and educated using the
VINSE Core Laboratory facilities. These facilities are also used by students and
faculty members from Delaware State University for their education and research
activities. Other outreach activities included nanoscience and nanotechnology
programs for high school students through Vanderbilt Summer Academy.