* 0963675
* 2010 Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Gordon Research Conference July 11-16, 2010 at Davidson College, Davidson, NC
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Vladimir Uversky, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 12/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding to support a new
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) that will focus on functional proteins not
having unique 3-D structures, known as intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs).
Recent studies have revealed that IDPs are highly abundant in nature and carry
out a number of crucial biological functions that are complementary to the
functions of structured (ordered) proteins. In any given organism, IDPs
constitute a functionally broad and densely populated subset of its proteome.
IDPs are common across the three domains of life, being especially abundant in
the eukaryotic proteomes. Signaling sequences and sites of posttranslational
modifications are commonly located within regions of intrinsic disorder.
Disorder-to-order transitions in an IDP are coupled with the adoption of
different structures in complexes with different partners. The disorder-based
signaling is modulated by various posttranslational modifications and
alternative splicing. GRC provides a forum for the discussion of IDPs, with
topics including but not limited to experimental and theoretical studies of
their intrinsically flexible state, mechanisms of their interactions and their
functional roles in biological systems. This GRC will unite participants from
all scientific disciplines with an interest in broadening our understanding of
IDPs and engaging in biophysical studies of individual proteins as well as
genomic and proteomic studies in whole organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;This conference seeks to gather leading and established
specialists in the field and to bring them into contact with each other and with
younger scientists, in an effort to seed new thoughts across the field.
Consistent with the GRC philosophy, a retreat-like atmosphere will be designed.
This will help in summarizing current knowledge and in spreading the ideas
across the community. There are no formal publications of the conference
proceedings, only collegial exchanges on site and afterward. This new GRC will
help promote research of IDPs at different levels and in various fields,
including but not limited to bioinformatics, proteomics, interactomics, and
unfoldomics and then will help to link the results of these diverse studies with
the thorough and detailed characterization of IDPs. In the preliminary program,
ten of thirty one speakers and discussion leaders are women. The program has a
balanced mixture of established and young scientists. When the attendees are
selected from the pool of applicants, principles of affirmative action with
respect to minority groups, women and junior scientists will be used as
criteria, in addition to the date of application and the scientific background
of the applicant.