* 0963512
* Research and Facility Renovation for the College of Engineering, Technology and Computer Science at Tennessee State University
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* S. Keith Hargrove, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,287,206.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the 7,202 square
foot renovation and modernization of six research laboratories and a server room
on the lower level (bottom floor) of the Research and Sponsored Programs (RSP)
Building at Tennessee State University (TSU). The new, state of the art
laboratories will foster multidisciplinary research as part of TSU's
Interdisciplinary Graduate Engineering Research (TIGER) Institute. Renovation
tasks supported by this award will include flooring, installation of HVAC,
electrical work, plumbing, and interior finishes. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The renovated facility will be used by TSU
faculty and students from architectural, civil, electrical, and mechanical
engineering; aeronautical and industrial technology; computer science,
chemistry; biology; mathematics; and physics. Upgrading TSU's research
infrastructure will enable collaborative, interdisciplinary research in ongoing
research thrusts in scientific visualization, materials science and engineering,
and smart sensor networking. Current research at TSU focuses on integrated
systems health management of turbine engines, improving vehicle-human
performance in vehicles for military and commercial applications, simulation and
modeling techniques to assess the life of composite materials, cross-layered
cognitive networks, and RF sensor based automatic target
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: TSU is an Historically Black
College/University that trains a significant number of African American students
in engineering. Annually, at least one hundred undergraduate and fifty graduate
students will be impacted by this award. Upon completion, the renovated facility
will enhance the ability of faculty to compete for extramural funding, continue
to attract outstanding student scholars and faculty, and facilitate the increase
of the nation's minority doctorates in the sciences, engineering, and
mathematics.