* 0963482
* Infrastructure Upgrades for Nano and Biotechnology Research at the LSU Agricultural Center
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Roger Husser, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 578,651.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides renovated
laboratory infrastructure for the conduct of nano and molecular biotechnology
research in the Wilson Laboratories at the Louisiana State University (LSU)
Agricultural Center. The Wilson Laboratories, where the renovation will take
place, were originally constructed in 1961. Although several portions of the
building have been renovated over the years, appropriate laboratory facilities
to support newer research areas are not
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The renovation will create
three new laboratories: Nanotechnology (with a clean room), Protein Chemistry,
and Tissue Culture. The renovations include new casework, interior finishes,
fume hoods, a Class 1000 clean room, and de-ionized water system. These
facilities will accelerate research in areas such as gene and drug delivery,
plant-derived bioactive compounds, antimicrobial nanoparticle synthesis,
molecular dynamics simulation of protein function, cell based biosensors,
BioMEMS, photoactivated gene silencing, and development of C. elegans as a
biomedical model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The renovated facility
will serve as research laboratories for researchers and students in the LSU
Agricultural Center, as well as for satellite and collaborating institutions
throughout the region. In addition, the renovated facility will promote broader
impact by serving as a central resource for the LSU Agricultural Center
Biotechnology Education for Student and Teachers (BEST) program, where high
school teacher-student pairs work in LSU laboratories during summers to conduct
hands-on research in bioetechnology. In prior years, BEST participants were
scattered at various locations, so housing them in laboratories within the
renovated facility will enhance not only collaboration among researchers, but
also foster cross-disciplinary research as well.