* 0963033
* Northern Tier Network--North Dakota and South Dakota Access Improvement
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Bonita Neas, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2013
* USD 751,244.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will improve the structure
of the Northern Tier Network (NTN) by linking North Dakota and South Dakota's
NTN segments (NTN-ND and NTN-SD). NTN is a regional optical research and
education network connecting institutions in thirteen states across the
northwestern U.S. Connecting the South Dakota and North Dakota networks
involves, acquiring a 20-year Indefeasible Right of Use (IRU) to dark fiber
between NTN-ND and NTN-SD, acquiring the necessary equipment to light the new
fiber between NTN-ND and NTN-SD, and upgrading NTN-SD's equipment in Aberdeen,
SD where the connection to the South Dakota network is made.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some examples of research activities that are likely to
benefit from the network connection are: high-energy physics research, when the
planned Dakota Ion Accelerators for Nuclear Astrophysics and Long-Baseline
Neutrino Program experiments come on line; work on improving the information
content of satellite imagery involving collaborations between South Dakota State
University, Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland, and the Earth Resources
Observation and Science (EROS) Data Center in Sioux Falls, SD, along with
commercial satellite imaging companies located around the world; environmental
science research in the Dakotas and elsewhere in the United States that takes
advantage of network access to the remotely sensed images of the Earth's surface
archived in the EROS Data Center; and real-time predictive modeling of drought,
rainfall, and hail. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratories at higher education sites
in South Dakota, nationally and internationally provide student research
training and mentoring activities for students across a variety of disciplines
that exploit network access to large data archives or supercomputing resources
around the United States, including the EROS Data Center in South Dakota. In
addition, the new network connection will enable scientists in South Dakota to
exploit more effectively the scanning electron microscope located at North
Dakota State University.