* 0963558
* Upgrades to Storm Peak Laboratory, A High Elevation Atmospheric Research and Education Station
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Daniel Obrist, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 587,767.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Atmospheric research has been conducted at the Desert
Research Institute's Storm Peak Laboratory (SPL) at 3220 m ASL in northwestern
Colorado for nearly 30 years. The last major renovation of SPL was done in 1995.
This award will fund renovations that will allow air sampling, chemical and
biological measurements under up-to-date conditions in warm and cold
laboratories. A chemistry laboratory with laminar flow benches and chemical hood
will meet current and future needs for preparation of aerosol filters, cloud
water and snow samples. Cyberinfrastructure will be improved by upgrading SPL's
internet connection to a high-bandwidth, direct microwave connection. Expanded
capabilities for atmospheric sampling will be enabled through construction of
five new air-handling manifolds that will allow contamination free collection of
natural, anthropogenic, and biogenic aerosols and gases under well characterized
aerodynamic conditions. A climate-control system will be added to ensure proper
functioning of temperature-sensitive instruments. The proposed improvements will
transform science at SPL by enhancing the ability to conduct atmospheric
research and creating new opportunities in atmospheric biogeochemistry for
research and research training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPL's remote continental
location, year-round access, and extensive instrumental facilities allow
measurement in the free atmosphere by scientists from the Desert Research
Institute, eight national laboratories, and nineteen other universities in the
U.S. and Europe. Research activities at SPL always involve participation by
undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral fellows. SPL hosts
atmospheric science field courses from a multitude of universities for both
undergraduate and graduate students. In 2009, SPL hosted 43 undergraduate,
graduate, and high school students via field courses. These classes give
students experience in all facets of atmospheric science, from development of
the research proposal to experiment and project planning plus final reporting.
The renovations will expand the scope and focus of research conducted at SPL and
thus provide additional opportunities for field training.