* 0963259
* Renovation of a Shared Facility for Research and Research Training at a Science-Rich Liberal Arts Institution
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Michael Deibel, Earlham College
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 09/30/2013
* USD 807,794.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5) to renovate the west wing of Stanley Hall, constructed in
1972 and shared by faculty in biology and chemistry. The renovation will affect
about 5000 sq. ft. of laboratory space, which will be organized into "research
neighborhoods". The theme of each research neighborhood will be dominated by the
instrumentation it houses (analytical, biochemical, molecular, synthesis, and
support). The renovation will provide house utilities that are currently
inadequate or lacking, such as house air, vacuum, purified water and nitrogen
gas, as well as improved storage, shelving and bench configuration.

The faculty in chemistry and biology have a strong track record of
collaboration. The renovated and reorganized space is expected to foster and
stimulate further collaboration, new research projects, student research
training and recruitment of new faculty as well as competitiveness and
productivity of current faculty.

Earlham College serves a student body that includes 12% underrepresented
minorities as well as students from underserved and rural areas. These students
will benefit from enhanced research training. In addition, the renovated
facility will be used for outreach activities and to stimulate collaboration
with local industry.