* 0963826
* IDBR: Ultrahigh Dynamic Range Fluorescence Detection for Capillary Electrophoresis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Norman Dovichi, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 130,000.00

Laser-induced fluorescence is a technique used for the study of minute amounts
of fluorescent material. The combination of capillary electrophoresis with
ultrasensitive laser-induced fluorescence has proven to be a powerful tool in
bioanalysis. As the preeminent example, the human genome was sequenced using
capillary electrophoresis arrays.

Dynamic range refers to the analyte concentrations that can be measured
reliably. It is limited for low signals (low concentrations) by background
noise, and at high signal (high concentration) by detector saturation or other
sources of non-linearity. A number of bioassays would benefit from wider dynamic
range. Examples of such systems include the study of rare post-translational
modifications of proteins, characterization of the ultralow methylation status
of DNA, detection of protein serum markers at very low concentrations, detection
of rare circulating cancer cells in the presence of a very large excess of
normal cells, enzyme kinetics at extreme substrate excess, study of specific
metabolic cascades, characterization of binding events across a very wide
concentration range, and detailed description of errors in
transcription/translation.

In this project a laser-induced fluorescence detector will be developed for
capillary electrophoresis, with a 12 order of magnitude dynamic range. This
detector provides over 100,000,000 times wider dynamic range than currently
available commercial instruments. The instrument is based on two modules.
Roughly 99% of the fluorescence signal will be sent to a single-molecule
detection module, which will be used to quantitate from 1-1,000 analyte
molecules. The remaining fluorescence signal will be sent to high-dynamic range
module that will be used to quantitate from 1000 to 1,000,000,000,000 analyte
molecules.

The broader impacts of the project include enabling the detection of minute
metabolic products generated from a huge excess of fluorescently-tagged
substrate, thereby enabling advances in biological research. Results of the work
will be made available to the community through publications and open-source
web-based resources.