* 0963905
* Octopamine Functions and Underlying Mechanisms for Associative Learning and Memory of Drosophila Melanogaster
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Kyung-An Han, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Cedric L. Williams
* 08/31/2010
* USD 52,811.00

Octopamine is a major invertebrate monoamine and is considered a counterpart of
mammalian norepinephrine. To understand how octopamine regulates adaptive
behaviors of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, the current project focuses
on a major receptor for octopamine OAMB that displays prominent expression in
the mushroom bodies, brain structures crucial for learning and memory. Thus, the
major objective of this research is to test the hypothesis that OAMB activates
key cellular signaling pathways in the mushroom bodies, which underlies
associative learning and memory. Preliminary data revealed that oamb mutants
showed poor learning in reward conditioning (capacity to learn and remember the
odor previously associated with sugar) and impaired short-term memory in
conditioned courtship (courtship suppression of rejected males). In the present
studies, oamb mutants and their transgenic variants will be further examined to
elucidate specific roles of OAMB in learning and memory, the brain structure(s)
that requires OAMB for those functions, and intracellular signaling molecules
activated by OAMB. These studies together will help delineate the cellular
mechanisms underlying reward learning and conditioned courtship. Considering a
remarkable functional conservation of key molecules between Drosophila and other
animals, knowledge obtained from the proposed studies will ultimately provide
significant insights into how different environmental factors and genetic
components affect learning and memory processes in other animals including
humans. The present studies employ diverse experimental approaches including
molecular, cellular, genetic, biochemical, statistical, and behavioral analyses
and thus will offer multidisciplinary training and learning opportunities for
students. Indeed, the PI has been actively engaged in training diverse groups of
students including underrepresented minorities and women as well as offering
research opportunities for high school students and various summer program
participants. Thus, this project will have broader impact by enhancing
participation of diverse student groups in research and integrating research
into education.