* 0963026
* US GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section: Analysis of Key Trace Elements in Size-fractionated Marine Particles
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Phoebe Lam, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2013
* USD 354,065.00

GEOTRACES is an international program to study the global marine biogeochemical
cycles of trace elements and their isotopes (TEIs). Its guiding mission is to
"identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key
trace elements and isotopes [TEIs] in the ocean" (GEOTRACES Science Plan, 2006).
Because particles in the ocean serve as important sources and/or sinks for many
trace elements and isotopes, particulate TEIs are key parameters for GEOTRACES.
Indeed, the composition and distribution of particles in the ocean is crucial to
understanding all three themes identified by the Science Plan: 1) Fluxes and
processes at ocean interfaces, 2) Internal cycling, and 3) Development of
proxies for past change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at
the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will be supported to ensure the
collection of high quality trace metal clean size-fractionated particles on the
US North Atlantic GEOTRACES Atlantic section and the analysis of key trace
elements and major particulate phases. They will analyze size-fractionated
particles collected by battery operated in-situ filtration for all key trace
elements listed in the Science Plan (Fe, Al, Zn, Mn, Cd, Cu), a suite of other
trace elements of interest (e.g. Co, Ti, Ba), and major carrier phases (e.g.
CaCO3, biogenic Si, and POC). The operation of battery operated in-situ
filtration (McLane pumps) for short-lived radionuclides is already funded for
the Atlantic GEOTRACES section. This project will coordinate closely with the
short-lived radionuclide group to adapt McLane pumps for simultaneous sampling
of size-fractionated particles for trace metal analysis and radionuclide
collection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Inasmuch as this will be the
first full ocean depth zonal section of size-fractionated particulates, the
result should be a novel and comprehensive understanding of the distribution,
composition, and dynamics of the particles that control much of the chemical
distribution, carbon uptake, and the biological productivity of the ocean.
Because of the importance of particles in so many processes affecting the
cycling of TEIs, this dataset will be invaluable in conjunction with other
parameters measured on the GEOTRACES Atlantic section. Many as yet unposed
scientific questions will emerge from this unprecedented dataset, which will be
made available through publication and electronically through the BCO-DMO data
office at Woods Hole so that it can be mined in the future by anyone in the
community exploring questions about particle distribution and composition. A
summer undergraduate student will help with some sample analyses, as will a
graduate student in the MIT-WHOI Joint Program in Oceanography.