* 0963274
* Reinvigorating Biotechnology at Southern Oregon University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Karen Stone, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 06/30/2013
* USD 218,786.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southern Oregon University (SOU) is a
liberal arts institution with a focus on undergraduate education and research.
The Departments of Biology and Chemistry at Southern Oregon University recently
established an undergraduate research facility dedicated to study in the
interdisciplinary fields of biotechnology. This award will enhance the research
and research training capabilities of the Biotechnology Research Center and
develop it as a state-of-the-art facility for faculty and students to conduct
cutting-edge research. The Biotechnology Research Center is a supportive
environment at SOU for undergraduate students to learn to use molecular methods
and to understand the application of these techniques to diverse research
questions. The Center houses equipment and supplies needed for research using
molecular methods, provides functional bench space, and serves as a forum for
interaction between faculty and students working on diverse projects that share
some methodology. This award will enable SOU to purchase and install up-to-date
fixed equipment and facilitate renovations to modernize the lab space. It is an
integral component of numerous student research projects and provides research
training to dozens of upper-division biology and chemistry students through
specific courses. Thus, the Center is an invaluable facility in helping SOU
train tomorrow's scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Renovating the Center will
correct deficiencies in basic research and safety needs. Specifically, this
project includes the upgrade and/or installation of a fume hood, DNA extraction
room, microscopy space, vacuum lines with HEPA filtration, distilled water,
safety shower and adequate bench space. SOU will then provide a modern, safer
research environment for SOU's growing body of students interested in the fields
of molecular and cellular biology and biochemistry.