* 0963812
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Building an Intelligent, Uncertainty-Resilient Detection and Tracking Sensor Network
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Sartaj Sahni, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 05/31/2014
* USD 249,786.00

Detection, identification, and tracking of CBRNE (Chemical, Biological,
Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive) plumes can be accomplished by combining
the modalities of sensor and cyber networks. The sensor network provides
information about physical-space activities, e.g., locations and movements of
the plume sources. The cyber network provides storage and computational
resources to analyze and infer where the plume originated, the trajectory of its
movement, and the prediction of its future movement. The challenges in realizing
such a sensor cyber network include intelligent sensing (intelligent sensor
selection and coverage) and the capability to deal with uncertainties
(uncertainty in measurement as well as in modeling). This project proposes to
leverage the convergence between the sensor and the cyber networks to achieve
these goals. In particular, the plan is to carry out three synergistic research
tasks: 1) network formation by sensor selection, placement, and coverage; 2)
sensor tasking protocol with temporal/spatial uncertainty management; 3)
protocols for reliable sensor-cyber communication supporting the above two
tasks. The PIs will prototype the research results and integrate the prototypes
for different components to build the sensor cyber network for plume detection,
identification and tracking. They will also evaluate the sensor cyber network
using various test scenarios in collaboration with Oak Ridge National Lab. If
successful, the project will provide technology for building detection and
tracking sensor networks that can give great protection to people and the
environment against harmful plumes.