* 0963533
* International Research Fellowship Program:   Profiling Marine Herbivore Gene Expression in Response to Algal Chemical Defenses
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Kristen Whalen, Whalen, Kristen E
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 08/31/2010
* USD 107,622.00

0754319 Whalen

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Kristen
E. Whalen, University of California, Santa Barbara, to work with Dr. Peter
Steinberg at the University of South Wales in Australia, and with Dr. Gretchen
Hofmann at the University of California, Santa Barbara.

The marriage between molecular tools and traditional methods for the study of
marine algal-herbivore interactions holds considerable promise for the field of
chemical ecology. Despite tremendous progress in identifying the diversity,
concentrations and distribution of algal chemical defenses and their impact on
marine herbivores, few studies have addressed the proximate mechanisms
underlying the profound variation in tolerance among these herbivores for their
chemically defended foods. Part of the problem is we have virtually no
information on the physiological responses of marine herbivores mediating this
interaction. Fortunately, recent advances in genomic technology will provide a
detailed and unprecedented view of the mechanistic underpinnings of how cells
and ultimately organisms tolerate and respond to environmental chemical
stresses. Techniques such as transcriptome profiling using DNA microarrays will
allow for the parallel analysis of the expression of thousands of genes and
provide a complete picture of gene regulation occurring in response to dietary
compounds. With the recent completion and annotation of the purple sea urchin
genome, genes responsible for mediating tolerance of algal chemistry can, for
the first time, be identified in a marine herbivore. The central objective of
this project is to develop the sea urchin microarray as a tool for understanding
broader aspects of marine herbivore physiology and resistance to dietary
chemical stressors. An oligonucleotide array will be designed and constructed
targeting over 2000 genes important in xenobiotic detoxification/efflux, signal
transduction, nutrient metabolism and chemoreception. This custom designed sea
urchin array will be used to profile gene expression in the Australian urchin
Heliocidaris erythrogramma, in response to chemically diverse macroalgal diets.
Transcriptome profiling will identify target genes whose temporal expression
will be further assessed by real-time quantitative PCR. Furthermore, genes
identified by transcriptome profiling can be targeted for additional biochemical
characterization of algal compound-protein interactions. The PI anticipates this
work will add volumes to our knowledge of the underlying biochemical mechanisms
influencing algal-herbivore interactions, leading to a more complete
understanding of marine consumer response to dietary chemical stressors and the
biochemical basis of diet selection.