* 0963595
* Dictionary of Ninam, a Yanomaman Language
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Lyle Campbell, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 03/31/2014
* USD 299,927.00

The goal of this project is to complete and publish a dictionary of Ninam, an
endangered Yanomaman language, spoken by only 560 people along the Mucajaí,
upper Uraricaá, and Paragua rivers in Roraima, Brazil and Venezuela. This
project completes the dictionary began by Ernesto Migliazza in the 1960s; it
secures previously collected information otherwise at risk, with fieldwork to
expand the information on the language and its lexical entries. Two versions
will be prepared: a more technical one for scholars (with look up options in
Ninam, Portuguese, Spanish, and English), and a practical version for the Ninam
communities and local educators (Ninam, Portuguese, and Spanish). The language
offers much of scientific interest. The dictionary will contain a grammatical
sketch, with attention to unusual typological traits, of which Ninam has a
number, for example, an evidentiality system, nasal harmony, serial verbs, and
unusual ergativity, among others.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This dictionary will
have the merits well known from other dictionaries of indigenous Latin American
languages, preserving endangered knowledge systems encoded in vocabulary. The
Ninam dictionary will serve linguistics and other disciplines which depend on
language-related material (anthropology, history, biology, geography). The
dictionary will benefit Ninam communities, addressing the need for resource
materials much needed for language maintenance efforts and native-language
curriculum in schools. The project provides training of graduate students in
both the US and Brazil. It benefits the general public interested in cultural
diversity, increasing information of cultural as well as linguistic
significance. It contributes to language typology, linguistic theory, and to
understanding the history of the Yanomaman languages and their speakers.