* 0963975
* AF:  Medium:  New Directions in Coding Theory and Pseudorandomness
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Venkatesan Guruswami, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2016
* USD 707,999.00

The probabilistic method is a powerful tool to establish the
existence&lt;br/&gt;of diverse objects of importance in several applications.
For example,&lt;br/&gt;Shannon's famous theorem asserts that a random codebook
can be used&lt;br/&gt;for reliably transmitting information at optimal rates on
a noisy&lt;br/&gt;channel. It is well known that a random graph is typically
"Ramsey"&lt;br/&gt;and has no large clique or independent set, and a random
sparse graph&lt;br/&gt;is very likely to be an expander with excellent
connectivity. Yet, in&lt;br/&gt;applications it is important to explicitly
construct such an object&lt;br/&gt;with a certified guarantee of the desired
property. Obtaining such&lt;br/&gt;constructions of comparable strength to what
is guaranteed by the&lt;br/&gt;probabilistic method is typically much harder and
often unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pseudorandomness is a broad area that deals
with efficiently&lt;br/&gt;generating objects that exhibit the desirable
properties of&lt;br/&gt;"random-like" objects despite being constructed either
explicitly or&lt;br/&gt;with limited randomness. Such pseudorandom constructions
are important&lt;br/&gt;in the study of error-correcting codes, complexity
theory,&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics, cryptography, and high-dimensional geometry.
Research&lt;br/&gt;in recent years has addressed some of these challenges and
led to&lt;br/&gt;powerful constructions of error-correcting codes, expander
graphs,&lt;br/&gt;randomness extractors, Ramsey graphs, compressed sensing
matrices,&lt;br/&gt;etc. Despite the seemingly different definitions and
motivations for&lt;br/&gt;the study of these objects, much of this progress was
based on&lt;br/&gt;insights uncovering intimate connections between them,
leading to a&lt;br/&gt;rich theory with a common pool of broadly useful
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This progress notwithstanding, explicit
constructions with optimal&lt;br/&gt;parameters typically remain open, and the
area is full of exciting new&lt;br/&gt;directions motivated by emerging
applications. This project will&lt;br/&gt;involve a comprehensive collection of
interconnected research&lt;br/&gt;activities focusing on the theory of error-
correcting codes and&lt;br/&gt;pseudorandomness. The directions pursued will
include strengthening&lt;br/&gt;the existing connections between various
pseudorandom constructs and&lt;br/&gt;discovering new computational applications
thereof, and investigating&lt;br/&gt;the pseudorandom properties of codes and
related objects that have&lt;br/&gt;important structural characteristics often
needed in applications&lt;br/&gt;(such as linearity or sparsity). Topics in
coding theory inspired by&lt;br/&gt;complexity theory such as list decoding and
locally testable codes,&lt;br/&gt;and codes for poorly understood noise models
such as deletion channels&lt;br/&gt;will be studied. Another important goal of
the project is to bridge&lt;br/&gt;the gap between worst-case and probabilistic
noise models via codes&lt;br/&gt;for channels with natural computational
restrictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use ideas from computer
science in setting new&lt;br/&gt;directions for research in coding theory as
well as discovering new&lt;br/&gt;constructions of codes and decoding
algorithms, thereby enhancing the&lt;br/&gt;connection between the computer
science and information theory&lt;br/&gt;communities. The discovery of new
coding schemes has potential direct&lt;br/&gt;applications in communication and
storage of data. Many of the&lt;br/&gt;questions to be addressed, therefore,
have a natural practical&lt;br/&gt;connection alongside their fundamental
theoretical appeal. On the&lt;br/&gt;education front, the project will engage
several graduate students and&lt;br/&gt;provide a stimulating research
environment for them, and help with the&lt;br/&gt;planned writing of a "goal-
oriented" textbook on coding theory.