* 0963973
* ITR/NGS:      Collaborative Research:     DDDAS:     Data Dynamic Simulation for Disaster Management
* CSE,CNS
* 08/20/2009,02/28/2011
* Wei Zhao, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 02/28/2011
* USD 29,371.00

This project will develop advanced Information Technology tools, mathematical
models, and prototype infrastructure for disaster modeling and management. The
project will bring comprehensive information and numerical prediction where it
is needed, at the disaster command center, in real time. The system will
incorporate large volume of information from data streams, e.g., as maps,
sensor, surveyance, and weather data, and the mathematical model will run on
remote supercomputers. The model will be controlled by dynamically available
data, and the results visualized in distributed devices, like laptops and
palmtops connected to the Internet by wireless ethernet and a broadband
satellite link. Other sensors and airborne imagers will also be networked
wirelessly. The core of the envisioned modeling system will be an existing
computer model of wildland and weather around the area, adn these models will be
rewritten from scratch using modern software engineering methodology as a data
driven application, and enhanced by new mathematical modeling techniques
together with advanced statistical techniques will be used to manage
uncertainty. High-performance middleware will be used to connect omputational
nodes, sensor nodes, surveyance nodes, and visualization nodes into a
distributed information and modeling system. New network software technologies
will make the communication between the nodes secure and provide quality of
service guarantees. The system will be designed to tolerate interruptions of
communication, increased latencies, and node disappearances.

