* 0963854
* IDBR: The LuxArray Scanner: Surveying the Environment with Biomicroelectronic Cellular Reporter Arrays
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Syed Islam, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 07/31/2013
* USD 150,312.00

Bacterial bioreporters are designed to produce a measurable signal in response
to a specific chemical or physical agent in their environment. Since they are
living sensors, they respond as a biological unit both continuously and in real-
time to environmental changes. Moreover, they report on contaminant
bioavailability (i.e., the effect the contaminant has on a living system) rather
than merely on contaminant concentration, as most analytical methods do. A suite
of 689 E. coli bioreporters containing unique genetic promoters linked to the
bioluminescent lux operon was designed by DuPont. This "LuxArray" serves as a
powerful tool to profile on a massive scale an organism's transcriptional
response to its environment. By monitoring those bacterial bioreporters that
generate visible light, one can identify genes activated under known specific
environmental conditions, such as the input of a chemical contaminant. The goal
of this research effort is to establish the utility of the LuxArray as an
environmental monitoring system using artificially spiked water samples and
samples obtained from Chattanooga Creek, a coal tar contaminated field site
located in Chattanooga, Tennessee. LuxArray bioreporters will be tested both as
free cells and as cells immobilized in a latex matrix. The expected long-term
outcome is a field deployable LuxArray instrument capable of continuously
monitoring an environmental ecosystem and reporting in real-time chemical
insults that may occur within that ecosystem with concurrent bioluminescent
"fingerprint" identification of what those chemicals are. Resulting data can
then be used to forecast environmental health and contribute to models of
predictive risk assessment. Project activity and outcomes will be available at
http://www.ceb.utk.edu.