* 0963199
* Expanding and Improving the C-Light Regional Optical Network
* O/D,OIA
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2012
* Jill Gemmill, Clemson University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 06/30/2012
* USD 1,431,340.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
renovate the existing regional optical research and education network
infrastructure in South Carolina, the South Carolina Light Rail and C-Light. The
project will lead to a higher bandwidth connection between South Carolina
campuses and national research and education networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will replace an existing router at the border of the C-Light network, in
Greenville, with a carrier-class router and use this to peer with Internet2 and
the North Carolina Research and Education Network in Charlotte, and with
Southern Crossroads/Southern Light Rail, Internet2 and National Lambda Rail in
Atlanta. The bandwidth of the connection between Atlanta and Greenville will be
expanded and multiple optical waves will be used to connect Greenville and
Charlotte. Campus Points of Presence within South Carolina Light Rail will be
augmented with new switches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of research projects
will benefit from the enhanced connectivity. These include: research on avionics
at the Citadel; research at Claflin University into the structural mechanisms
responsible for the stability of proteins; modeling studies of cloud formation
over Antarctica conducted by Coastal Carolina University; the use of
archeometrics to develop digital reconstructions of ancient buildings (also by
Coastal Carolina University); modeling studies of galaxy collisions by a
researcher at Francis Marion University; research into protein docking by
investigators at the Medical University of South Carolina, the University of
South Carolina, and the University of Tennessee; network analyses of signal
transduction as well as research on tissue engineering and biofabrication at the
Medical University of South Carolina; and the simulation of polymers, including
biopolymers, their interactions with synthetic surfaces and other polymers,
approaches to DNA sequencing and detection using nanopore techniques, and multi-
scale modeling of materials, by investigators at the University of South
Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide infrastructure for
research conducted at academic institutions within the state of South Carolina.
Because a variety of different institutions, including two historically black
colleges and universities, are being connected to South Carolina Light Rail
through other funding, enhancing the connections between South Carolina Light
Rail and the national research and education networks will benefit not only the
South Carolina Light Rail principals, Clemson, the University of South Carolina
and the Medical University of South Carolina, but also a broader range of
institutions throughout South Carolina. The project includes educational
activities at Coastal Carolina University (a parallel programming course), South
Carolina State University, and the South Carolina Governor's High School for
Science and Mathematics (using the remote computing resources for classroom
education).