* 0963641
* Critical-Juncture, STEM Educational Innovations Driven by Holistic, Integrative Evaluation Systems
* EHR,HRD
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Maryam Foroozesh, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,235,958.00

The Xavier University of Louisiana I-CUBED program will focus on two of the
I-CUBED program's integrative themes, namely, the critical educational junctures
and broadening participation in STEM disciplines. The program will integrate and
enhance the University's suite of core STEM bridge programs, which serve to
attract underrepresented minority students into STEM fields and assist them in
the transition from their high school studies through their first year of
college. The project proposes to provide a new model for integrating and
assessing "bridge" programs at the institution that have been successful
especially in graduating African American students with STEM degrees. Overall
goal of the project is to effectively connect, integrate and evaluate a core set
of STEM bridge programs at Xavier and the summer/freshman year learning
environment in STEM at the institution. This would be achieved by increasing
collaboration and communication among faculty, increasing faculty access and
exposure to resources and research in STEM education development, providing
assessment and evaluation systems for STEM education development, and
stimulating research on and information dissemination of same. Innovative,
transferable instructional strategies and assessment models will be developed
and fully tested. The program will begin to change the institutional culture of
the university, breaking down departmental barriers and developing an
environment of cooperation and collaboration based on state of the art planning
and assessment systems. Xavier's I-CUBED program will use its nationally
successful mechanisms for dissemination of STEM programs, to share program
results throughout the higher education community.