* 0963345
* A Path Toward an Environmentally Secure Future through Ecosystem Science and Monitoring
* O/D,OIA
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Jiquan Chen, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 06/30/2013
* USD 3,639,152.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project involves the renovation of laboratories in the south wing of the
Bowman-Oddy Laboratories Building at the University of Toledo, in Toledo, Ohio.
Constructed over 40 years ago, these laboratories currently serve as the
research facility for faculty from the Department of Environmental Sciences. The
renovated space will become the Center for Biosphere Restoration Research. The
new Center will conduct interdisciplinary, collaborative research on the
ecosystem processes that drive the biosphere and on the impacts of human
activity. The design encourages the development of holistic approaches to
research. Examples include: the linking of field ecology with remote sensing and
predictive models; and the collaboration of soil biochemistry with plant
ecological physiology to gain greater understanding of the plant&#8208;soil
system.

The renovation will include: interior construction and renovation of laboratory
case-work; refurbishment of electrical, plumbing, heating, cooling, air-
handling, and hood ventilation; and network wiring. NSF is contributing part of
the overall cost of a portion of the renovation that is associated with research
and research training.

The following are examples of areas of research to be conducted in the Center:
how forest management practices can be used to enhance carbon sequestration
while maintaining the productivity of the forest for timber and recreational
use; the ecological principles underlying community assembly of insect
populations in managed environments and their implications for the ecology of
agricultural systems in tropical forests; a search for ecological markers
predictive of the sustainability of the ecosystem services provided by wetland
and aquatic ecosystems; the study of fluxes from the natural landscape that are
related to the carbon cycle; the role of environmental factors such as fire,
drought and climate variations on heterotrophic and autotrophic soil
respiration, and hence on the carbon sequestration potential of forest
ecosystems; the evolution of soil microbial communities under varying inputs of
litter quality, carbon dioxide concentrations, temperature, and exogenous
nitrogen in order to predict the ability of soils to sequester carbon under
varying environmental conditions; how extreme heat stress, elevated carbon
dioxide, and water availability affect photosynthetic productivity; developing
and deploying genetic and biomolecular techniques for the in situ detection and
community fingerprinting of environmental bacterial pathogens; the study of the
persistence of environmental contaminants such as hormones and antibiotics from
concentrated animal feeding operations, pharmaceuticals and personal care
products that are residual in sewage sludge applied to agricultural lands, and
acrylamides arising from waste created by the greenhouse industry; the
development of electrochemical devices for environmental sensing.

The award will help the university to maintain a vibrant program of graduate and
undergraduate research in the environmental sciences. In addition to providing
infrastructure for research and research training, the renovation will provide a
resource that will be used for summer research programs involving school
teachers. The upgraded research capabilities will enhance the collaborations of
Center faculty with partners at other academic institutions and at government
agencies with environmental portfolios.