* 0963392
* Renovation of Research Laboratories in the College of Marine Science-MSL Building
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Jacqueline Dixon, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bauke Houtman
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,898,232.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project renovates a suite of 13
contiguous, outdated and marginally functioning, research laboratories and their
associated infrastructure in the Marine Science Laboratory at the University of
South Florida College of Marine Science. Renovations will allow students and
faculty working in these facilities to carry out state-of-the-art marine
research funded by NSF and other agencies in a variety of topical areas such as
coral reefs, ocean optics, marine mass spectrochemistry, biogeochemical cycles,
climate change, bio-indicator and chemical sensor development, ocean
acidification, and plankton studies among others. Renovations include termite
repair and installation of metal casework, installation of new fume hoods, and
updates to the electrical, 70 year-old plumbing system, 25 year-old HVAC, and to
building air handling. The renovation will ameliorate negative conditions that
have become health and safety issues. Broader impacts include increasing the
infrastructure for science by providing modern and safe resaerch facilities and
dramatically increasing capacity for graduate and undergraduate student research
training and external user collaborations. the work will also benefit local in-
service K-12 science teacher training programs as well as the institution's and
faculty's efforts outreach to high school girls through summer oceanography
programs and middle school science students via a televised oceanography courses
taught by Marine Science faculty.