* 0963370
* Renovation and Revitalization of Biology Research Facilities at Penn State Schuylkill
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Rod Heisey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 590,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Funds are provided to renovate the Biology Research Laboratory in the Classroom
Building at the Schuylkill Campus of the Pennsylvania State University. The Lab
was originally designed and constructed in the 1960s, and it has received little
modernization since then. Consequently, it is severely deteriorated and
outdated. The biology faculty at PSU Schuylkill conduct research in three major
areas: parasite transmission and host-parasite interactions, effect of prenatal
drug exposure on neurological development of mice, and chemical interactions of
invasive plants and plant-soil interactions. The lack of adequate research
facilities has severely impaired the ability of the faculty to conduct their
research. The renovation will update the overall physical condition of the
Biology Research Lab, construct a small vivarium where mice and mosquitoes can
be raised, and improve the lighting and climate control of the greenhouse to
make it better suited for research applications. One impact of the renovation is
to increase significantly the number of students, especially minority students,
who are involved in independent research projects and research training.