* 0963993
* III: Medium: Energy-Efficient Data Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Miron Livny, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 783,846.00

The energy cost of operating large server farms is now a sizable portion of
their total-cost-of-ownership. The focus of the ecoDB project is to design,
develop and evaluate methods that improve the energy efficiency of such server
farms for data-intensive applications. ecoDB will investigate a range of issues,
including "global" issues that considers the entire server farm as a holistic
single large computing system and uses energy-aware workload management and data
placement strategies. These global techniques will be implemented in various
existing distributed systems, including the Condor system. At the other end of
the spectrum, this proposal plans to investigate "local" techniques that can be
used to improve the energy efficiency of an individual server by synergistically
exploiting the underlying hardware and/or software characteristics. A crucial
aspect of the ecoDB project is to focus on techniques that systematically trade
performance for energy efficiency, essentially treating "energy consumption" as
a first-class metric in data processing systems. The repercussions of this
approach percolate through various aspects of a data processing systems ranging
from query/workload optimization and evaluation to replication management and
job scheduling in large-scale parallel and distributed data processing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also facilitate the training of
graduate students in the emerging area of energy-efficient data processing
methods. The broader impacts of this proposal also include benefits to society
by producing techniques that can potentially reduce the energy consumption of
data centers, which in turn has beneficial environmental and economical effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is partially funded by the OCI CF21 Venture
Fund for promoting the reuse of Cyberinfrastructure (CI) elements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information, please see:
http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~jignesh/ecodb/