* 0963839
* SHF: Medium:  Automatic Control Driven Resource Management in Chip Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Padma Raghavan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 05/31/2015
* USD 899,683.00

Future computer architectures will execute critical applications ranging from
climate modeling to bioinformatics to simulations of new materials. Emerging
chip multiprocessors are novel architectures that provide high performance and
low power consumption. When multiple applications share the same chip
multiprocessor, proper management of architectural resources becomes a critical
problem. This research targets inter-application management of different types
of resources found in a chip multiprocessor using robust and resilient
techniques drawn from formal feedback control theory. It enables applications to
satisfy their performance requirements and, at the same time, maximizes the
utilization of hardware resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research helps to
make the transition from conventional architectures to chip multiprocessors
smoother, and as a result, maximizes the number of critical applications that
can take advantage of these emerging architectures. The transfer of the
technology being developed to IBM and HP Labs allows serious testing of the
proposed strategies in large-scale architectures built from chip
multiprocessors. The results from this project not only present an accurate
assessment of feedback control theory in a new domain, but also get integrated
into two important software infrastructures, Singularity and Xen, both used
extensively by large research communities. This research also accommodates two
efforts in broadening participation, CISE Visit in Engineering Weekends (VIEW)
and NASA-Aerospace Education Services Project (NASA-AESP) at the Center for
Science and the Schools (CSATS).