* 0963053
* IRNC-ProNet: Americas Lightpaths:  Increasing the Rate of Discovery and Enhancing Education across the Americas
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2018
* Louis Fox, Florida International University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 7,744,790.00

The project team intends Americas Lightpaths (AmLight) to enable research and
education amongst the people of the Americas through the operation of production
infrastructure for communication and collaboration between the US and Western
Hemisphere science and engineering research and education communities. Four
links are proposed to tie together the major research networks of five of the
larger countries in the Americas: Brazil, Canada, Chile, Mexico, and the United
States. In addition, this work will enable interconnects between the United
States and the Latin American regional network of RedCLARA, which enables
connectivity to 18 Latin American national research and education networks.

The effort is fundamentally collaborative, includingg AURA, ANSP, RNP, CENIC,
AtlanticWave, PacificWave, ANSP, CUDI, RedCLARA, and REUNA. Through AtlanticWave
and PacificWave, there will be production connectivity and peering to North
American backbone networks Internet2, National Lambda Rail (NLR), ESnet, and
CANARIE. Through RedCLARA, there will be production connectivity to thirteen
national research and education networks with plans to expand to eighteen NRENs
during the life of the project.

AmLight will enhance global e-Science collaborations through distributed
production peering fabrics, as well as any research and education networks
present or future that connect to AtlanticWave or PacificWave. AmLight is a
network architecture designed to support the needs of U.S.-Western Hemisphere
research and education communities in a manner that supports the evolving nature
of discovery and scholarship. The capacity and designs are based on
collaborative funding over the five-year project plan, and are expected to
evolve and continue to match the needs of the community.

Over 40 collaborations that include participants from the Americas are funded
directly by NSF and encompass disciplines including physics, environmental
science, oceanography, climate change, astronomy, and others. AmLight will serve
as the foundational infrastructure to support these collaborations.

Intellectual Merit AmLight is an approach to solve the problem of
interconnecting not just the advanced networks, but the core communities and
needs behind them in the Western Hemisphere. Today?s research is being adversely
impacted by the lack of networking capacity to and from South America. AmLight
provides the structure and the resources to empower researchers and educators.
These successes present themselves qualitatively in the creation of
geographically distributed research groups using the network, working groups
formed through common interests developed on the network, and publications made
possible through the network.

Broader Impact As the network ties together more instruments and research groups
at higher speeds, the result will be an increase in the rate of gathering,
processing, and sharing data. This will produce an increase in the rate of
discovery. The possible impact of this award touches on many areas of
collaborative science and engineering. From biodiversity research that will
identify specimens faster, to collaborative biomedical engineering that will
discover drug treatments more quickly, to nuclear physicists. Scholarship in the
Americas will improve through new opportunities for collaborative teaching,
technology-augmented student mobility, and an infrastructure for inquiry-based
learning. The AmLight project will allow U.S. classrooms to share a window to
classrooms throughout the Western Hemisphere.

The NSF designates Hispanic Americans as a disadvantaged community. This
infrastructure gives Hispanic Americans a new and unique advantage - the
opportunity to leverage cultural and language commonalities with collaborators
in Latin America to advance their pursuit of research and education in the US.
This award will offer an advantage to not only the Hispanic populations
throughout the US, but will cement collaborative relationships throughout the
Americas.