* 0963113
* Renovation of Coe College's Peterson Hall of Science
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Marie Baehr, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 02/28/2013
* USD 4,704,396.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
the renovation of Peterson Hall at Coe College, a small, private, undergraduate
university in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. Built in 1968, this building houses all of the
science laboratories at the College. Problems with the existing structure
include: cracking and separation of a wall on the third floor; erosion of window
plaster and casings; windows that no longer open; frequent plumbing leaks;
electrical capacity that is too low for modern research equipment and
environmental systems; compressed air, steam and gas systems that do not work in
many rooms; failure of air handlers to achieve climate control; lack of airflow
isolation in rooms where trace-level analysis is performed; a hot water system,
original to the building, that has exceeded its useful life; and stockrooms that
lack proper storage and ventilation conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
renovation is essentially a gut renovation of the interior of Peterson Hall. It
will include: replacement of ceilings, flooring, lighting, some ductwork,
windows, interior wall covering, door frames and some interior walls;
refurbishment of electrical, plumbing, heating, cooling, air-handling, hood
ventilation and temperature control systems; reconfiguration of lab benches
&amp; spaces; and network wiring. NSF is contributing part of the overall cost
of renovating the building to cover the portion of the renovation that is
associated with research and research training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
following are examples of areas in which research is conducted in Peterson Hall
and which would be strengthened by the renovation: the physics of oxide glasses
and their structure-property relationships, including the study of
superstructural groups in borate glasses, the structure of complex three and
four component borosilicate glasses for radioactive waste incorporation, and the
structure of a variety of new alkali and alkaline-earth vanadate glasses; the
optical properties of heavy metal oxide glasses and laser induced
recrystallization of lead, barium and other heavy metal vanadate glasses;
research in musical acoustics; plant and animal ecology; microbial ecology of
species that have the ability to use ferric iron and sulfur compounds as
electron acceptors for growth in the absence of oxygen; the molecular
alterations in murine microglia that occur following stimulation with pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokines in conjunction with the application of gonadal
steroids; patterns of gene expression in the salamander, Ambystoma mexicanum;
the study of sea-worm biocements; the fate of agricultural chemicals in the
natural environment; the electronic structure of glassy materials and the
corrosion of glass surfaces; and the synthesis, structure, and reactivity of
hypercoordinate group 14 compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will help
this liberal arts college to maintain a vibrant program of undergraduate
research that provides an example of the way in which undergraduates can be
given meaningful research experiences. In addition to providing infrastructure
for research and research training, the renovation will provide a resource that
will be used for summer research programs involving high school students, high
school teachers, undergraduates and visiting faculty. It will support
collaboration with faculty researchers in Japan, Canada, Italy, and England, and
their students. It will facilitate public outreach events in science and
mathematics aimed at elementary, middle, and high school students and the
general public. It will provide much better resources for undergraduates form
outside Coe who come to Coe for its Research Experiences for Undergraduates
program.