* 0963539
* ARI-R2:  Renovating a Core Facility to Support Research in the Newly Funded CREST Center for Energy and Sustainability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Crist Khachikian, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,735,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The College of Engineering, Computer
Science, and Technology (ECST) at the California State University Los Angeles
(CSULA) will renovate, reconfigure, and modernize 9,500 square feet of research
space to create a Core Facility for Research in Energy and Sustainability (CEaS)
to support research activities for the new NSF-supported CREST Center for Energy
and Sustainability. Research in energy and sustainability is a core multi-
disciplinary, multi-investigator activity within ECST, where faculty from
physics, biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering, and technology
collaborate. Labs will be renovated within the Engineering and Technology
building on CSULA's campus. The building, constructed in 1956 and renovated in
2000, was designed as a non-research facility before CSULA's more recent focus
on basic research, and therefore is inadequate to meet the needs of current
faculty researchers. Through this award, five disjointed spaces will be
renovated and joined into three multi-user and shared subfacilities to comprise
the core energy and sustainability research facility: Environment, Materials,
and Advanced Technology. The renovations will focus on expanding space for more
projects and faculty and student researchers, and reconfiguring of space (e.g.,
research benches, fume hoods, gas lines, high voltage electrical lines, and
cyberinfrastructure) needed to conduct
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research that will be
enhanced through this renovation address fundamental questions that have the
potential to increase the availability of highly efficient, non-fossil-fuel-
based energy, while promoting ideas of sustainability and stewardship. The
renovated facility will support current research at CSULA in fuel cells,
advanced photovoltaic materials, biofuels and combustion, and carbon
sequestration. The new core research facility will enable CEaS faculty and
students to conduct innovative research in a newly renovated facility that is
highly conducive to multidisciplinary research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Activities conducted in the renovated laboratories will contribute to
broadening participation in science and engineering and basic research on the
CSULA campus. CSULA is a comprehensive, non-Ph.D. granting university, which
will leverage the new facility to involve mostly undergraduate students in
research. The CEaS will be used for summer research programs, which include
partner institutions (middle and high schools and community colleges) with a
large population of underrepresented minority students. Summer Research
Experiences for Undergraduates and Research Experiences for Teachers
participants will also conduct research in this facility.