* 0963859
* CSR: Medium: A Component Architecture for Web Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* John Ousterhout, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2014
* USD 923,222.00

Although the World-Wide-Web was initially conceived as a vehicle for delivering
documents, it is now being used more and more for delivering sophisticated
interactive applications. However, creating powerful Web applications is a
difficult task and current development tools exacerbate the problems with a low-
level approach that discourages modularity and code reuse. This project is
exploring a new architecture for Web application development, where applications
are created by assembling high-level reusable components rather than building
from scratch. A component architecture can dramatically simplify the development
of interactive Web applications by encouraging reusability and by hiding inside
the components many of the complexities that bedevil Web developers today. This
project is exploring three aspects of component architectures: new abstractions
for higher-level Web components, including layout management; abstractions for
layering data management components to simplify transformations, business rules,
and aggregation; and the application of component architectures to mobile
devices in order to manage differences in device form factors. We are exploring
design choices, creating production-quality implementations for both framework
elements and specific components, and evaluating the implementations. In
addition, we are releasing the framework in open-source form for others to use.
Overall, this project will increase our understanding of component-based
architectures and Web application development.