* 0963626
* Building an Integrated Identification, Engagement and Assessment Infrastructure for STEM Enrichment Programs at Hunter College
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2017
* Vita Rabinowitz, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 05/31/2017
* USD 1,245,842.00

The "Building an Integrated Identification, Engagement and Assessment
Infrastructure for STEM Enrichment Programs at Hunter College" is an award with
a vision that includes transforming how STEM enrichment programs are made
available to students at CUNY Hunter College, facilitating faculty work in the
area of student education within STEM enrichment programs and collaboration
across programs, and leveraging the intellectual capital of current grant-funded
programs. The goals of the project are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Identify
students for recruitment into the STEM programs at a much earlier time and
broaden participation; &lt;br/&gt;2. Expand the paths for information about and
application to the programs at critical educational junctures; &lt;br/&gt;3.
Reinvent the mentoring of students in the programs and their research placements
to better integrate research and education; and &lt;br/&gt;4. Assess our
effectiveness and track our students to create an information loop that will
feed back into each stage of the process from recruitment to post-
baccalaureate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five NSF awards upon which the I3
project will build include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Math and Science Partnership in New
York City (0412413 to CUNY City University of New York);&lt;br/&gt;2. The
Catalyst Scholarship Program (0850021 to CUNY Hunter College)&lt;br/&gt;3. The
Noyce Teacher Academy Scholar Program (0833134 to CUNY Hunter
College);&lt;br/&gt;4. MIND Alliance for Minority Students with Disabilities in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (0833392 to CUNY Hunter
College); and&lt;br/&gt;5. New York City Louis Stokes Alliance Phase IV (0703449
to CUNY City College).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team proposed to achieve
the four stated goals by creating a multifaceted model of institutional
integration for CUNY Hunter College. This model includes a new administrative
function in the Office of the Provost complementing a Science Advisory Board; a
plan to bring together faculty and professional staff from Student Services,
Admissions, Institutional Research, Assessment, and Institutional Technology; a
plan to implement new computer software technology for improved communication
across the student, faculty and administrative communities; and a plan to create
a sustainable infrastructure for the science programs which can accommodate
growth and continued innovation. This work will focus on three primary areas:
Student recruitment and identification, student engagement, and the creation of
an information infrastructure for student tracking, reporting and assessment.