* 0963399
* CITADel - CyberInfrastructure Technology Advancement for Delaware
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Richard Sacher, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,354,827.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will renovate the campus
network infrastructure and the wide-area network connection at the University of
Delaware. This includes adding a second external connection point to the campus
network, improving external network capacity, providing higher-bandwidth
connectivity, providing the capability to use dynamic network circuits, and
upgrading campus network devices to enable the ability to provide multiple
10-Gbp/s connections from research centers and groups to the campus backbone.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovation will enhance research in a number of fields
of research pursued at the University of Delaware, including: astronomy and
space physics, catalysis and energy research, critical zone studies in
oceanography and marine biology, bioinformatics, genomics, protein modeling, and
computer science research on networks. Examples of specific projects that will
be affected include: the analysis of data from the Very Energetic Radiation
Imaging Telescope Array System (VERITAS) that scans the night sky for remnants
of exploded stars, distant active galaxies, powerful gamma-ray bursts, and
evidence of dark matter particles; conducting cosmic ray science using the
IceCube neutrino detector; archiving, analysis and visualization of the output
from hydrodynamic and magnetohydrodynamic turbulence simulations; studies of
hydrological and coastal resources, wetlands, and land resources using data from
remote sensing platforms; studies of deep-water convection in the North-Atlantic
Ocean; multiscale modeling of nanomaterials to help develop innovative catalytic
technologies for efficient conversion of biomass into chemicals, electricity,
and fuels; network performance in distributed computing; future support of the
Protein Information Resource, a public bioinformatics resource that supports
genomic, proteomic and systems biology research and scientific studies; the use
of remote supercomputing facilities for bioinformatics research; and research in
plant functional genomics in collaboration with partners in other north-eastern
EPSCoR states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing infrastructure for
research, the renovation will enhance access to dynamic network and computing
resources for graduate research training and education. Research seminars and
technical courses feature projects that make use of computing resources. The
network renovation will allow such users to exploit the current trends of
virtualization so that computing work is no longer tied to a particular lab or
group of systems. The University will use the enhanced network connectivity to
make its computational and network resources available, for education and
research, to other four- and two-year colleges in Delaware.