* 0963283
* XVIII Alpine Summer School on Buoyancy-Drive Flows
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Claudia Cenedese, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 12/31/2012
* USD 35,000.00

Buoyancy is one of the main forces driving flows on our planet, especially in
the ocean and atmosphere. Buoyancy driven flows encompass a wide spectrum of
geophysical flows that range from buoyant coastal currents to dense overflows in
the ocean, and from avalanches to volcanic pyroclastic flows on the Earth's
surface. In the ocean, buoyant coastal currents transport fresh water, heat,
nutrients, sediments, biogeochemicals, pollutants, and biological organisms
along many continental shelves and, hence, have important impacts on ecosystems,
fisheries, and the coastal circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XVIII Alpine
Summer School entitled 'Buoyancy-Driven Flows' will be held in Aosta, Italy,
from June 20 to July 1, 2010. The Co-directors of the school will be: Claudia
Cenedese (WHOI); Eric Chassignet (FSU); and Jacques Verron (INPG). The summer
school will last 10 days with approximately 10 invited speakers, each presenting
2 or 3 pedagogical lectures. In addition to formal lectures, shorter 'research
seminars' will be given by a few additional senior participants. Attendees will
also have the opportunity to present their work via poster sessions and to
participate in a debate on the importance of buoyancy-driven flows in climate.
While it is planned to have a series of lectures with a strong emphasis on the
ocean, it is also intended to discuss a wider range of geophysical problems
(avalanches, volcanic flows, atmospheric flows, etc.). The intention is to
collect the lecture notes and publish them in a book.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The lectures will first give a broad
overview of the current state-of-the-art research in buoyancy-driven flows and
will be put in the context of a wider range of geophysical problems (avalanches,
volcanic flows, atmospheric flows, etc.). Then, more specific lectures will
focus on the importance of correctly representing processes than are not
currently resolved in the ocean component of climate models. Given the impact of
buoyancy flows on the ocean circulation and the Earth's climate, it is
considered timely to bring together leading scientists to summarize the present
theoretical, experimental, and modeling understanding of buoyancy-driven
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: One specific objective of the school
is to expose young graduate students and recent Ph.D. recipients to the
importance of buoyancy-driven flows in the ocean circulation and in the present
day climate, from a combined theoretical, experimental, and modeling point of
view. Furthermore, the lecture notes will be published as a text book.