* 0963414
* Sustaining Coastal Experimentation and Observing Systems in Support of Marine Ecosystem and Climate Science
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Johan Schijf, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Bauke Houtman
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,672,553.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chesapeake Biological Laboratory
Research (CBLR) Pier is an essential research facility that serves as a platform
for instrumentation, equipment, and experimental mesocosms that test hypotheses
and gather data required for models to inform ecosystem-based management
decisions in the heavily used and presently compromised Chesapeake Bay. In
recent years, the pier sustained significant structural damage that has resulted
in closing it to research and educational activities. This project repairs storm
damage to the pier and its seawater supply system. Repairs involve extensive
replacement of the support structure and decking, replacing the pumping station,
and securing seawater intake lines to the pier to protect them from future storm
threats. These renovations allow the pier, which is presently closed to research
and education activities, to be re-opened. The renovated platform will then be
able to once again house microcosms and mesocosms for in-situ process studies
that range from studies of predator-prey dynamics to fishery recruitment; to
climate change; to ocean acidification; to the ecophysiology of fish, crabs, and
sea grass; and to studies of eutrophication and mercury speciation in aquatic
food webs. Broader impacts of the repair and reopening of the CBLR Pier include
increased use for sensor testing and development as well as building
infrastructure for science. The renovations will provide jobs in the Chesapeake
Bay area and improved, safe areas where faculty, university students, K-12
teachers and students, and the general public can experience the integration of
research and education through programs that provide extensive hands-on public
outreach pertaining to Chesapeake Bay conservation and climate change. It is a
place where the public gets to interact with scientists and participate in the
collection of scientific data.