* 0963858
* Collaborative Research: On Topographic Imprint of Hillslope Aspect: Deciphering Aspect Controls on Vegetation and Landforms in Central New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Erkan Istanbulluoglu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 67,836.00

Collaborative Research: On Topographic Imprint of Hillslope Aspect: Deciphering
Aspect Controls on Vegetation and Landforms in Central New Mexico

This project will investigate the role of aspect and vegetation in modulating
rates and processes of landscape evolution in desert elevations of central New
Mexico, where aspect plays a dominant role on ecosystem structure. The influence
of vegetation patterns on runoff and erosion have been studied in semiarid
ecosystems, especially in the Long Term Ecological Research sites in the
southwest US. Research has identified critical concerns about the landscape
scale impacts of vegetation change, and resulted in testable hypotheses. Yet,
long-term implications of vegetation-erosion interactions on sediment yields and
landform evolution have not been adequately documented and modeled. This
research will study moderate- to low-relief catchmets in central New Mexico
(northwest part of the Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge), where north-facing
slopes are characterized by a juniper-grass savanna, and south-facing slopes by
shrublands, with other factors such as precipitation, lithology, and elevation
are relatively uniform. Existing vegetation patterns in this site are believed
to have been present since the mid Holocene, before which pinon-juniper-oak
woodlands dominated the region. The opposing hillslopes in the site show
pervasive differences in their morphologies with north-facing slopes usually
steeper and more planar than south-facing slopes, and in their ecohydrological
response to monsoon precipitation. This work will investigate the co-evolution
of soils, vegetation and topography using a variety of process-based research
methods including ecohydrological monitoring (soil moisture, runoff,
evapotranspiration, biomass); dating of surface sediments to approximate
Holocene erosion rates; and numerical modeling of ecohydrology and landscape
evolution.

Broader Impacts: This project will train two graduate students. A project
website will be jointly developed between the two institutions, reporting
research results, data, and visualization of numerical model experiments. This
interdisciplinary research will have a significant impact on the ongoing efforts
in ecosystem monitoring studies in the Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge. In
particular, our modeling approach will offer capabilities in predicting the
impacts of biome transition and land-use change on regional hydrology and
sediment yields. Such modeling efforts are of critical importance in habitat
conservation, restoration, and land-use planning efforts across the southwest US
as well as in other semiarid regions worldwide.