* 0963659
* STEM Central STATION
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Sona Andrews, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,243,702.00

Boise State University has created the STEM Central STATION (Strategic
Transformation Aligning Teaching, Immersion, Outreach and kNowledge) to increase
the scope, efficiency and effectiveness of NSF-supported STEM programs on
campus, and catalyze the transformation of STEM institutional culture for
students and faculty. Boise State is transforming from a focus on high-quality
teaching and learning to excellence in teaching, learning and research, making
it an ideal "laboratory" to study institutional change related to STEM
education. Exceptional growth in STEM enrollment (32% over four years) and
research funding (32% in 2009) converge to provide optimal timing for STEM
education transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM Central STATION builds
upon current STEM programs (LSAMP, MSP, Noyce, STEP, S-STEM, GK-12, and Idaho
EPSCoR) by providing value added activities including: 1) a campus hub for STEM
resources, research and programs, 2) a peer Learning Facilitators program that
supports all the NSF STEM programs, 3) a STEM Community Seminar Series to foster
interdisciplinary research, teaching and student support, and 4) STEM pedagogy
workshops and research groups for faculty. The STATION focuses on critical
junctures for students and faculty and STEM research and evaluation. Overall
goals of the STATION are to: &lt;br/&gt; - Facilitate and achieve STEM students'
transitions through academic and cognitive critical junctures; &lt;br/&gt; -
Increase STEM faculty appreciation for and implementation of student-centered
pedagogy and inclusion of students in research, particularly for faculty
involved with NSF STEM programs; &lt;br/&gt; - Conduct research on institutional
transformation and evaluate program impact on STEM student satisfaction,
retention, and completion, and faculty engagement in learning about STEM
pedagogy; and&lt;br/&gt; - Provide a model for other metropolitan universities
undergoing similar transformations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM Central
STATION is grounded in literature regarding learning theories and institutional
change, with an emphasis on concepts of self-authorship. The evaluation plan of
the STATION offers a case study of a metropolitan university in transition to a
research university, while continuing to value and advance quality teaching and
learning. The outcomes of the project are amplifying the results of the NSF STEM
programs at Boise State, which include emphases on students from minority and
underrepresented groups (particularly LSAMP, STEP and EPSCoR), serving low
income and first-generation students, women, and Latinos/as, whose regional
population has recently more than doubled. The Service Learning component of the
Learning Facilitators training course provides outreach to K-12 students and
teachers, enabling expansion of STEM outreach in K-12 classrooms. With strong
commitments from the university president and leadership of resources, graduate
assistants and space, the project implementation plan includes strategies to
phase out grant support and transition to university support to sustain the
STATION after the grant period.