* 0963278
* The Incus Facility: An Integrated UIC Cyberinfrastructure for High-Performance Computing and Networking
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Robert Grossman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 02/28/2013
* USD 1,225,915.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of an upgrade to
part of the campus network and to the campus' network connection to the
Starlight facility. This upgrade is designed to support computer science
research in networking, visualization and data-mining, primarily at the
University's National Center for Data Mining and Electronic Visualization
Laboratory. To that end, the upgraded connection to Starlight will be
implemented with 100 Gigabit-per-second networking infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovation will facilitate research on the development
and use of cloud computing and cloud data storage. Developing data management
and computing services that scale to very large datasets is a fundamental
research problem, as is developing services for visualizing and collaboratively
analyzing these datasets. The renovated network will also provide researchers on
campus with remote access to a new magnetic resonance imaging system as well as
facilitating participation in the analysis of data from the Large Hadron
Collider.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing infrastructure for
research, the renovation is likely to enable students from under-represented
groups to participate in advanced research, since approximately half of the
National Center for Data Mining's Ph.D. students come from underrepresented
groups and almost half of the supported research assistants in the Electronic
Visualization Laboratory come from underrepresented groups.