* 0963300
* ARI-R2 - Repair and Renovation of the PARI Research and Education Infrastructure
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2010,02/28/2013
* David Clavier, Pisgah Astronomical Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 02/28/2013
* USD 1,303,324.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will permit the renovation
of the Research Building of the Pisgah Astronomical Research Institute (PARI).
This facility is located in rural North Carolina at the former NASA Rosman
Tracking site, which dates back to the 1960s. The renovation consists of several
sub-projects, namely nonstructural repairs to a leaky roof, repairing the HVAC,
repairing and renovating electrical generation equipment, renovating the fire
alarm and equipment monitoring system, renovating the telecommunications system,
and repairing the associated antenna structures for two 26-meter radio antennae.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PARI's mission is to provide research space for
scientists, students, and non-professionals. Current research focuses on radio
surveys of the Milky Way Galaxy, various projects in time-domain astrophysics,
and studies of the wind speeds in the upper atmosphere of the Earth. The radio
observations are conducted on-site using two 26-meter radio telescopes. The
facility is host to a large and growing collection of astronomical glass plates,
which are being digitized and cataloged for use in time-domain studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PARI provides research opportunities to university faculty
and students, citizen scientists, and K-12 students. PARI is a member of the NSF
supported North Carolina Math and Science Education Network and the North
Carolina Alliance to Create Opportunity Through Education. Its location in rural
North Carolina provides a unique opportunity for science research and education
in an under-served part of the country.