* 0963010
* Modernization and Enhancement of the Seawater System and Research Infrastructure at Northeastern University's Marine Science Center
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Joseph Ayers, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Bauke Houtman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,768,555.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project renovates 1,310 sq ft. of research laboratory space in Northeastern
University's Marine Science Center which houses the Ocean Engineering Lab, the
Molecular/Analytical Chemistry Lab, the Shared Molecular Resources Lab, and the
Wet Prep Lab. It also provides major infrastructure upgrades to the existing
flow-through seawater system which lacks adequate capacity and reliability for
present and future research needs. These improvements will help to transform
these facilities into an interdisciplinary research hub focused on technological
solutions to better address major environmental issues facing the world's
coastal marine habitats. The renovations will provide increased research
capacity as well as improved facilities for graduate student training. Research
that will be enabled include studies of coastal ocean eutrophication, the
development of automatic underwater mariculture controllers that can be used in
fisheries development projects, marine genomic studies, and investigations of
the molecular, physiological, and behavioral responses of marine organisms to
stress. Broader impacts of project include increasing infrastructure for science
in terms of helping the US stay economically competitive in the area of
mariculture and fisheries ecosystem management. Additional impacts include
potential applications to national security through the development of remotely
controlled vehicles and sensors. The renovation will also enhance the research
and educational capabilities of the institution and facilitate broader
participation by outside researchers and will serve as a hands-on science
outreach engine by serving over 4,000 K-12 school children each year through the
Northeastern University Coastal Ocean Science Academy which has many students
that are members of under-represented minorities in STEM fields.