* 0963343
* Sustainable Infrastructure for the SUNY Oneonta Biological Field Station Upper Research Site
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Willard Harman, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 03/31/2014
* USD 417,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal seeks funding to renovate
biological field station by replacing a laboratory building located on the Upper
Research Site of SUNY-Oneonta?s Biological Field Station. The Upper Research
Site is located near Moe Pond in New York State and is a relatively remote
research area comprising the oldest of the field station?s nearly 1000-ha
holdings. The site has been used for studies on primary productivity in old
fields undergoing succession, community ecology of anthropophilous mosquitoes,
trematode and mollusk life cycles and population dynamics, fisheries ecology,
impacts of invasive species, trophic cascades associated with water quality
management and land use, and other topics. The field station has a record of
supporting research training for women students with women making up 52% of the
field station?s student interns over the past four
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structure proposed for replacement is a
primitive wood-frame field laboratory, about 5m x 12m. The upgrade to more
modern laboratory space will provide researchers with the ability to conduct
more sophisticated studies and will allow researchers to establish long-planned
projects in ornithology, parasitology, geomorphology, botany, and population
ecology. Examples of research projects that would benefit from the renovated
facility include: studies of dynamic trophic cascades resulting from alterations
in the fisheries in Moe Pond; research on the response of mosquito populations
to changes in the nature of the site (e.g. fluctuations in beaver activity);
comparison of nutrient runoff from forested lands on acid soils at the Upper
Research Site with runoff from primarily agricultural land cover on the more
basic soils of the Thayer Farm section of the field station; research on
helminth parasites of fishes including a study of the gene flow of C. cornutum
and N. rutili in their host populations; Ornithological research including how
and why birds sing, the interactive nature of avian communication, breeding
behavior, long-term studies of the avian population, and research on the impact
of human disturbance on passerine reproductive success; research on cross-biome
aquatic carbon biogeochemistry and metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to providing infrastructure for research, the renovation will provide a resource
that will be used by undergraduate and graduate student researchers. It will
contribute to the training of graduate students in a new Master of Science in
Lake Management program. The renovation will make it possible to extend to the
Upper Research Site, the university?s programs of pre-college field experiences
and of capstone experiences in the relatively new interdisciplinary major in
Environmental Studies. The refurbished laboratory will play a role in long-term
ecological studies of the watershed of the upper reaches of the Susquehanna
River.