* 0963474
* Renovation of ANSP Entomology Department Research Collection &amp; Associated Lab
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Daniel Otte, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,051,265.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Entomology Department at the
Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia (ANSP) will use these funds to
revitalize its current research facility to ensure the conservation of one of
the nation's most important entomological research collections, and in doing so,
support and promote 21st century research and research training. This award
provides funds to renovate and upgrade the defective wooden open-shelved mobile
compactor system with state-of-the-art compactorized metal cabinetry including
sealed metal doors. Insect storage cases that are a proprietary part of the
cabinetry shelving will be replaced as required. The deteriorating compactor
deck surface, which exacerbates the risk of additional damage to the collection,
will be repaired. The renovation of the existing HVAC system will mitigate
fluctuations in temperature and humidity that also threaten the collection. The
research facility's deteriorating ceiling tiles will be replaced with pest and
water-resistant "clean room" tiles increasing the effectiveness of the HVAC
renovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Academy of Natural Sciences was
established in 1812 and is the oldest natural science institution and museum in
the Americas. The Entomology Department at ANSP holds one of the larger and more
taxonomically complete entomological collections in North America with an
extensive collection of insect specimens dating from the early 19th Century. The
primary focus of ANSP entomological research is systematic entomology. The
renovation project ensures that the collection's worldwide holdings continue
into the 21st century as a biological library documenting disease vectors,
agricultural pests, climate and environmental variables, and the phylogeny,
taxonomy, ecology and biodiversity of our insect fauna. The new compactor design
will increase storage capacity by ca. 20% promoting collection growth and the
integration of a backlog of accessioned material currently unavailable to
researchers. The collection serves a local, regional, national and international
audience and is used extensively by students and educators from a broad range of
academic institutions, and by resident and visiting scientists. The renovation
of the Entomology research facility at ANSP ensures that this significant
collection will be protected and available in perpetuity to the scientific
community for research and study, and to the general public through Academy
exhibitions, educational programs and behind-the-scenes tours.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvement of the Entomology research infrastructure will
enhance research training of the next generation of educators, scientists and
systematic entomologists. Opportunities for entomology research in the
Entomology Department will be increasingly accessible to the participants of the
Academy's Women in Natural Sciences Program, a science enrichment program for
high-school girls, next-generation volunteers, university students, including
Research Experience for Undergraduate Program participants, and secondary and
home schooled students. Modernization of the Entomology research facility will
benefit greatly the day to day functioning; fulfilling loan requests, addressing
information and data requests, fielding questions from the public, hosting
students and scientists, systematics research, and collection care and curation.
Renovation allows the recuration and organization necessary to undertake the
creation of a species database of the collection ultimately served to the
internet for national and worldwide use.