* 0963328
* Laboratory Revitalization for Environmental Sustainability Research at Tufts University
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Christopher Swan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,568,929.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Over the past 40 years, the field of environmental engineering has evolved from
a discipline focused primarily on "sanitary engineering" to one that brings a
multidisciplinary approach to solve environmental problems in natural and
engineered systems. This multidisciplinary approach is essential for addressing
the growing need for sustainable approaches to using, managing and conserving
natural resources. Water is a critical resource requiring sustainable management
of both quantity and quality. One of the most critical threats to current and
future clean water supplies is emerging contaminants, specifically engineered
nanomaterials, pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs), and
pathogens. To address this need, this award will renovate the existing
environmental engineering laboratories to create a centralized, high-quality
laboratory space to enhance ongoing and future research programs in
environmental sustainability. The outcome of the renovation will be the new
Environmental Sustainability Laboratory (ESL), that will be used extensively to
support the research activities of eight researchers and their collaborators.
The renovated space will also allow for integrated research and research
training of undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral
associates from a range of disciplines and backgrounds. Within this renovated
space, Tufts University will be able to pursue the following research goals: (1)
acquire fundamental knowledge for enhanced mathematical modeling of engineered
nanomaterial transport, distribution and persistence in multi-media
environmental systems, (2) understand the influence of wastewater treatment
operations and reactive transport processes on the environmental fate of PPCPs
in water reuse systems, (3) develop real-time monitoring devices and modeling
tools to assess the prevalence and fate of waterborne pathogens in urban areas,
and (4) create and implement multi-disciplinary undergraduate and graduate
student research training in environmental sustainability.

Intellectual Merit: The laboratory renovations will support relevant research
activities of NSF-funded researchers by creating a physical and intellectual
environment that focuses on integrating laboratory experiments and mathematical
modeling to address the environmental threats posed by emerging contaminants.
The anticipated intellectual merits of the integrated ESL include: (1) data
generation to advance fundamental scientific knowledge and to provide
quantitative inputs to mathematical and conceptual model development and
validation, (2) hands-on laboratory research experiences for undergraduate and
graduate student researchers that instill technical skills as well as an
understanding of the value and limitations of experimental measurements, (3)
development of mathematical modeling tools to extend the utility of experimental
measurements across media types, and temporal and spatial scales, and (4) use of
experimental findings and model output as feedback mechanisms to inform future
experimental research.

Broader Impacts: The renovated facility will provide future leaders in
environmental sustainability with the skills necessary to develop and apply
novel approaches in response to emerging threats to water quality and water
supply. Issues of emerging contaminants are broadly discussed in mainstream and
alternative media, and thus are timely, societal-relevant research topics.
Activities within the ESL will reach beyond the specific studies conducted in
the laboratory to influence how research and research training are conducted,
technology development and implementation, and environmental policy related to
emerging contaminants. The School of Engineering at Tufts University has a
strong track-record of recruiting and retaining women and other underrepresented
minorities. Using existing programs and the excitement generated through hands-
on experiential learning on projects with real-world and social relevance, Tufts
plans to recruit and retain a diverse group of students, postdoctoral
associates, and faculty for ESL research programs.