* 0963051
* Materials Joining Engineering Laboratory Upgrade
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Yoni Adonyi, LeTourneau University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2012
* USD 798,823.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports academic research
infrastructure renovation for the stand-alone Welding/Materials Joining
Engineering Laboratory at LeTourneau University. This laboratory is used by the
Materials Joining Engineering program at LeTourneau University, one of only two
ABET-accredited Materials Joining Engineering programs in the United States.
More than 700 graduates of the program work in the heavy manufacturing, defense
and energy sectors, and 96% of new graduates are employed within six months of
graduation. The new Master of Science in engineering program, to be launched at
LeTourneau University in fall 2010, is expected to further lead to increased
externally funded research conducted in the laboratory. The laboratory is housed
in an aging, 53 year-old, 8,400 square foot metal building that has become
inadequate as demands for electrical power, improved ventilation and cleaner
environments have increased to operate modern research equipment. This award
will support the following laboratory renovations in order to advance the
research capabilities while addressing environmental and safety issues: (1) a
new 700 kVA transformer and corresponding high voltage feed lines will replace
the two aging 225 kVA and 110 kVA transformers, and old wiring will be replaced
with copper bus bars and adequate distribution boxes; (2) individual exhaust-
less ventilation devices at each welding station will replace the inefficient
fan-based system; (3) roof leaks will be repaired, and insulation and an air
conditioning unit for the high bay area will be installed; (4) basic filtering
and hazardous waste disposal features in the metallography area will be
installed; and (5) high bay fluorescent fixtures will replace inadequate
lighting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed renovations
will transform materials joining research through increased reliability,
reproducibility and accuracy of experiments performed in the Materials Joining
Engineering Laboratory, and expand research capabilities by reducing
environmental contamination and advancing experimentation on novel materials.
The renovated laboratory will provide experimental capabilities to investigate
research topics such as high power hybrid welding innovations for high strength
steels, processes to reduce the use of costly metals for joining electronic
materials, and methods to eliminate cracks in weld deposits when repairing
nuclear reactor components. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The upgraded
laboratory facility will serve as a multi-user site for national and
international research and mentoring for an ever increasing number of students.
With the addition of a graduate program in engineering as of fall 2010, the
number of students who use the facility is expected to increase by 40-50%.
Additionally, each year the laboratory hosts an average of 500 visitors from
local high schools, community colleges and trade schools, many of which
traditionally serve a high number of underrepresented groups. Modernization of
the laboratory facilities will serve to improve engineering faculty and student
recruitment.