* 0963674
* 2010 Meiosis Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar 2010
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2011
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 05/31/2011
* USD 7,000.00

Chair: Abby Dernburg Vice-Chair: Nancy
Hollingsworth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meiosis is a specialized cell division
process that is essential for sexual reproduction. During meiosis, a "diploid"
cell, which contains two copies of each chromosome - one inherited from each
parent - splits to form "haploid" cells such as sperm, eggs, or pollen, which
contain only a single copy of each chromosome. When two of these haploid cells
fuse at fertilization to form a new zygote, this results in restoration of the
diploid chromosome number. During meiosis, chromosomes undergo genetic exchange,
also known as crossover recombination, resulting in new combinations of genes.
This recombination process underlies both genetic diversity within individual
species and the evolution of new species. Defects in meiosis can give rise to
infertility or to offspring with any of a wide range of devastating
defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2010 Meiosis Gordon Conference will bring
together researchers studying meiosis in a broad variety of organisms. The
meeting will focus on cutting-edge, unpublished research presented by invited
speakers who employ a diverse array of approaches and who represent a wide range
of perspectives. Included among the speakers will be early-career investigators
who will have a chance to present their work to an expert audience for feedback.
A notable feature of this year's gathering is the addition of a Gordon-Keenan
Research Seminar, a 1½-day meeting preceding the actual conference and organized
by students and postdoctoral fellows. The seminar offers an opportunity for
junior researchers to meet each other and be introduced to the topics to be
covered in more depth during the 4½-day conference immediately following. The
goal of both the seminar and the conference is to offer a highly interactive
environment for the exchange of ideas and development of collaborations that
will move the field forward. Advances in this field will enhance our
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms that cells use to control and
coordinate complex processes - processes such as DNA repair and chromosome
division - that are so essential to life.