* 0963648
* I3: A Cyberinfrastructure and Communication-Based Model to Foster Innovation that Broadens Participation in STEM Fields through Institutional Integration
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2017
* Diana Natalicio, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 999,970.00

A Cyber-infrastructure and Communication-Based Model to Foster Innovation that
Broadens Participation in STEM Fields through Institutional Integration brings
together NSF/EHR awards from the ADVANCE, AGEP, CCLI, GK-12, LSAMP, REU, and
S-STEM programs, as well as other work, around the I3 integrative theme(s) of
broadening participation and the integration of research and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Cyber-infrastructure and Communication-Based Model to
Foster Innovation that Broadens Participation in STEM Fields through
Institutional Integration will transcend departmental silos and hierarchical
administrative structures to transform the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP)
into an institution in which faculty are committed to sharing resources,
collaboration is supported through recognition and rewards, and effective
practices emanating from NSF-funded awards at UTEP focused on broadening
participation are extended across the university. The discussions among diverse
faculty members and administrators facilitated by the model are expected to
stimulate innovation in preparation of students for undergraduate and graduate
education in STEM areas and result in proactive strategies that provide
effective avenues for sustainability. The unique mechanisms for obtaining this
institutional collaborative culture are the development of the Cyber-
Infrastructure (CI) and communication structures (Provost-led STEM Council and
Special Interest Groups) that can drive innovation and extend and sustain the
impact of efficacious broadening participation initiatives. In the context of
this proposal, CI refers to the technical infrastructure, organizational
practices, and social interactions that support data and resource sharing, as
well as efforts that cross boundaries within or outside the organization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anchor for this I3 project is the NSF CREST-funded
Cyber-ShARE Center, which has expertise in CI and cross-disciplinary
collaborations. The Cyber-ShARE Center (using Cyber-Infrastructure to Share
resources to Advance Research and Education) brings the experiences and base to
serve as the foundation for this effort, which will integrate its work and
initially that of projects that have demonstrated effectiveness in broadening
participation at all levels of the academic continuum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CI will be developed to support the project in the following ways: 1)
semantically annotated websites; 2) accessible databases that can be used to
inform faculty, staff, and administrators on matters relevant to research
projects and data relevant to broadening participation; 3) Web portal that
supports networking, collaborations, and shared activities centered on Special
Interest Groups (SIGs) on broadening participation; and 4) intra-campus
communications facilitated by the Provost-Led STEM (ProSTEM) Council. Initially,
NSF-funded projects contribute data to the CI and other UTEP faculty members
make use of this information in developing their own future endeavors. Over
time, information from efforts funded by sources other than NSF provide
information to the CI as collaboration among faculty and administrators becomes
the new norm in this culture of collaboration. This institutional transformation
involves defining practices, procedures, and policies on campus that support
linkages among projects, cross-fertilization of practices, and identification of
new research directions. By engaging faculty across disciplines, projects
benefit from discussions that analyze common threads from multiple perspectives.
The CI will improve the efficacy of the University's programmatic and evaluation
frameworks for monitoring activities and measuring student progress.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I3 endeavor allows UTEP to take a more proactive
approach to creating a culture of collaboration by establishing the CI and
communication structures to enable the study and understanding of professional
organizational relationships. The integration of STEM interests at UTEP provides
value-added in a minimum of three organizational CI domains. It is expected
that: 1) the number and extent of reciprocal relationships among STEM interest
groups will be much larger than the number and extent of non-reciprocal
relationships (degree of hierarchy); 2) the lateral, peer-to-peer networks will
see heavy interaction and activity, indicating dispersed global activity rather
than activity with a few focal points in the local community (degree of
centralization); and 3) there will be fewer hierarchical levels for access to
problem solutions, and information for solving problems, than a traditional STEM
educational and research enterprise structure (hierarchical levels in the
emergent portal).