* 0963404
* Collaborative Research: Measuring and Modeling Collective Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Christopher Chabris, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2015
* USD 173,908.00

The "holy grail" of artificial intelligence research for decades has been to
design computers with robust, integrated, human-like intelligence. This goal has
proven elusive, in spite of a massive amount of research. But another goal is
just now becoming feasible, and so has been the subject of much less research:
using vast computer networks to create new kinds of intelligent entities that
combine the best of both human and machine intelligence. One key to designing
such human-centered computing systems is better ways of measuring the collective
intelligence they exhibit. That is the focus of this research, which represents
a collaborative effort among researchers at MIT (lead institution), CMU and
Union College. The PIs will first use analogies with what is already known about
measuring individual intelligence to suggest new ways of measuring the
collective intelligence of complex human-machine systems. For instance, they
will determine whether the striking pattern of correlations across tasks that
characterizes individual human intelligence even exists for human-machine
groups. Next, a series of statistically validated tests will be developed to
measure the key components of collective intelligence in human-machine groups.
Then, to better understand the "active ingredients" of collective intelligence,
the PIs will use what is already known about how groups of people interact
effectively to measure micro-level behavior in human-machine groups. A key goal
will be to find critical factors (such as group size, technological support, or
individual capabilities) that contribute to a human-machine group's adaptability
across a wide range of tasks.

Most people and computers today are parts of larger human-machine systems that
must cope with a wide range of problems. This research will provide powerful new
tools for managing and designing such systems. Imagine, for instance, that one
could give a short "collective intelligence test" to a top-management team, a
product development team, or a collection of Wikipedia contributors. Imagine
that this test could predict the team's future performance on a wide range of
important tasks. And imagine that the test could also help suggest changes to
the team that would improve its flexibility. Or imagine that designers of new
collaboration software tools could use a single test to predict how well their
tools would improve a group's effectiveness on many different tasks. From the
smallest business work groups to our largest societal challenges, there are now
many new opportunities for people and computers to solve problems together, not
just more efficiently, but also more intelligently. This work will help build a
firmer scientific foundation for doing this.

Broader Impacts: With individual humans, it is relatively easy to measure
intelligence, but it is difficult to increase that intelligence or to observe
the detailed events inside the brain that give rise to it. With human-computer
groups it is much easier to observe and change factors (such as group size,
composition, and technological support) that are likely to determine the group's
collective intelligence. Thus, there is a profound intellectual opportunity, not
just to learn more about how to design intelligent human-computer systems but
also to gain new insights into the very nature of intelligence in complex
systems. The results of this research, therefore, will be of interest not only
to researchers in computer-supported cooperative work, human-computer
interaction, and artificial intelligence, but also more broadly to fields such
as cognitive science, social psychology, and organization theory.