* 0963064
* Collaborative Research:  Development of a next generation sensor for measuring biologically available iron in seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2015
* Karen Orcutt, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2015
* USD 576,416.00

There is increasing evidence that iron is important not only in the regulation
of bulk phytoplankton production in large regions of the world oceans, but that
it also profoundly influences the speciation of algae within the phytoplankton
assemblage. The broad implications resulting from these dual effects range from
impacts on the global carbon cycle to the possible stimulation of harmful algal
blooms. There is a strong need for ultra-sensitive, real-time monitoring and
detection technologies that capture the reactive iron pool in seawater that is
available to eukaryotic phytoplankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s request
funding to ?biocalibrate? the reactive iron fraction to gain a measure of iron
availability to marine eukaryotic phytoplankton. The PI?s will combine Time
Resolved Fluorescence (TRF) and Fluorescence Resonate Energy Transfer (FRET) to
develop an ultra-sensitive photoactive nanodevice that uses the siderophore
desferrioxamine B (DFB) as the iron-selective sensor interface, lanthanide
fluorescence to report the presence of iron in this receptor, and Q-dot
nanocrystals to greatly amplify this signal to achieve the picomolar level
sensitivity needed to study both coastal and offshore ocean
waters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sensor will be calibrated with a range of
nearshore and offshore species of cyanobacteria, diatoms and dinoflagellates,
and the coccolithophorid Emiliania huxleyi; phytoplankton important in the
regulation of carbon export from surface to the deep ocean. The ultimate goal of
the project is to develop a photoactive nanosensor that allows real-time in situ
measurements that reflect phytoplankton growth
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of new generation of sensor to measure labile iron in-situ will
greatly advance our knowledge of iron biogeochemistry. In addition, due to
extremely short response time, this sensor will provide a unique opportunity to
measure iron kinetics, cycling which is one of the biggest challenge in this
research area, believe to be critical to control iron bioavailability to
phytoplankton. Therefore this project will certainly lead to the burgeoning of
this research area, potentially leading to new findings. In addition to
supporting graduate students and undergrads, this proposal involves middle
school teachers. Orcutt has obviously established productive relationships with
local educators, and the letters from these teachers outlining their enthusiasm
for continuing the relationship gives confidence that the proposed work will
lead to an effective educational outcome. The potential for involvement of
minority students at Southern Miss. is also significant. The proposed work also
has the benefit of ?fertilizing? the field of oceanography with advances in
other sciences (chemistry, materials).