* 0963072
* Renovation of Arcadia University Cell &amp; Molecular Biology Core Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Wesley Rose, Arcadia University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 666,812.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are provided to renovate and
update the cell and molecular research laboratories in Boyer Hall at Arcadia
University. These renovations will provide a modern, functional, and safe
laboratory environment for the research faculty and their student researchers.
The Biology Department is housed in Boyer Hall, a building designed to support
the science departments and constructed in 1970. Over the past 40 years, minor
efforts were made to retrofit newer equipment into the existing space. However,
many of the systems and room conditions have degraded over the years. The
renovations include (1) replacing outdated and unreliable fume hoods and adding
fume hoods to those laboratories that do not currently have fume hoods; (2)
providing critical emergency power to all refrigerators and freezers in research
laboratory spaces; (3) installing alarms on all freezers and refrigerators to
alert the Department of Public Safety and investigators in the case of a
malfunction of the power supply or the refrigerator or freezer itself; (4)
providing under-counter lighting and upgrading the current ceiling fixtures in
all laboratories; (5) providing multiple vacuum outlets directly at multiple
workstations on the laboratory benches of all laboratories; (6) installing a new
pure water system and installing plumbing to bring the pure water to all of the
sinks in the laboratories on the second floor of Boyer; (7) installing a
supplemental HVAC system to support the facility; (8) replacing the current
flooring with new impervious flooring adequate for a functioning research
laboratory; (9) updating the electrical supply to these laboratories to provide
sufficient electrical outlets to workstations and equipment without the need for
extension cords; (10) adding data port drops to all laboratories; (11) replacing
the doors on the existing cabinetry and adding sufficient shelves and cabinetry
to all of the laboratories; (12) adding workstations to those laboratories which
currently have very few workstations; and (13) adding a cold room with a fume
hood.