* 0963366
* Collaborative Research:  Expedition 323 Objective Research on the Paleoceanography of the Bering Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2012
* Carlos Alvarez Zarikian, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 05/31/2012
* USD 45,398.00

This research provides the first Pliocene paleo-oceanographic observations from
the Bering Sea and supports the objectives of IODP expedition 323 for
understanding the associated factors influencing climate change during the
Pliocene and Pleistocene, including a warm period of the early Pliocene, when
pCO2 levels were similar to today¡¦s levels. The flow of water masses between
the Bering Sea and the Arctic and Pacific oceans, changes in Arctic ice volume,
and whether dense intermediate waters formed in the Pacific during this time
will be investigated as some of the possible triggers of past climate change.
The high resolution sediment records obtained from this cruise, with relatively
large-amplitude signals, provide a unique opportunity to understand how
insulation changes in the upper atmosphere propagate through the climate system
and to further test if the orbital cycles of climate change primarily operate on
23ky versus 40 ky timescales. This study utilizes K % logging data from the
cruise with paleomagnetic, sedimentological (eg., grain size analysis) and
paleontological (eg., analysis of microfossil assemblages; d18O and d13C
measurements of benthic and planktonic forams) measurements from the drill
cores. The information expected from this study is critical for understanding
the fundamental drivers and feedbacks between ice sheets, oceanic and
atmospheric circulation and the global carbon cycle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project significantly advances large
investments previously made in an important IODP expedition. The data derived
from this investigation can provide important information for paleoclimate/ocean
models, and is relevant towards projections of future climate under IPCC AR4
scenarios. The project includes a team of early and mid-career scientists, and
includes international collaborations with other scientists of the IODP
community. Support is also provided for undergraduate and graduate education,
and for public outreach and education.