* 0963219
* Enhanced Collaborative Research Facilities for Chemistry, Biology, and Psychology at Stetson University
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* John York, Stetson University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2012
* USD 610,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The proposal seeks funding to renovate a natural science research facility in
the institution's Sage Hall. The project will result in 3370 sf of renovated
research space serving the Chemistry and Biology Departments. The facility will
provided renovated laboratories for Chemistry, Synthetic Chemistry,
Computational Chemistry, Aquatic Biology, and Behavioral Neuroscience.

The institution is a small, private university serving 2,222 undergraduate
students. Every natural sciences major must complete a research project that
spans several semesters as a part of his or her degree requirements. Additional
student research is supported by Stetson Undergraduate Research Experience
(SURE) grants, and SURE grantees must present their research at both
professional conferences and Stetson's own campus-wide annual research
symposium.

Research topics planned for the renovated labs include: the binding of organic
thiophenes to copper centers with a goal of gaining a better understanding of
the copper-thiophene interactions relevant to the desulfurization of fuels; the
binding of alkenes to copper centers with a goal of understanding the chemistry
of ethylene binding to the plant enzyme ETR1; curcumin and its role in
inhibiting oxidative stress in biosystems; drug delivery hydrogels based upon
copolymerization of 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) and 2-hydroxyethyl
acrylate (HEA); the neural control of behavioral responses to taste input, the
neurophysiology of the rat gustatory system, the influence of catfish biology on
the impact of invasive loricariid catfish on a Florida ecosystem, and freshwater
ecology.

In addition to providing infrastructure for research by faculty members, the
renovation will result in an increase in research opportunities for students
from Stetson and for students from a nearby State College who wish to spend a
summer working on a research project.