* 0963119
* Renovation of the Plant Environmental Center Research Greenhouse
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2012
* Johanna Schmitt, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2012
* USD 0.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award will provide funds to renovate the research greenhouse portion of the
Brown University Plant Environmental Center with new temperature control,
ventilation, and lighting systems. Funds will allow replacement of the outdated
environmental control and lighting systems with state-of-the-art energy
efficient evaporative cooling systems, exhaust fans, horizontal air flow fans,
vent motors, and lamps including computerized controls. Another key element of
the renovation is to add automated energy curtains to the ceilings and walls for
each of the three rooms in the greenhouse to provide insulation in the winter,
shading in the summer, and the ability to maintain separate light regimes in
each room. Funds will permit renovation of the experimental preparation area
with better counters and sinks, storage space, and lighting to facilitate
potting, tissue collection, and other activities necessary for greenhouse
research projects.

The research greenhouse, which is the only facility of its kind at Brown,
currently supports laboratories in the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary
Biology (EEB) and the Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and
Biochemistry (MCB), including faculty members, postdoctoral researchers, Ph.D.
students, and undergraduates. Projects use a variety of species including the
reference plant Arabidopsis thaliana, the important food plant rice, rare and
threatened species, and invasive non-native plants to address fundamental
questions in plant biology such as how plants interact with and adapt to their
environments, how reproductive fitness is optimized, and how development is
regulated. Although plant researchers at Brown have an impressive record of
accomplishments, greenhouse renovations are essential for their continued
success. The greenhouse infrastructure renovations will expedite plant research
by removing seasonal constraints, providing ample growth facilities for large-
scale experiments such as genetic screens, and increasing the range of species
that can be propagated. Important long-term ramifications of the proposed
renovations are stimulating new research directions and attracting new faculty
and students interested in plant research.

The Plant Environmental Center provides research plant growth space, classroom
space, and a conservatory with a teaching plant collection to promote plant
biology through research, education, and outreach. The Center draws together
people interested in all aspects of plant science ranging from ethnobotany to
ecology to molecular biology. The central location on campus facilitates use by
students, faculty, and members of the surrounding community. The greenhouse
renovations will increase the visibility of plant research at Brown across the
wide audience drawn to the Plant Environmental Center. A key broader impact will
be to increase recruitment of undergraduates into plant research projects, which
is a top priority in our participating laboratories. Greenhouse renovations will
also aid in their outreach efforts such as visits from local K-12 classes and
development of plant science curricular modules for high school students.