* 0963619
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluation of India's National Rural Employment Guarantee Act in a General Equilibrium Framework
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* John Papp, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 02/28/2011
* USD 22,000.00

This research will use data from an NSF funded survey to estimate the labor
market impacts of a large public works program in India. The National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) is a massive public works program funded by the
Indian central government. From April 2008 to March 2009, 45 million households
participated in the program, working over two billion person days. The surge in
employment opportunities created by the NREGA has the potential to create labor
shortages that could drive up market wages and lead to a fall in private sector
employment and output. On the other hand, many researchers have suggested in
developing countries with imperfect markets, hiring additional workers might not
raise wages and may even decrease them without affecting output. The
implementation of the NREGA provides a rare opportunity to test these
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an equilibrium model of labor markets, this
research will estimate the impact of the NREGA on labor market outcomes such as
wages and employment both within and outside the village. Funding will be used
to conduct a survey in the north west of India collecting information on NREGA
participation, earnings, and migration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The intellectual merit lies first in the project's method for identifying
the impact of the NREGA. Since the NREGA was introduced in three distinct
phases, during the period from 2006 to 2009, some districts implemented the
NREGA while others did not. A simple comparison of early phase districts with
late phase districts, however, would lead to biased estimates of the program's
effect since the government chose to implement the program in low wage districts
first. The study will exploit the phase-in of the program combined with changes
in the minimum wage, weather shocks, and village level controls to identify the
impact of the NREGA. Apart from identifying the impact of this particular
program, the model based approach will allow tests of existing models of rural
labor markets. Specifically, it will provide convincing evidence of how an
increased demand for labor from the government affects private sector employment
and wages--a central question of the literature on rural markets in developing
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research project will
develop a framework for estimating the effect of one of the largest public works
programs in the world. The estimates will permit policy simulations to assess
the impact of proposed extensions to the NREGA. More broadly, the results will
inform policy making in many developing countries where an understanding of
rural labor markets is required. The study will also foster collaboration
between researchers at the NCAER in India and Princeton and build a foundation
for future joint work. Finally, the proposed activity will extend an existing
frequently-used panel data set on rural India and make the anonymized data
available for public use.&lt;br/&gt;