* 0963554
* A Dedicated Advanced Science and Engineering Enterprise Network:  The National Backbone Component
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Gwendolyn Huntoon, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2013
* USD 2,992,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a renovation of the
optical infrastructure of the National LambdaRail (NLR). It will deploy advanced
dense wave-division multiplexing infrastructure to create a nationwide 40
Gigabit per second light-wave network over existing NLR fiber
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;National LambdaRail is one of two national optical
network backbones established by the academic research and education community.
It provides and operates 12,000 miles of optical transport that connects over 20
regional optical networks across the United States. It supports many of the
world's most demanding scientific and network research projects. Its nationwide
footprint provides the foundation for collaboration between researchers and
groups of researchers at over 280 research universities, a number of U.S.
government laboratories, and other universities across the globe. The NLR
optical network is basic infrastructure for research that is used by a wide
variety of disciplines, ranging from biology, cosmology, and high-energy physics
to computer science research on networks themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to providing infrastructure for research, the renovated network will
have an indirect impact on the integration of research and education. Many of
the people using this type of network for research are graduate students and
post-doctoral researchers so the project will facilitate research training for
many individuals. Basic research on the configuration, deployment, and
management of optical networks may lead to results that can be applied to
enhance the capability, security and resiliency of the national commercial
network infrastructure. One of the research projects likely to use the renovated
infrastructure consists of computer science research aimed at improving the
delivery of health services through the use of advanced networking technologies.