* 0963481
* Infrastructure improvements to support invertebrate research at The Field Museum
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Rudiger Bieler, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 07/31/2013
* USD 2,787,782.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project involves the renovation of invertebrate research areas within the
Field Museum of Natural History (FMNH). The renovated Invertebrate Research
Facility will support invertebrate biodiversity, evolutionary, phylogenetic, and
conservation research and research training conducted by individuals, groups and
teams. The renovated facility will consist of an area designated the
Collaborative Invertebrate Laboratories, an area designated the Insect
Systematics and Training Unit, and an area that will be the Molluscan and Marine
Invertebrate Units.

The Field Museum is one of the largest natural history museums in the world. It
is a not-for-profit independent research museum which accumulates and
disseminates knowledge about the Earth's biological and cultural diversity. The
research side of the museum supports investigations by a tenured/tenure-track
faculty, resident graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, and national and
international associated researchers. The Museum maintains world-renowned
research collections in the fields of Anthropology, Zoology, Botany, and
Geology. The Museum makes research specimens available on loan to any bona fide
researcher associated with an academic institution in any country of the world.

The proposed renovations will facilitate the use of several million invertebrate
specimens in research and research training in invertebrate zoology,
evolutionary biology, phylogenetic analysis, and conservation biology carried
out by scientists from both the Field Museum and external institutions. The
infrastructure improvements will increase the efficiency of research projects
involving the project's senior personnel, their students, post-docs, and other
collaborators. The shared, centralized facility will promote collaborations and
the exchange of techniques and ideas across research groups. Trainees will be
exposed to a variety of research as well as to state-of-the-art equipment and
methods for morphological analysis. The renovations will improve the Museum's
capacity to accommodate and train individuals with certain kinds of
disabilities. The renovation will also facilitate the continuation of the
expansion of FMNH's freely internet-accessible collection databases, which help
to make its specimen holdings available for research, educational, and
conservation activities around the world.