* 0963224
* A 21st Century Revitalized Research and Research Training Infrastructure for Chemical and Biological Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Rodney Fox, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,763,769.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the renovation of
7,695 square feet of wet laboratories for the conduct of research on Biological
Materials and Processes (BioMaP) in the Chemical and Biological Engineering
(CBE) department at Iowa State University (ISU). The BioMaP research facility is
located in a campus building built in 1964, which was not designed to
accommodate the increasing amount and complexity of BioMaP research in CBE in
recent years; the twenty individual laboratories in the facility have very
limited counter space, and the chemical fume hoods are old, energy inefficient,
and some unusable. This project will install (a) two plume style fume hood
exhaust fans on the roof of the research facility for fume hoods in this
facility to operate in a safe and energy-efficient manner, (b) electrical
upgrades, (c) a deionized (DI) water system to provide DI water to the entire
facility, (d) additional cabinet/counter space and new chemical fume
hoods/biological safety cabinets, and (e) fiber optic lines for high speed high
bandwidth computer connectivity for high performance computing
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The BioMaP research at ISU is
leading to new breakthroughs in sustainable biorenewable sources of energy, as
well as chemicals, that is vital to reducing dependence on petrochemical
products. BioMaP research areas include polymeric biomaterials, cellular
dynamics, catalysis/biocatalysis, nanotechnology, and computational
materials/biology. Upgrading the research infrastructure will enable
collaborative, interdisciplinary BioMaP research, impact productivity of ongoing
and future research, and create the next-generation research space for faculty
and students. It will also enable research training of a larger number of
students and a diverse student body in these cutting edge areas to prepare them
for the future critical needs of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The renovations will significantly impact fourteen faculty, sixty
graduate students, seventy undergraduate students, and twelve postdoctoral
researchers. Additionally, the renovations will enhance the diversity of the
students since the BioMaP faculty are leading two NSF-funded REU programs that
use the facility, are involved in several programs to aggressively promote
student diversity, and work in the NSF-supported Engineering Research Center
focused on Chemicals from Biorenewables (CBiRC). Another significant benefit of
the renovated facility will be a 40 percent reduction in energy usage for fume
hoods, leading to a more sustainable facility.