* 0963757
* SHF: Medium: Combining Speculation with Continuous Validation for Software Developers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* David Notkin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 766,000.00

Unprecedented computational power is available from multi-core processors and
cloud computing. To date, this power has been used primarily to make programs
run faster. However, in many cases the bottleneck to solving users' problems is
in the challenge of creating the software, not in the time to run it. This
project will apply computational power to the real bottleneck, providing
developers with new types of feedback. As a key broader impact, the research
will enable developers to create software more quickly, more cheaply, and with
higher quality.

The key technical idea is to inform developers, in advance, of the consequences
of their likely actions. The development environment speculates about developer
actions, evaluates the effect of each action (on compilation, tests, version
control conflicts, etc.), and unobtrusively makes this information available to
the developer. By knowing which choices are good and which are bad, developers
can avoid bad choices that cost time or reduce quality. The project's
intellectual merits include algorithms to quickly create and evaluate many
possible developer actions, UI design for developer awareness, and evaluation of
how increased awareness of contingent information, about possible actions,
affects developers. This also leads toward an answer to the question: If
developers had infinite processing power, what fundamental software engineering
research problems would remain?