* 0963581
* Sleep-Dependent Preservation of Emotional Memory: EEG and FMRI Investigations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Jessica Payne, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 07/31/2014
* USD 440,482.00

Why do we sleep? We spend nearly one-third of our lives sleeping. Growing
evidence suggests that one purpose of sleep is to strengthen memories formed
during the day, particularly if these memories are emotional. With the support
of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Elizabeth Kensinger (Boston College),
Dr. Jessica Payne (Notre Dame), Dr. Bob Stickgold (Beth Israel hospital), and
their students are assessing the role of sleep in memory formation, focusing on
how memory for emotional experiences changes over sleep-filled delays. In
particular, this research examines how sleep contributes to the maintenance of
an emotional trade-off in memory, whereby people have difficulty remembering
information presented in close proximity to an emotional item, although they
remember the emotional item itself extremely well. This research combines
electroencephalography (EEG), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and
behavioral methods in examing how different phases of sleep can lead to re-
wiring of the neural circuits used to retrieve emotional memories, and how such
re-wiring is influenced by the way an emotional event is first experienced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Memory trade-offs are magnified in those with depression
and anxiety, and both disorders are associated with dramatic changes in sleep.
Understanding the cognitive and neural mechanisms of the development and long-
term preservation of these memory trade-offs is thus essential for knowledge of
both healthy and dysfunctional emotional processing. Moreover, a longstanding
question in cognitive neuroscience is how memory for emotional experiences is
consolidated over time, and examining sleep-dependent effects on memory trade-
offs provides a rare window through which to view the consolidation processes at
work. Examining sleep effects on memory trade-offs also provides a means to
answer one of the most mystifying questions in the field in sleep and memory
research, which is how sleep-dependent consolidation processes preferentially
select some aspects of an experience for long-term storage while allowing other
aspects of memory to be forgotten. In addition to contributing to cognitive
neuroscience and clinical psychology research, funding of this project enabling
the growth of the neuroscience program at Boston College and helping launch a
neuroscience focus at the University of Notre Dame. Moreover, this project is
facilitating fruitful collaborations between Boston College, Beth Israel
hospital, and Notre Dame, allowing students to benefit from training at all
three sites. The project offers a rich research infrastructure for undergraduate
student learning, providing them with exposure to EEG, fMRI, and behavioral
assessment. &lt;br/&gt;