* 0963137
* Laboratories for Institute for Engineered Interfaces
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Kalle Levon, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2013
* USD 3,000,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The project is a renovation of laboratory space on the 8th floor of Rogers Hall,
the main building of the Polytechnic University of New York (NYU-Poly). The
renovation will provide a modern chemical synthesis facility comprised of three
multi-person labs together with four smaller rooms providing shared research
support services.. This will support the research program of the approximately
one-year old Institute for Engineered Interfaces (IEI).

The Institute for Engineered Interfaces is an interdisciplinary unit with
members from six NYU-Poly departments (Chemical and Biological Sciences,
Chemical and Biological Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering, Civil Engineering and Physics) and from the New York
University Dental and Medical Schools. The design of the laboratory space is
intended to promote collaboration between the different researchers. Research
areas that will be explored in the renovated facility include: the design of
biologically inspired materials and devices, bone growth, inflammation, cell
adhesion, bioactive surfaces, biosensors, self-assembled monolayers,
nanocomposites, and liposomes.

Within the new renovated shared space, researchers and students from diverse
scientific disciplines such as physics, chemistry, chemical engineering,
electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, and civil engineering will be
able to carry out more complex investigations and interdisciplinary scientific
research. Some of the results of the research to be conducted in the renovated
labs could lead to improved technologies for medicine. Senior-level
undergraduates and graduate students will be involved in research in the
Institute, preparing undergraduates for both industrial employment and graduate
studies. As part of NYU-Poly's interaction with a number of NYC schools and
their science teachers, access to the laboratories will be provided for middle
and high-school outreach activities. The renovated facility will also be used to
provide high-school teachers with opportunities to participate in research over
the summer.