* 0963061
* Renovation of Stanford Nanofabrication Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Roger Howe, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2014
* USD 4,203,254.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is to renovate the Stanford
Nanofabrication Facility (SNF), which is an open-use, shared facility and a
participating site in the NSF-funded National Nanotechnology Infrastructure
Network (NNIN). Since the nanofabrication facility opened in 1987, the SNF's
Class 100 clean room (10,500 sq ft) has operated around the clock for 50 weeks
per year. With the exception of the annual two-week shutdown, the clean room
facility has been used for research and research training 100% of the time. With
its heavy usage and the rapidly changing toolbox for nanofabrication, the SNF
needs to be renovated and updated to provide the flexibility, reliability, and
capacity in nanofabrication that is needed by such a large set of internal and
external users conducting research in nanoscience and
nanoengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plan calls for a series of
renovation tasks including updating the wet chemical handling capability,
renovating the process gas handling and exhaust ventilation systems, updating
the electrical distribution, updating the process cooling water, and modernizing
the temperature and humidity controls. The research facility space will be
updated to include two specialized processing areas, a flexible micromachining
room and a nanosynthesis facility. These areas will be used to expand the
nanofabrication capability of the SNF and better support interdisciplinary
research programs. Examples of nanofabrication activities supporting research
goals include fabricating nanostructured electrodes for fundamental studies of
electron transfer rates in molecules, production of silicon nanowires for
biological sensing, growth of nanowire electrodes for higher performance
batteries and fuel cells, and creation of novel nanoelectronics based on carbon
nanotubes and graphene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovated facility will attract
an increasingly broader base of academic and industrial researchers from the
physical sciences and the life sciences to SNF, enabling them to address new
scientific questions and adopt new approaches to technology development. In 2008
alone, 581 researchers came to the SNF to fabricate nanostructures for their
research in electronics, optics, MEMS, NEMS, biology, and chemistry. In a
typical month, the SNF serves about 240 researchers, including about 50 from
industry and about 20 from other universities. The cross-fertilization of
research cultures and pursuit of interdisciplinary science will continue to
ignite creativity and innovation in the renovated SNF and enhance the quality of
graduate and undergraduate education for student users.