* 0963022
* ANIMA (Accelerometer Network Integrator for Mobile Animals), a New Instrument Package for Integrating Behavior, Physiology and Ecology of Wild Mammals
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2010,12/31/2014
* Terrie Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 12/31/2014
* USD 855,758.00

The study of wild terrestrial mammals has been greatly advanced in recent years
by the wide spread adoption of GPS technology into biologging collars. These
devices provide investigators with hour-by-hour information about animal
location that can be used to understand a wide variety of patterns ranging from
animal migration to habitat preferences. Current biologging technologies provide
little information, however, about animal behavior and physiology which are
critical to understanding how terrestrial mammals respond to different stimuli
such as climate, interactions with other organisms, and landscape influences
such as human development. Recent breakthroughs in sensor miniaturization and
power consumption now make it possible to incorporate low cost accelerometers
and magnetometers, such as those found in consumer applications like the iphone
and Nintendo Wii, into a biologging collar that continuously measures behavior
and energetics.&lt;br/&gt; The project will develop, calibrate and test a collar
(the ANIMA) that can be used to assess continuous time-energy budgets, movement
patterns, behavioral diaries, and daily energetic costs of free-ranging
terrestrial mammals such as mountain lion, wolves and elephants:&lt;br/&gt;i.
Collar development: Design and build a long life collar for terrestrial wildlife
with archival storage of continuously sampled accelerometer and magnetometer
data for precise reconstruction of energetics, behavior and dead reckoning of
animal movement path, onboard control of GPS sampling interval based on animal
foot fall frequency, and remote download of GPS locations with behavioral
codes.&lt;br/&gt;ii. Collar calibration to behaviors such as walking, running
and feeding for a variety of species to determine energetic costs using
metabolic chambers and/or empirically derived energetic models.&lt;br/&gt;iii.
Collar testing on wild mountain lions in the Santa Cruz Mountains, in order to
test functionality and durability.&lt;br/&gt; The development of the ANIMA
leverages the skills of a unique interdisciplinary team from the departments of
Computer Engineering, Environmental Studies, and Ecology and Evolutionary
biology. Successful completion of the project will result in a major
technological advancement for the scientific study, monitoring and management of
a wide range of mammals living in diverse terrestrial ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;
The ANIMA collars are designed for and will be made available to the biological
community at large, potentially leading to significant breakthroughs in large
mammal ecology, conservation and management. In addition, as these collars are
designed for megafauna that are naturally charismatic, insights are likely to
greatly inform public knowledge and opinion of large mammal behavior and
conservation. Outreach activities include presentations at professional
conferences, public lectures, curricula development for elementary and high
school science classes, an interactive web site and coverage by various media.
Details on where and how to purchase ANIMA collars will be made available on our
website at http://people.ucsc.edu/~cwilmers/index.html.