* 0963544
* Sierra Nevada Research Institute Informatics and Data Visualization Center in Yosemite National Park
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Roger Bales, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 03/31/2013
* USD 411,600.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will renovate an old,
uninsulated building that is currently used for environmental research at the
University of California Merced (UC Merced) Sierra Nevada Research Institute
(SNRI) Wawona Field Station in Yosemite National Park. The result of the
renovation will be an interdisciplinary, energy-efficient, networked center for
computational modeling, eco-informatics, and data visualization. The center will
support a variety of ongoing and future, computationally intensive research at
the interface of science and natural resource management. Cyberinfrastructure
upgrades will include high speed internet connections to the UC Merced campus
for remote data storage and processing. Infrastructure improvements will
include: weather proofing, roof repair, an upgraded electrical system, and
heating and cooling upgrades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wawona Field Station
(WFS) supports Sierra Nevada Research Institute (SNRI) research and facilitates
synergistic links among academic research, science education, natural resource
management, and the arts. The WFS provides unique opportunities for research at
the interface of science, resource management, and scientific communication. The
WFS is a broad-based field station that supports research projects involving
traditional field station activities and, more recently, the use of embedded
sensor networks for spatially and temporally intensive measurements. However,
WFS serves more functions than a traditional field station. Researchers who
engage in field activities at WFS also do computationally intense synthesis,
analysis, and visualization of remote sensing data, spatially explicit field
data, temporally rich sensor network data, and data from other remote data
libraries (e.g., genome sequence data). Addressing interdisciplinary
environmental questions at landscape scales requires that field data be tightly
coupled in real time with data synthesis and visualization to help refine and
target subsequent field sampling. The renovated structure will facilitate
interdisciplinary cross-scale research and enhance the Sierra Nevada Research
Institute?s current activities including change detection in hydrological and
ecological systems. The renovated facility will also provide research
experiences to members of one of the most diverse student bodies in the
University of California system, thus increasing interest in science among
traditionally underrepresented student populations.