* 0963104
* Laboratory renovation at the Ocean Research College Academy at Everett Community College
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Ardi Kveven, Everett Community College
* Standard Grant
* Bauke Houtman
* 08/31/2012
* USD 276,084.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project transforms makeshift
research laboratory space at Everett Community College into a mainstream
research laboratory with adequate electrical, water, and gas, a fume hood,
seawater holding tank, and other requirements necessary for carrying out marine
science research. The renovated lab will support the shore-based analytical and
modeling aspects of on-going field studies of the environmental monitoring by
students and faculty of the Ocean Research College Academy (ORCA) at Everett
Community College. ORCA has pioneered a unique and effective research training
program for high-school students, many of them from disadvantaged backgrounds or
who are from groups under-represented in the sciences. ORCA students learn
first-hand, though inquiry-based, hands-on, research experiences that foster the
questioning nature of science and how to use data to support ideas and
hypotheses. ORCA science focuses on environmental research and the monitoring of
the northeastern arm of Puget Sound, a location local to the college and for
which the local community has a high level of interest in preserving and
understanding its present and future environmental functioning and vitality.
ORCA research involves monthly research expeditions aboard a local charter
vessel that allows students to collect data and analyze trends in ocean
chemistry, seabed composition, plankton diversity, and marine bird and marine
mammal abundance and distribution. The new facility will allow studies of CO2
and nutrient cycling in the Sound and their impact on its water chemistry and
organism development to be realized. Broader impacts of the newly renovated
facility include enhancing infrastructure for science that fully integrates
education and research for students from under-served populations engaged in
carrying out environmental research of an important part of the Washington State
coastline. Additional impacts include improving facilities that serve ORCA
faculty, most of whom are women, two of whom are of Native American descent, and
all of whom serve as positive role models for students. The project also enables
collection and publication of data that addresses environmental concerns in the
Puget Sound area, includes student-driven public outreach that showcases
research results and demonstrates the excitement of discovery through scientific
investigation.