* 0963726
* CIF: Medium: Iterative Decoding Beyond Belief Propagation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Bane Vasic, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 682,222.00

Error correcting codes are an integral part of modern day communications,
computer and data storage systems and play a vital role in ensuring the
integrity of data. At the heart of modern coding theory is the fact that the
low-density parity check codes can be efficiently decoded by the algorithm known
as belief propagation (BP). The BP is an iterative algorithm which operates on a
graphical representation of a code by sending coded bit likelihoods - beliefs.
The project establishes a new paradigm and develops tools for the design and
analysis of decoding algorithms which are much simpler yet better than belief
propagation. This novel paradigm provides a new angle in addressing a
fundamental coding theory questions and a methodology for designing a class of
decoding algorithms with provable performance and large flexibility in
controlling complexity and speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike BP decoders, these
decoders do not propagate beliefs but a rather different kind of messages that
reflect the local structure of the code graph. The methodology for designing
such decoders involves identifying graphical structures on which traditional
decoders fail, and deriving message passing rules that can correct a majority of
these structures with minimal number of bits used in the messages. New and
successively better decoding algorithms are built by adding more bits to the
messages passed in a simpler decoder. The project develops a comprehensive
framework to study decoders that achieve the best possible trade-off between the
complexity and performance in the low noise region. Also by increasing the
number of bits to represent the input alphabet successively better
approximations of the behavior of the decoders for continuous channels are
obtained.