* 0963136
* Theoretical Studies in Gravitation and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Stuart Shapiro, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2014
* USD 645,000.00

This award to the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) supports the
research in general relativity and theoretical astrophysics of the PI, Professor
Stuart L. Shapiro. In addition to the PI, the funding supports one postdoctoral
research associate, one graduate student during the two summer months and two
undergraduate (REU) students to assist in the research. The intellectual scope
of this research program spans several problems involving general relativity,
the generation of gravitational radiation, relativistic hydrodynamics, and
relativistic magnetohydrodynamics. A common thread uniting the different
theoretical topics is the crucial role of gravitation, especially relativistic
gravitation. Compact astronomical objects such as black holes and neutron stars
provide the principal forum, and the dynamics of matter in a strong
gravitational field is a major theme. Some of the topics for investigation
include the inspiral and coalescence of compact binaries (binary black holes,
binary neutron stars, binary black hole neutron stars and binary white dwarf
neutron stars), the generation of gravitational waves from binaries and other
promising astrophysical sources, gravitational collapse, the stability of
rotating, relativistic stars and the evolution and final fate of unstable stars,
gamma-ray burst sources, and the formation and growth of supermassive black
holes in the cores of galaxies and quasars. Most of these topics represent long-
standing, fundamental problems in theoretical physics requiring large-scale
computation for solution. Hence the approach involves to a significant degree
large-scale computations on parallel machines, as well as analytical modeling.
Many of the numerical calculations employ the state-of-the-art computational
resources of the UIUC's National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA).
They comprise both initial value and evolution computations and treat vacuum
spacetimes containing black holes as well as spacetimes containing realistic
matter sources and magnetic fields. The results have important implications for
astronomical observations, including those planned for gravitational wave
interferometers, such as LIGO and LISA, and have the potential to transform our
understanding of the underlying phenomena.

This project has broader impacts beyond the solutions to the specific research
problems that it tackles. An appreciable portion of the funding is devoted to
the education, training and support of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
students. These students collaborate with the PI on the majority of research
topics funded by the project. The grant supports the activities of the PI's
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) team at UIUC in computational
astrophysics and general relativity theory. The training that each of the PI's
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students receives in large-scale
computations and scientific visualization, as well as in several different areas
of theoretical physics and astrophysics, prepares them to pursue professional
careers in a broad range of scientific and technical fields. The computer
algorithms and numerical codes that are developed are useful to other groups
working in computational physics and astrophysics. Through the research and
outreach activities of the PI and his group, the grant helps promote the use of
computers and visualization tools at all levels of education, as well as the
public awareness of some the latest and most exciting developments in
gravitation physics and astrophysics.