* 0963666
* Conference: 2010  Intermediate Filaments Gordon Research Conference, June 20-25, 2010, Tilton School, New Hampshire
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Robert Goldman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 03/31/2011
* USD 7,100.00

Lay Abstract&lt;br/&gt;MCB-0963666&lt;br/&gt;Goldman, Robert&lt;br/&gt;2010
Intermediate Filament Gordon Research
Conference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Intermediate filaments (IF)
are important structural proteins located in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus
of vertebrate cells where they help to form the so-called "cytoskeleton" and
"nucleoskeleton", respectively. They provide the cell with stability as well as
mechanical resilience. IF represent one of the largest gene families, with over
70 genes coding for the proteins which are tissue-type specific and expressed in
a developmentally regulated manner. Recent studies on IF interactions with other
cytoskeletal and nucleoskeletal elements provide important insights into their
unique contribution to the structure and function of cells in many different
tissues. Importantly, defects in IF are responsible for a great many human
diseases ranging from blistering skin diseases to muscular dystrophy and
premature aging disorders. These findings, combined with recent basic research
showing that IF can regulate protein biosynthesis and gene expression demand a
revision of the classical view of IF as primarily structural proteins and
necessitates linking IF research to other research communities with an interest
in protein folding, gene expression, and signaling. The planned Gordon Research
Conference on Intermediate Filaments is designed to expose established IF
research groups to researchers from different fields, offering an opportunity to
enhance studies of the role of IF in basic cell structure and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The Gordon Research Conference
on IF brings together participants of junior, senior and minority ranks from all
over the world who study IF proteins from functional, regulatory and structural
perspectives. The GRC has traditionally fostered a free-flowing exchange of
novel ideas, tools and reagents, and facilitated the establishment of productive
educational and research collaborations with world renowned experts in the field
of IF structure and function. GRC provides a unique cross-disciplinary setting
in which junior and senior investigators from diverse backgrounds can come
together for innovative and collaborative brainstorming in an informal, relaxed
setting. Oral presentations and posters describing the most recent cutting-edge
research provide the basis for give and take discussions among all participants.
The exchange of information is open, lively and provocative, often evoking
exciting new ideas that lead to fruitful collaborations. The program for the
2010 conference will have a major focus on novel structural and functional
findings, their emerging role in cell signaling and organelle function, the
enlarging list of associated proteins they interact with, and potential novel
approaches for their study. The conference will provide an important entry into
other disciplines relating IF functions to cell biology, neurobiology,
physiology, cellular transport, cell architecture, cell division, cell
signaling, and cell-cell interaction. In short, this conference will serve both
a scientific and a training function.