* 0963059
* Renovation of Research Facilities in Brown Hall, East Tennessee State University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Gordon Anderson, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,999,364.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are
provided to renovate research space in the Brown Hall Science building at East
Tennessee State University. The proposed renovations will increase safety,
security, and energy efficiency in the laboratories of a large number of
faculty, postdoctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate students in the
Departments of Biological Sciences, Chemistry, and Physics and Astronomy. This
aging building serves the instructional, research and research training purposes
of these three departments, and much of the research conducted in the building
occurs in space that was not originally designed for that purpose. The
renovations will consolidate three faculty computer research laboratories and a
number of instrument facilities in one part of the building. It will involve
three components, namely, (1) consolidating computer research laboratories on
the first floor of the south wing of the building and installing additional and
isolated electrical circuits, additional HVAC equipment and appropriate
temperature alarms, and emergency power for these, as well as for instrument
rooms in the same part of the building; (2) reassignment of biology and
chemistry research laboratories within the building and renovation to install
needed facilities, such as fume hoods, controlled heating and lighting, and,
where necessary, emergency power; and (3) upgrading of fume hoods and casework,
including chemical-resistant countertops in a number of research laboratories.
These improvements will contribute to the continued productivity of a minimum of
20 faculty members in the three departments, as well as their postdoctoral,
graduate and undergraduate research.