* 0963844
* Photoelectrokinetic Spectroscopy:  A New Probe of Solid/Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2010,12/31/2011
* Richard Saykally, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Prof. Richard Saykally and his group at the University of
California - Berkeley are investigating a novel concept for measuring the
spectroscopic properties of aqueous interfaces, with long-term aims of
developing new instruments and devices, as well as an enhanced understanding of
the basic nature of electrolyte interfaces. Microfabricated channels of selected
materials (e.g. glass, silicon, with various coatings) with suitable optical
windows are connected to a liquid chromatography system which delivers liquids
with precisely controlled composition, pressure, and flow through the channel.
The resulting electrokinetic current/voltage is monitored both upstream and
downstream from a nozzle exit orifice. The magnitudes of these observables
depend explicitly on the properties of the solid/liquid interface (zeta
potential, ion and electron mobilities, charge transfer cross sections, electric
field). When light impinges on the liquid/solid interface, changes induced in
the electrokinetic current and potential are observed. Measuring the changes in
these quantities as a function of the optical wavelength and power can produce a
spectrum of the chromophores localized in the interfacial region (adsorbed to
the solid or located in the double layer).

This new approach can help characterize the nature of electrolyte interfaces,
providing information essential for advancing the crucial technologies of
batteries, fuel cells, solar fuel generators, and photovoltaics. In addition to
this potentially transformative scientific impact, the work is providing
training in the development of new methods and instrumentation.