* 0963578
* NeTS NOSS: Collaborative Research: Towards Robust and Self-Healing Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/17/2009,08/31/2013
* Xiaojiang Du, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2013
* USD 193,039.00

Research has shown that Heterogeneous Sensor Networks (HSNs) can significantly
improve the performance of sensor networks. To achieve better performance, we
adopt an HSN model consisting of a small number of powerful high-end sensors
(H-sensors) and a large number of low-end sensors (L-sensors). The objective of
this project is to investigate innovative network architectures of HSNs, and
develop energy-efficient, self-healing schemes and routing protocols for HSNs.
We plan to build an integrated research and education program. The research
components of the project consist of the following two parts: &lt;br/&gt;.
Investigating efficient and robust network architectures of HSNs.&lt;br/&gt;We
will investigate innovative network architectures for two different types of
HSNs: HSNs where the locations of H-sensors are controllable and NOT
controllable. We will determine the optimal density of H-sensors and L-sensors,
and the optimal locations of H-sensors to minimize the cost of sensor nodes
while ensuring a network lifetime and coverage requirement. We propose a novel
Density-Varying-Deployment scheme for H-sensors. We will also design robust
clustering schemes that can tolerate H-sensor failures and provide reliable
network structures.&lt;br/&gt;. Designing self-healing and energy-efficient
schemes and routing protocols for HSNs.&lt;br/&gt;The primary functionality of
wireless sensor networks is to sense the environment and transmit the acquired
information to a base station for further processing. Thus, routing is an
essential operation in sensor networks. Typical sensor nodes are small,
unreliable devices with limited energy supply. The routing protocols should be
energy-efficient and robust to sensor failures, and be able to find new paths
when nodes fail. By utilizing powerful H-sensors, we will design self-healing,
energy-efficient routing protocols for HSNs which take into consideration of
data fusion. &lt;br/&gt;The research is tightly coupled with an educational
program that includes the following four themes, &lt;br/&gt;1) Mentoring
graduate and undergraduate students, and recruiting students of underrepresented
groups in North Dakota and Tennessee to participate in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;2) Developing a new graduate course-Wireless Sensor Networks.
&lt;br/&gt;3) Field study of sensor networks. Sensor networks have been deployed
in several farms in North Dakota for agricultural monitoring and several
chemical/nuclear plants in Tennessee for hazard monitoring. We will take
students to the farms and plants to study how to improve the performance of
these real sensor networks by applying our research results. &lt;br/&gt;4)
Integrating research and education together by setting up a Heterogeneous Sensor
Network Lab. &lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merits include:&lt;br/&gt;1) In this
research, we will develop innovative network architectures for two different
kinds of HSNs, i.e., the locations of H-sensors are controllable or not.
&lt;br/&gt;2) We will design energy-efficient and self-healing routing protocols
for HSNs, which are robust to node failures and prolong network lifetime.
&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts are:&lt;br/&gt;Recruiting students of
underrepresented groups, including female, low incoming, first generation,
Native American, and African American students in North Dakota &lt;br/&gt;