* 0963441
* Renovation of the Greenhouse Research Facility at the University of California, Irvine
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Brandon Gaut, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,257,826.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the renovation of a
highly used greenhouse research facility at the University of California,
Irvine. The renovations will include: replacing earthen floors with concrete for
pest control, replacing benches that are presently rotting and corroding,
replacing outdated evaporative coolers, improving lighting to allow more
research to extend into the winter months, adding a new transformer and
electrical wiring, and sub-dividing the greenhouse to provide chambers that can
be controlled independently, and accessed directly, without requiring
investigator travel through the adjacent research areas in order to avoid cross-
contamination of disease and pests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovated facility
will support a large group of researchers from the School of Biological
Sciences, particularly from the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology,
as well as researchers from the Department of Earth Sciences. The greenhouse
will be used for research in areas that include evolution, genomics, ecology,
ecophysiology, plant-insect interactions and global change biology. The
renovation will make it possible to perform manipulative plant experiments under
controlled conditions that are beyond what is possible in the current
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renovated facility will provide an increased
number of opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral
associates to participate in research.