* 0963034
* Charitable Giving and Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Lise Vesterlund, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2015
* USD 276,640.00

Americans contribute substantial amounts to charities every year, helping secure
jobs for millions of people and services to many more. Unfortunately the
economic downturn has increased the demand for charitable services and
simultaneously reversed the otherwise steady increase in giving. As a result
many organizations are now strapped for funds, and it is clearer than ever that
we need to better understand why people give and how we can encourage them to
give more. This proposal presents three different research projects which aim to
improve our understanding of charitable giving. The first develops a new method
for examining voluntary contribution in the experimental laboratory, the second
uses this method to study fundraising techniques, and the third extends current
research on gender difference in cooperative behavior suggesting that non-
profits may benefit from varying solicitation strategies by
gender.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The three proposed projects
will each present a significant intellectual contribution. First, a new method
for testing charitable giving in the experimental laboratory is developed and
tested. The theoretical characteristics of the proposed methods are not only
superior to standard methods, initial results also suggest that it is more
transparent and less sensitive to behavioral error. Thus the study will provide
an important methodological contribution. The second project uses this new
method to study central fundraising strategies. These studies will shed light on
the empirical relevance of existing theories on charitable giving and will
provide guidance for the development of new models. Of particular interest will
be to determine under what circumstances fundraisers do or do not benefit from
informing donors of the amount of money that has been contributed to date. While
recent research suggests that announcements are beneficial the study indentifies
a series of cases where this is not the case The third study merges the
literatures on gender differences in cooperation and competition. Examining
gender differences in cooperative behavior under competitive pressure, it will
be determined if the stronger competitive drive for men may be detrimental when
there are social gains from cooperative behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: The proposed work will improve our understanding of charitable giving
and of the mechanisms that are most likely to succeed in raising funds. The
results will be of interest to practitioners as well as to donors and recipients
of non-profit services. While the study on gender differences in cooperative and
competitive behavior provides insights on how fundraisers may benefit from
varying the solicitation strategies between men and women it will also improve
our understanding of gender differences in the labor market. While it has been
noted that men are more competitive and that this may help explain why they are
more likely to hold top managerial positions, the proposed study may demonstrate
that in cooperative settings the drive to succeed in competitions may come at a
significant cost.