* 0963268
* Transformation through Renovation: Anthropology at Beloit College
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Shannon Fie, Beloit College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 03/31/2012
* USD 349,688.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project is to renovate an anthropology research complex in the Godfrey
Anthropology Building on the campus of Beloit College. The research laboratories
that will be modernized include an archaeology workspace/laboratory, an
analytical wet laboratory, and a museum laboratory which is adjacent to the
College's Logan Museum of Anthropology. The renovation includes optimization of
the laboratory floor space, installation of climate control to bring
temperatures and relative humidity to an acceptable range for anthropological
research, storage cabinets for reference and research collections, electrical
and lighting upgrades to improve visibility and safety, and installation of
research work stations.

The renovated research laboratories will be used for active research projects on
faunal and human-osteological remains, archaeobotanical material, Paleolithic
collections, and ethnographic materials. Improved access to research and
reference collections by faculty, students, and visiting scholars, adequate work
spaces for collaborative and concurrent projects, and dependable environmental
control and security will enhance the research in these areas. Example of
research studies that will be enabled include the role of exchange in the
integration of Midwestern Middle Woodland communities, ca. 100 BC - AD 200, the
analysis of macrobotanical remains from early agricultural communities in the
Prairie Peninsula, the analysis of archaeological remains from areas around
burial mounds in the local region, and the settlement patterns of Woodland
inhabitants.

The renovations will greatly enhance Beloit College's capacity to train future
anthropology doctoral candidates. As the baccalaureate origin of more
anthropology Ph.D. graduates than any other independent, four year liberal arts
college, Beloit College's students pursue a range of original anthropology
research projects that strengthen their ability to design a research project,
interpret data, and present research results. The renovated anthropology
laboratory complex will transform student engagement by facilitating difference
modes of research training including one-on-one student-faculty mentoring, small
group collaborations, and independent research. The renovated facility will also
enable a range of collaborative research projects with visiting scholars working
with the Logan Museum of Anthropology.