* 0964507
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research:    Explicit Codes for Efficient Operation of Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Zhen Zhang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2014
* USD 523,416.00

This project deals with models of wireless multi-terminal networks incorporating
practical constraints such as individual links that experience fading,
applications that are delay-sensitive, network communication that is subject to
broadcast and interference constraints and nodes that are constrained to operate
in half-duplex mode. The network is assumed to be static for the duration of the
message, but can change from one message to the next and channel-state
information is assumed to be present only at the receiver. In such settings,
cooperative communication in which intermediate nodes facilitate communication
between a particular source-sink pair, is key to efficient operation of the
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key goal of any communication system, is one of
achieving an optimal rate-reliability tradeoff. The diversity-multiplexing gain
tradeoff (DMT) determines the tradeoff between relevant first-order
approximations to the rate and reliability of communication. The DMT of point-
to-point communication links has been extensively studied and signal sets are
available that are optimal under any statistical distribution of the fading
channel. There now exist protocols and codes for two-hop relay networks that
come close to achieving the corresponding min-cut upper bound on DMT. Goals of
this project include: 1) determining the DMT of various classes of multiterminal
networks ranging from broadcast, cooperative-broadcast and multiple-access
channel networks to layered multi-hop networks; 2) identifying the classes of
networks for which the DMT of the network is given by the DMT of the min-cut; 3)
assessing the impact of asynchronous operation of the network, as well as of the
presence of feedback along one or more links in the network; 4) the construction
of codes with lesser decoding complexity.