* 0964812
* Thermodynamics and Phase Equilibria of Heusler and half-Heusler Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Philip Nash, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2013
* USD 333,242.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Heusler compounds of type A2BC and 'half-Heusler' compounds
of type ABC, where A and B are transition metals and C is a group III-V element
are of great interest for their functional properties such as shape memory,
thermoelectric, ferromagnetic and spin polarization effects which could lead to
new mechanical and electronic devices. The objectives of the proposed research
are to accurately determine heats of formation for ternary compounds of this
type, to make complementary measurements of heat capacity, phase equilibria,
melting points and lattice parameters and to analyze these data to provide
understanding of the systematic alloying behavior in these systems. The
enthalpies of formation of the compounds will be determined by direct synthesis
reaction calorimetry using a Kleppa type calorimeter. The specific heats will be
determined over a range of temperature from enthalpy measurements made in a
Setaram high temperature drop calorimeter. Although potentially there are 230
compounds, rapid screening of composition space to identify which systems
contain these compounds will be performed using diffusion multiples and
systematic analysis of phase diagrams. The thermodynamic data obtained will be
incorporated into an on-line database for access by the scientific community.
The data will be incorporated in computational thermodynamic Gibbs energy
descriptions of the compounds for use in predicting phase equilibria. Such data
are also of importance in providing benchmarks for first principles calculations
and for optimization of thermodynamic descriptions of compounds to permit future
computational alloy development extending to higher order systems.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Novel mechanical and electronic devices may be possible
using compounds based on three metallic elements. These compounds often exhibit
properties such as magnetic or thermal shape memory and large shape change in
magnetic fields which can be used for mechanical actuators and half metal-half
semiconductor property which can be used to produce so-called 'spintronic'
devices or conversion of thermal energy to electrical energy which have the
potential to reduce energy consumption and waste heat loss in electronic
devices. Basic property measurements will be made on a large number of such
compounds, many of which have not been synthesized previously. The results of
this project can be used by the wider scientific community for further alloy
development of these materials and application to devices. Graduate and
undergraduate students and high school students from the Illinois Mathematics
and Science Academy will be directly involved in the research. Laboratory tours
will be arranged for 3-8th grade classes from a local Chicago public school. The
project involves a substantial international collaboration with researchers in
both China and Korea and will provide opportunity for researchers to visit IIT
to give seminars to our students and interact with faculty and graduate
students. The thermodynamic database is available for all scientists to access
via the web. Video tutorials of experimental techniques will be produced, edited
and made available on the web as well as through iTunes U.