* 0964184
* Collaborative Research: Colorado Airborne Multi-Phase Cloud Study (CAMPS)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Zhien Wang, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2014
* USD 179,103.00

This project will focus on in situ and remote sensing measurements of wintertime
clouds over the Park Range of the Rocky Mountains in northern Colorado. These
clouds are generally mixed-phase; the combination of ice, liquid and water vapor
presents challenges both to measurements and modeling, and consequently, to
understanding their impact on atmospheric radiation and on precipitation. The
Colorado Airborne Multi-Phase Cloud Study (CAMPS) will use the Wyoming King Air
research aircraft instrumented with both remote (cloud radar and cloud lidar)
and in situ sensors (cloud and particle probes, total water hygrometer) to
elucidate the vertical and horizontal structure of cold mixed-phase
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data
gathered during CAMPS will include information about macro- and microphysical
parameters of mixed-phase clouds obtained by both in situ and remote-sensing
methods. These data will be analyzed to address a number of important questions
about the structure, properties and impacts of mixed-phase clouds. Specific
goals include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To assess the vertical and horizontal
structure and spatial and temporal variation of cloud properties (particle size
distribution, ice and liquid water content, particle habit) in liquid, mixed-
phase and precipitating clouds at a mid-latitude continental site with complex
terrain during winter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To assess the impact of
topography and associated variations in vertical forcing on cloud generation and
cloud properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To develop a data set that provides
the information necessary for improving the representation of mixed-phase clouds
in cloud-resolving and climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. To provide
correlative data for validation of the Department of Energy (DOE) Atmospheric
Radiation Measurement (ARM) program mobile facility and the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration A-Train satellite-borne remote
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. To provide observational confirmation of the
redistribution of snowfall associated with riming inhibition due to enhanced
CCN. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, by enhancing the community's understanding of
cloud-scale processes, the data from CAMPS will be the basis for improvements in
the representation of clouds in global climate models. This will lead to more
accurate calculations of current and future climate. In addition the CAMPS
project will contribute to both formal and informal education at a number of
levels. At least one graduate student from each of the participating
universities will be involved with the field work and/or data analysis related
to this project. The investigators will include undergraduates from their
institutions in flight-planning and/or meteorology exercises related to CAMPS
when possible. Formal educational opportunities for elementary school students
will be coordinated by the Storm Peak Laboratory staff, including visits to the
laboratory and aircraft and classroom exercises. Outreach activities will
include signage at the Steamboat Springs Ski Resort, an interactive display at
the gondola building and coordination with the 2011 Steamboat Weather Summit.