* 0964990
* 2010 Gordon Research Conference on the Biology Post-Transcriptional Gene Regulation to be held July 18 through July 23, 2010; Newport, R.I.
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2011
* Manuel Ares, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 05/31/2011
* USD 7,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on "The Biology of Post-Transcriptional
Gene Regulation" will be held at Salve Regina University in Newport, Rhode
Island, from July 18th to July 23rd, 2010. This meeting is the fourth in a GRC
series that has been held every other year since 2004. The goal of this series
is the elucidation of the fundamental mechanisms and regulation of RNA
biogenesis. The emphasis is on post-transcriptional transactions involving the
generation and metabolism of mRNA, but this extends to transcriptional coupling,
and to factors involved in translation and its control, including tRNA and non-
coding (e.g., micro) RNAs. Representing key areas of post-transcriptional gene
regulation, the speakers will include a number of internationally known experts
in this field, along with more junior speakers chosen on the basis of the
content of their submitted abstracts. Approximately 150 participants are
expected for the five-day meeting. The program will consist of nine morning or
evening sessions that broadly address cutting-edge issues in the areas of
coupling between transcription and RNA processing; genomics and evolution of
RNA-processing signals and factors; RNA splicing catalysis, fidelity, and
regulation; RNA turnover, including nonsense-mediated mRNA decay; RNA transport
and localization; non-coding RNA; translational control; and RNA-protein
interactions. In addition, four small poster sessions will enable all
participants to contribute to, and learn about, these topics. Free early-
afternoon and late-evening periods in the relatively isolated summer setting of
Salve Regina University should stimulate productive, informal discussions among
established and more junior investigators, postdoctoral trainees, and graduate
students from the U.S. and abroad. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Gordon Research
Conference has a unique format that brings together sets of researchers -
graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, principal investigators at all career
stages, grant administrators, scientists from the pharmaceutical and publishing
industries who, despite converging interests, have only infrequent opportunities
to meet as a group. The resulting intellectual cross-fertilization will help
define critical areas and thus help propel this field forward. Understanding the
basic mechanisms of post-transcriptional gene regulation is essential for a full
understanding of the organization, function, and evolution of genomes. Speakers
for this conference include 17 females and five underrepresented minorities. The
selection of attendees from the pool of applicants will employ the principles of
affirmative action with respect to minorities, women, and junior scientists.
Funds from the National Science Foundation will support the attendance of young
investigators working in U.S. laboratories, including graduate students, post-
doctoral fellows, and beginning principal investigators.