* 0964357
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Data-Parallel Hash Tables: Theory, Practice and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Annamaria Amenta, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2015
* USD 532,084.00

Parallel data structures and algorithms are becoming an increasingly important
research area, due to the rapid advances in GPUs and other massively parallel
commodity multi-core hardware along with the software needed to program these
devices. In this collaborative effort involving the University of California at
Davis and Harvard University, the PIs will focus on the design and
implementation of parallel hash tables, one of the most fundamental of data
structures, on the new platforms. Real-time parallel hashing would enable a
variety of graphics applications on dynamically changing data, including spatial
hashing, surface and image matching, and hashed octrees which in turn enable a
host of other applications including Boolean surface operations, point-cloud
nearest neighbors, ray-tracing acceleration and photon mapping. In prior work,
the PIs built a baseline implementation that shows effective parallel hashing
can be done on the GPU; they can construct the table as quickly as the fastest
available radix sort, and can execute parallel random access on the elements
much more quickly than binary search. In the current research, the PIs plan to
improve upon their baseline implementation significantly, while also focusing on
related structures such as multi-maps and Bloom filters. New designs and
construction algorithms will be developed, implemented, and analyzed with
respect to performance, and then applied to a variety of computer graphics
applications. The PIs expect this work to lead to interesting theoretical
results; modern hash table constructions have never been considered in the
parallel context, so finding the right model for analysis is one goal of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will contribute to
the computing infrastructure, not only for computer graphics but also for
general-purpose computation. The PIs will distribute their implementations
freely, in part by extending and building upon their existing (and popular)
library of general-purpose data structures (the CUDA Data Parallel Primitives).
The PIs note that making the most of the emerging parallel GPU resources
requires training the next generation of programmers to think in parallel;
therefore, they plan to exploit this project as an opportunity to revive a long-
untaught undergraduate parallel programming course, in addition to studying
parallel algorithms with their graduate students.