* 0964022
* Bone Tissue: Multi-Scale Simulation for Clinical Applications; Los Angeles, CA; April 19-23, 2010.
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Maria-Grazia Ascenzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 11/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0964022 PI: Ascenzi, Maria-Grazia ORG:
UCLA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Bone Tissue: Multi-scale Simulation for
Clinical Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Engineers,
mathematicians, system biologists, clinical researchers,
and&lt;br/&gt;clinicians are convened to formulate a plan to develop 3D multi-
scale virtual rendering of bone&lt;br/&gt;tissue able to address specific
clinical issues. The proposed workshop will be a novel opportunity to expose
researchers and clinicians, including junior colleagues, to diverse, but
compatible expertise, along the lines of the Interagency Modeling and Analysis
Group (IMAG) aim and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Roadmap, to design
a common plan of action to develop state-of-the-art 3D multi-scale models of
bone. The proposed three-day workshop format will allow experts from different
fields to teach each other the latest developments concerning bone modeling and
to design collaborative plans to solve challenging problems. Each day will begin
with presentation of clinical problems and relevant technologies by systems
biologists, mathematicians, and engineers. During the first two afternoons of
the workshop, round-tables will address day-specific clinical problems, aiming
to design a plan to obtain necessary additional experimental data and to adapt
existing mathematical and engineering tools for preparation of the appropriate
multi-scale model. The last afternoon of the workshop will be dedicated to
reviewing the research planning and collaborations to make sure that each person
knows his/her particular ongoing role and contribution. As the workshop closes,
each participant will appreciate his/her role in advancing the 3D multi-scale
modeling of the bone tissue for each of the clinical problems examined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The proposed workshop will (1) establish
the bases for critical new networks and partnerships across disciplines,
institutions, and seniority, (2) create opportunities for further advancement of
women and minorities through encouragement to participate in the workshop, (3)
provide training for junior and senior researchers in complementary disciplines,
(4) improve treatment and public health management of bone related conditions;
and (5) potentially provide insights for the formulation of new materials based
on deeper understanding of bone as a natural composite-hybrid material.
&lt;br/&gt;