* 0964592
* NeTS:  Medium:  Collaborative Research: Experimental Platform for Low-Power Wireless Networking Research
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Akos Ledeczi, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 04/30/2014
* USD 600,000.00

The conventional architecture for short-range, low-power, wireless hardware
integrates a radio transceiver and a general-purpose microcontroller. However,
microcontrollers have limited computational power and hence, restrict the kinds
of algorithms that can be implemented. Moreover, closed radio architectures
prevent the direct access to the physical layer needed for many novel
applications. The emergence of low-power FPGAs with their efficient duty cycling
support presents an opportunity to create a novel wireless platform to overcome
these limitations. The project develops a highly flexible hardware/software
architecture for mobile wireless networking based on low-power FPGA devices.
High performance DSP and other algorithms can be implemented directly in
hardware, while the rest of the code runs on a soft processor core inside the
FPGA. This flexible hardware/software boundary increases the complexity of
software development that is eased via sophisticated development tool support
and an extensive software component library that the project is also developing.
The small inexpensive platform offers two orders of magnitude higher performance
than current microcontroller-based hardware at equivalent power for many
applications. Hence, it will stimulate research in novel protocols and enable
new applications not possible today. A competition for undergraduate students
will be organized in which winners will receive the hardware, software,
training, and mentorship needed to carry out their ideas during a paid summer
internship at Vanderbilt.