* 0964833
* 2010 Environmental Endocrine Disrupters Gordon Research Conference: May 30 - June 4, 2010; Switzerland
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Robert Zoeller, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Hannah V. Carey
* 02/28/2011
* USD 10,000.00

Hormone signaling represents a key mechanism by which development in
multicellular organisms is paced, reproduction is controlled, body weight is
regulated, and nearly all other physiological systems are integrated. Thus, it
is of great importance that industrial chemicals that have become global
contaminants in the environment are being shown to interfere with hormone
signaling. The science of evaluating the environmental impact of these so-called
"endocrine disruptors" is at an important crossroad, because historically, risk
was measured for one chemical at a time, and toxicity was measured in general
terms. It is clear, however, that chemicals that interact with hormone systems
do not behave according to the rules of general toxicity. Therefore,
understanding and appropriately regulating the risk of exposure to these
chemicals for wildlife and for humans requires the participation of many
different kinds of scientists, including molecular biologists, endocrinologists,
toxicologists, wildlife biologists, statisticians, and risk assessors. In
addition, it requires the participation of basic researchers, ecologists,
physicians, and government regulators. The goal of this international conference
is to assemble such a group of scientists to facilitate the integration of basic
endocrinological research of these chemicals with risk management of human and
wildlife populations. This award will support young scientists and trainees,
especially individuals who are from groups underrepresented in science, to
attend this meeting. This will provide them the opportunity to interact with
scientists from a variety of disciplines and impact their career development in
a field that increasingly integrative and multidisciplinary.