* 0964633
* Modular Autonomous Biosampler (MAB): A Multi-platform System for Distinct Biological Size-class Sampling and Preservation
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2011
* Stephen Cary, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2011
* USD 245,750.00

The last 10-15 years has seen a tremendous growth in the development and
application of new sensor platforms, specifically autonomous and Lagrangian
platforms such as Autonomous Underwater Vehicles, drifters, and ocean glider and
in the realm of integrated Ocean Observing Systems (OOSs). A parallel growth in
the realm of biosensors remains significantly behind that of the geophysical
sampling and biosampling is an under-represented sector in the implementation of
OOS systems worldwide. Nevertheless, the potential for discovery and
environmental health assessment from biological and chemical sensors is
extremely high. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's propose to design and integrate
current-off-the-shelf technology into a novel configuration that has not been
accomplished before. While it is true that systems like the Hardy Continuous
Plankton Sampler (1930) have some historical bearing on this project, and
certainly point to the long standing need for a system such as we are proposing,
the development of a new class of modular self-contained, programmable pump-
filter systems is a significantly distinct undertaking. The development of this
device is particularly urgent given the critical need in the community for
biological sampling in connection with existing and planned ocean observatory
and mooring networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a low-cost high capacity smart
biosampler that has the ability to store samples for extended periods of time
for later analysis will satisfy the critical need to access these vastly
understudied areas of our oceans. The proposed modular autonomous biosampler has
the potential to dramatically increase our remote long-term biological
surveillance capabilities. The potential for discovery and environmental health
assessment from biological and chemical sensors is extremely high.