* 0964652
* NetSE:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Promoting Secondary Spectrum Markets via Profitability-Driven Methods and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* David Starobinski, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 714,501.00

Wireless telecommunications are undergoing substantial policy reforms in pursuit
of better spectral efficiency. A key element in these reforms entails granting
full property rights to spectrum license holders, thereby paving the way to
secondary spectrum markets. Spectrum markets hold a remarkable potential to
increase spectrum utilization by making it available to a larger fraction of
public at lower cost. Yet, although a favorable regulatory framework has been in
effect in the last few years, liquidity of spectrum markets is inhibited due to
uncertainties perceived by spectrum license holders. These uncertainties stem
from complex relationships between effects of electromagnetic interference and
economic considerations. This research involves a constructive study of
viability of spectrum markets by establishing methods and algorithms that render
such markets profitable for their participants.

The investigators focus on analytical study of profitability of spectrum
markets, and its empirical verification. Main thrusts of the research program
are: (i) fundamental elements of pricing and interference externalities for
efficient and economically viable use of spectrum; (ii) algorithms for spot
market use and real-time measurement-based pricing policies; (iii) empirical
techniques for testing demand model specification, and formative models of
demand-price relationships via experimental studies. This research is
interdisciplinary and it is based on identifying incarnations of both novel and
classical notions in economics in the specific context of wireless
communications and spectrum markets.

The research impacts legal and economic policies for the future wireless
industry and provides a tool for assessing potentials of the secondary spectrum
market.