* 0964980
* 2010 Gordon Conference on Biomineralization;New London, NH; Summer 2010
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2011
* Lia Addadi, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 04/30/2011
* USD 5,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0964980 PI: Addadi, Lia ORG: Gordon Research
Conferences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2010 Gordon Research Conference on
Biomineralization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The purpose of this
conference is to explore the fundamental mechanisms that underlie
biomineralization processes in all organisms, as well as their possible
applications. The interest in this topic stems from the important role that
biomineralization processes play in biology, biotechnology and medicine, and the
inspiration that can be derived from the understanding of biomineralization
strategies in chemistry, interfacial science, materials science, nanotechnology
and paleoclimate reconstruction. The goal is thus to foster discussions across
disciplines, by bringing together chemists, physicists, biologists, medical
doctors, geochemists and engineers who would otherwise not overlap on the
conference circuit, in a setting that promotes cross-fertilization of new ideas.
Biomineralization has attracted increasing attention in the past decades because
it lies at the meeting point between several areas where true scientific
revolutions have occurred. Nanotechnology and systems biology are only two
examples of areas that may derive inspiration and practical knowledge from
biomineralization, while in turn contributing to it with fundamental
understanding of physics and biology, and with technical advances. Tissue
engineering, synthesis of bio-inspired materials, structure-function relations
and material property investigations are examples of more specific areas that
will be foci of the planned conference. This conference will also help to define
new research directions that are vital to providing a firm scientific foundation
for some major technological challenges for decades to come, such as
miniaturization, synthesis of environmentally benign materials, and improving
quality of life for an aging population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS:
Biomineralization has a significant and obvious impact on human health. But in
addition to such well known pathologies as osteoporosis, atherosclerosis, and
tooth decay and the promise of medical regeneration of hard tissues, the field
has implications for understanding the paleontological record and the historical
climate record of the earth. It also holds promise of revealing revolutionary
new biomimetic means for producing an array of useful new ceramics. Past
Biomineralization Gordon Research Conferences have been characterized by broad
participation. In 2008, for example, participant demographics closely reflected
the breakdown for speakers and discussion leaders, with 34% being female and 52%
coming from North America; 30% came from Europe, 13% from Asia, 1% from South
America, and 4% from Oceania. For 2010 30% of the speakers and discussion
leaders are female. One goal for 2010 is to increase the percentage of
participants from under-represented regions. Because the 160 attendees will be
selected from a much larger pool of applicants, the organizers can be selective
in choosing participants. In addition to the scientific background of the
applicant, they intend to use diversity and location in an underrepresented
region as selection criteria. Financial assistance will be used directly to
encourage participation by faculty, students, and post docs from
underrepresented regions.&lt;br/&gt;