* 0964842
* Collaborative Research:  Heterogeneous Photocatalytic Transformation of Isoprene: Relevance to Secondary Organic Aerosol Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Marc Baum, Oak Crest Institute of Science
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 379,387.00

The hypothesis to be tested in this project is that atmospheric heterogeneous
photocatalysis of isoprene may play an important role in secondary organic
aerosol (SOA) formation. The atmospheric relevance of transition metal-based
particulate semiconductors in the photochemical oxidation of isoprene to low
volatility products will be investigated. Photocatalysts will include
atmospherically-relevant transition metal oxide particles, desert sand, and
volcanic ash in the 0.1 to 10 micrometer size range. Liquid-solid photocatalytic
reactions will be studied in terms of the organic substrate (isoprene and the
primary products of isoprene gas-phase photochemical oxidation, methacrolein and
methyl vinyl ketone), the presence of a sacrificial electron donor (e.g.,
acetate), oxygen concentration, and pH. The potential for photochemical Diels-
Alder reactions to occur between isoprene (a diene) and a range of relevant
dienophiles will be investigated, followed by analysis for oligomeric products.
The research will be overseen by senior investigators from CalTech and the Oak
Crest Institute of Science.

These studies will potentially advance the field of aerosol research by guiding
future smog chamber studies; identifying chemical markers characteristic of
heterogeneous photooxidation pathways; and investigating the polymerization
products, which may account for a significant portion of the SOA mass. The
research will be carried out by a post-doctoral scholar, and a graduate student
at Caltech, as well as community college students and high school teachers
working in teams with high school students via Oak Crest. These efforts will
help to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in scientific
research.