* 0964033
* AF: Medium:  Algorithmic Research in Game Theory, Networks, and Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2015
* Richard Karp, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 03/31/2015
* USD 1,200,000.00

Over the past two decades there have been many examples of &lt;br/&gt;results
and insights in the Theory of Algorithms and Complexity that are motivated
by,&lt;br/&gt;and inform, important research fronts in other sciences: Quantum
Computing, &lt;br/&gt;Markov chain Monte Carlo, and Algorithmic Game Theory are
&lt;br/&gt;examples. This project is about computational
research&lt;br/&gt;whose purpose is to shed light to a broad front of central
problems in &lt;br/&gt;Game Theory and Economics, Networking, and Biology.
&lt;br/&gt;Aspects of this work involve devising algorithms for approximating
&lt;br/&gt;Nash equilibria, or identifying computational impediments to the
task;&lt;br/&gt;understanding better the power and limitations of learning
and&lt;br/&gt;distributed algorithms for computing equilibria; exploring from
the&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic standpoint the refinements of the Nash equilibrium
concept, as&lt;br/&gt;well as of equilibrium selection processes, which have
been&lt;br/&gt;developed by researchers in Game Theory over the past fifty
years;&lt;br/&gt;coming up new, compelling, and computationally motivated
solution concepts; &lt;br/&gt;identifying complexity-theoretic impediments to
the central problem of characterizing &lt;br/&gt;the optimal multi-object
auction, as well as developing algorithms and lower&lt;br/&gt;bounds for the
problem of computing price equilibria in both the&lt;br/&gt;most general setting
and in novel special cases of markets. &lt;br/&gt;Further goals of this project
in the realm of Networking include &lt;br/&gt;studying a recently identified
class of models known as ``networks of games;'' &lt;br/&gt;determining the
extent to which sophisticated pricing schemes &lt;br/&gt;can improve the
efficiency of selfish routing; and the analyzing two new &lt;br/&gt;genres of
network models: One for social&lt;br/&gt;networks, and one for financial
markets. In Biology, a recent result &lt;br/&gt;established that natural
selection under recombination optimizes not fitness, &lt;br/&gt;as it had been
assumed for decades, but a novel metric which we call ``mixability;''
&lt;br/&gt;this project shall follow on this work by devising techniques for
proving mathematically &lt;br/&gt;this effect, as well as gauging rigorously its
impact on Evolution, and and by exploring &lt;br/&gt;the relationship between
recombination, mixability, and genetic modularity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is likely to produce new insights into both Computation&lt;br/&gt;and
the target disciplines (Game Theory, Networking, Theory of Evolution),
&lt;br/&gt;as well as new mathematical techniques. In Algorithmic Game Theory,
&lt;br/&gt;it seeks to make progress on some of the deepest and most looked at
problems, but also to&lt;br/&gt;identify new exciting research fronts and
directions in this field.&lt;br/&gt;In the Theory of Evolution, the effort is to
shed light on some of&lt;br/&gt;the most fundamental and old questions of this
important discipline.&lt;br/&gt;The insights from this work will be used in the
development of graduate and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate courses. A substantial part
of this project aims at&lt;br/&gt;understanding and improving the global
information environment (the&lt;br/&gt;Internet, the worldwide web, and the
digital social networks they&lt;br/&gt;enable), which is one of Humankind's most
valuable resources.