* 0964443
* SHF: Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Chorus: Dynamic Isolation in Shared-Memory Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Swarat Chaudhuri, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2012
* USD 442,815.00

Expressing parallel computations over complex shared-memory data structures has
always been a vexing issue in parallel programming. On one hand, popular task-
based programming models do not provide first-class abstractions for isolation
and locality. On the other, Actor-based programming naturally captures locality
but is unsuitable for computations on large shared data structures. The present
project partially bridges the gap between these two styles of parallelism
through Chorus, a new programming model for parallel computations over
unstructured, continually changing shared-memory data structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key abstraction of Chorus is an object assembly: a
local, isolated region in the heap equipped with a thread of control. Assemblies
can imperatively modify themselves, merge with other assemblies, and split into
smaller assemblies?through these operations over assemblies, Chorus captures
unpredictable, dynamic changes to parallelism. This makes Chorus an ideal
programming model for many irregular data-parallel applications (e.g., meshing,
clustering), which exhibit fine-grained data-parallelism in typical executions
but no parallelism in the worst case, and whose parallelization remains an open
and difficult challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The predicted outcomes of the
project include new insights into the semantic foundations of Chorus and new
language constructs integrating Chorus with existing abstractions for
asynchronous task creation, directed synchronization, and locality. On the
system-building end, the project will integrate Chorus with the Habanero Java
parallel programming language, and implement a compiler and runtime for the
resultant language. The performance and programmability of this language will be
thoroughly evaluated using benchmarks largely consisting of emerging irregular
workloads.