* 0964702
* TC: Medium:  Securing JavaScript Web Applications via Staged Policy Enforcement
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Ranjit Jhala, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 03/31/2015
* USD 1,151,927.00

JavaScript is the lingua franca of modern Internet computing. Unlike traditional
code, JavaScript is highly dynamic and malleable. While JavaScript is
increasingly used in security-critical applications that manipulate sensitive
information like banking information and social security numbers, Web browsers'
sandboxing mechanism for JavaScript (the "same-origin policy") is too coarse to
adequately secure "mashups" that combine code at runtime from mutually
distrusting origins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides tools to secure
JavaScript applications from buggy or malicious code by enforcing security
policies, written by developers and users, that specify what code should be
trusted and what data must be protected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faced with dynamic
applications like mashups, traditional enforcement mechanisms call for either
one incomplete initial analysis or expensive from-scratch re-analysis whenever
code is added. This project instead introduces staged program analysis. At each
stage, as much analysis as possible is performed as possible given the known
code; the remainder of the analysis computation is deferred until more code
becomes available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system, implemented in a browser and
evaluated on real Web sites, must be scalable enough to use with complex,
popular sites; precise enough to produce few false positives; efficient enough
to run on end users' browsers without noticeable performance degradation; and
user-friendly in minimizing user intervention and providing a faithful rendition
of protected sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For users, the project will make Web
2.0 applications safer and more reliable, without degrading the browsing
experience. For developers, it will provide early error detection and the
guarantee of safe execution for dynamic Web 2.0 applications.