* 0964596
* Environmental Uncertainties and Livelihood Thresholds in the Okavango Delta, Botswana
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2017
* Brian King, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2017
* USD 612,032.00

This research will combine insights from both social and natural sciences to
understand how variability and uncertainty in time and space impact human-
environment interactions. The project will examine social responses to
environmental variability, particularly precipitation and flooding. Of interest
is how people maintain their livelihoods, and further how these strategies
change in anticipation and in response to environmental change. Thus this work
will also characterize the patterns of precipitation and flooding as well as
their impacts on household farming, household collection of materials such as
reeds, grasses, and wood, and individual entry into the tourism sector. The work
will be positioned in the international treaty-recognized Wetland of Importance,
the Okavango Delta (OD) of Botswana. Nestled within the Kalahari (Kgaligadi)
Desert and flooded each year from Angolan highland precipitation, the OD has
experienced vastly dramatic changes in precipitation and flooding in the last
several decades. This rural area's population is highly dependent on the natural
resource base, either directly (e.g., farming, reed collection) or indirectly
(e.g., the wildlife-oriented ecotourism industry). It is therefore further
hypothesized that these fluctuations have increased people's uncertainty about
the availability of water and the timing / magnitude of flooding, impacting
their decisions about which and how many livelihood strategies to employ. The
overall project research goals are as follows: 1) quantify environmental change
in the OD human-environment system, with particular respect to precipitation and
flooding; 2) capture the distribution of natural resources over space and time
using field-collected and satellite-derived data; 3) map resource activity areas
and management / tenure systems to better understand livelihood decision-making;
4) assess how environmental change impacts livelihood strategy selection, and,
in turn, how these decisions impact the environment; and 5) evaluate the utility
of a human-environment system framework for understanding dynamic systems such
as the OD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the Okavango Delta's high profile
internationally, it has been understudied in terms of the impacts of uncertainty
in human perception of and reaction to environmental change in livelihood
strategy selection. This work will be of practical and immediate benefit to
local and regional resource managers. Collaboration with local researchers will
facilitate diffusion of lessons learned to area students, from preschool to
university-level. Students from the local University of Botswana campus as well
as members of the sampled communities will be trained in survey and GPS (global
positioning system) collection, marketable skills which will build capacity for
both individuals and communities. The Botswana government maintains permit-
approved research results for access by relevant government agencies, thus
facilitating better resource management in light of environmental change.
Further, results will be distributed through the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands
through its Scientific and Technical Review Panel (STRP). Technical Reports are
disseminated to all signatory countries to the Convention and will assist in
making the research findings available to an international audience.