* 0964479
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Cooperative Routing in Wireless Ad- Hoc Networks with Advanced PHY Layers: Interference Management, Resource Allocation, and Information Mixing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Michael Neely, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 426,771.00

Wireless ad-hoc networks consist solely of cheap, mobile nodes that operate in
the absence of expensive fixed infrastructure such as base stations. In order to
save energy, increase data rate, or improve robustness, some nodes may act as
helper nodes, relaying some or all of the information. In the simplest form of
relaying, data packets are forwarded node-by-node in a manner akin to a fire
bucket brigade. In more advanced methods, such as those considered in this
research, several nodes can cooperate to forward information. The key design
questions are two-fold. First is the design of cooperative communication
techniques, i.e., physical-layer approaches for relaying information from one
set of nodes to the next. Second is routing, i.e., identifying which of the
available nodes should participate in the transmission and what system resources
(time, energy, bandwidth) should be allocated to each.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research analyzes interconnections between these two
key questions, treated separately in most prior work. We consider the routing
problem when rateless codes are employed at the physical layer. Such codes allow
receiving nodes to accumulate mutual information (instead of just energy) from
multiple transmitting nodes. This yields greater network robustness and
efficiency. The research investigates the effect of interference, which
automatically arises when multiple messages are being transmitted
simultaneously. By using stochastic network optimization, optimum resource
allocation can be provided without the need for centralized knowledge of all
states of nodes and propagation channels. Cooperative transmission techniques
based on a hybrid of network-coding and compute-and-forward, their rateless
variants, and application to cooperative routing are investigated as well. The
concepts are validated through experiments.