* 0964088
* Investigating the Structure of Tornadoes and the Near-tornado Environment Using Mobile High-frequency Ka-band Doppler Radar Technology
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Christopher Weiss, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 355,344.00

The intellectual merit of this study will be in the introduction of high
frequency mobile Doppler radar technology to the VORTEX 2 field program. This is
a large field program entering its second field operations period in May-June
2010 involving multiple mobile platforms focused on the study of tornadic
thunderstorms in the upper Great Plains region. This contribution to the field
program will involve two Texas Tech University Ka-band (35 GHz) (TTUKa) radars.
Observations with these radars will be used to address many VORTEX 2 objectives
related to better understanding the nature of circulations in the near-tornado
environment, in tornado cyclones, and in sub-tornado-scale vortices. Owing to
the use of non-linear pulse compression, a first for mobile high-frequency
radar, these radar systems feature higher sensitivity than other such radars.
The fine angular resolution and high sensitivity of the TTUKa radars will
provide previously unresolved detail and coverage of air motions at the tornado
scale. Two primary observational objectives are (1) horizontal and vertical
structure of tornado vortices, and (2) pre-existing vertical vorticity maxima
prior to tornadogenesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the study
will be manifested in several ways. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
heavily utilized in the planning and execution of TTUKa data collection and the
presentation of preliminary results at mission briefings. Some of these students
have a background in fields other than meteorology (e.g., civil engineering,
wind engineering, mathematics), and therefore have the opportunity to expand
their knowledge base. Given the typical ethnic diversity of the student
population at Texas Tech University, traditionally underrepresented groups will
have the opportunity to contribute to the project, particularly those of
Hispanic descent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One ultimate goal of the proposed
research is the improved understanding of tornado vortex structure, leading to
advancement in understanding of hazards due to tornados. Another objective of
the research is to improve tornado forecasts through the recognition of the
influence of detectable variability in the pre-tornadic supercell environment on
subsequent storm evolution. This increase in forecast skill is vital for the
protection of life and property. Through the broad dissemination of research
results in journal publications and conference presentations, all research
objectives that are met will have significant impact in the community.