* 0964819
* Studies Involving Atoms in High Rydberg States
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* F. Barry Dunning, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 06/30/2014
* USD 604,114.00

The control and manipulation of the electronic states of atoms will be explored
using as a laboratory Rydberg atoms in which one electron is excited to a
preselected very-high-lying initial state. The targeted final states will be
created using carefully-tailored sequences of short electric field pulses.
Localized electronic states will be engineered whose motion mirrors that of a
classical electron moving in both quasi-one-dimensional and near-circular
orbits. The response of such atoms to periodic trains of pulses will be studied
to explore their dynamics, the level of control that can be achieved by varying
the driving field, the transition from classical to quantum chaos, and the
application of the tools of classical non-linear dynamics to atomic systems.
Techniques to store/retrieve information in atoms will be evaluated. The role of
collisions or electrical noise in destroying such information will be also
examined. Rydberg atom-surface interactions will be investigated under
controlled conditions to understand how atoms evolve as they approach a surface
and to examine the charge transfer processes that occur. Rydberg atom
interactions with nanoscale particles deposited on the surface will also be
studied.

Rydberg atoms promise valuable new insights into the nano-/meso-scale world and
systems such as quantum wells and quantum dots that play a prominent role in
emerging technologies related to quantum computing, quantum information
processing, and information storage/retrieval. The work will furnish new
understanding of physics in the ultra-fast ultra-intense regime and speak to the
engineering of low-lying atomic (and molecular) states at the sub-nanoscale
using the new generation of attosecond pulse lasers. Rydberg atoms form a bridge
between the quantum and classical worlds permitting exploration of the whole
quantum-to-classical crossover. The Rydberg atom-surface studies will furnish
new insights into charge transfer processes at surfaces which form the basis of
many practical spectroscopies used to characterize surfaces and of many surface
chemical reactions. The research will contribute to the training of the
scientific workforce by providing students with a solid foundation in many areas
of physics together with a diverse array of experimental skills in many
technologically-relevant areas ranging from high-vacuum systems and lasers to
high-speed electronics and computerized data acquisition and control systems.