* 0964220
* HCC: Medium: A Toolkit to Evaluate the Effect of Multitouch Interaction on the Musculoskeletal System and Design Safe Multitouch Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2010,10/31/2012
* Devin Jindrich, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2012
* USD 900,888.00

Some have heralded multi-touch interaction as the technology to drive computing
systems into the future. But as we move towards a world where interaction is
based on human body movement that are not well documented or studied, we risk
creating technology and systems that may lead to musculoskeletal disorders
(MSDs). This is not a hypothetical but a real danger. In the past devices such
as keyboards have led to MSDs, yet many new systems make no effort to avoid
gestures that are known to lead to musculoskeletal disorders or to eliminate
gestures that are symptomatic of a patient population. With multi-touch
interfaces currently being considered for adoption by companies and academia, it
is now more critical than ever that good design practices incorporating
preventive approaches be implemented in the initial stages of product design and
development. In this research, the PI and his interdisciplinary team that
includes experts in human-computer interaction, kinesiology and ergonomics will
evaluate the effect of multi-touch interaction on the musculoskeletal system and
provide mechanisms for developing safe multi-touch systems that involve
interactions designed to cause minimal musculoskeletal stress and risk. Project
outcomes will include best practices and standards for interaction that are safe
yet allow users to fully benefit from the new levels of immersion that multi-
touch interaction affords. In particular, the PI will develop a toolkit that
will allow multi-touch designers to input a gesture movement and evaluate its
induced stress in a variety of situations and under different variables. In
addition, the software will allow input of formal definitions of HCI tasks and
some choices of gestures, and will suggest a set of suitable gestures for the
task based on the given choices. To achieve these goals, the PI will explore new
formal models of human-computer interaction that take multi-touch interaction
into account at both the cognitive and psychomotor
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will provide multi-
touch interaction researchers with valuable new models and tools that focus not
on a particular application area but rather on the generic technique of multi-
touch interaction and design. The new biomechanical models will also contribute
to our fundamental understanding of the functioning of our hands. Project
outcomes will be generalizable to other emerging types of input devices, such as
the Nintendo Wii remote.