* 0964216
* Collaborative Research: IDBR: Nanopore optical biosensor development for analyzing membrane protein interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Sang-Hyun Oh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 02/28/2014
* USD 250,000.00

Membrane proteins are one of the most important classes of molecules,
representing over half of drug targets, and also one of the most poorly
understood classes. This award is to leverage new technologies in
nanofabrication, nano-optics, microfluidics and protein engineering to develop a
nanopore membrane biosensor, which has the potential to transform membrane
protein research. This real-time imaging instrument will exploit periodic
nanopores patterned in a thin gold film to measure the binding kinetics and
affinities between membrane-bound receptors and ligands - a task that is highly
desirable but is rarely achieved with existing affinity biosensors such as
BIAcoreTM. A thin gold film perforated with periodic nanopores will concurrently
act as a mechanical scaffold to support cell membranes as well as a label-free
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) sensor. Binding of ligands to immobilized
membrane receptors will sharply modulate the light transmission through metallic
nanopores, which is recorded as a real-time "movie" with high resolution. The
system will be integrated with microfluidics to reduce sample consumption and
enable multiplexing. While this instrument will be applicable to analyze
potentially any membrane protein in a near-native lipid bilayer environment,
initial studies will be performed with the key recognition events controlling
cellular immunity. The ability to perform ligand screening for membrane
receptors at high throughput and high resolution would present a breakthrough in
studying these molecules and the fundamental life processes they
enable.&lt;br/&gt;The integration of supported and free-standing lipid membranes
with nanopore SPR sensors will provide an entirely novel approach for dynamic
probing of membrane protein interactions, rather than adding incremental
improvements to existing SPR instruments. To encourage adoption of the
technology by biological groups, a two-day short course at the University of
Minnesota (http://www.nano.umn.edu/biomems09/) will be expanded to include
nanopore array fabrication, while the software and fabrication protocols will be
freely available on the research website. To excite underrepresented groups
about STEM research, SPR and protein-protein binding experiments will be
incorporated into a training plan spanning middle-school through graduate
students, placing special emphasis on undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;