* 0964031
* Fertility Transition and Emerging Differences in Parental Investment and Children's Economic Roles
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Karen Kramer, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 192,512.00

Harvard University anthropologist Dr. Karen L. Kramer will undertake research on
how economic transitions affect fertility patterns and children's lives.
Subsistence farmers worldwide are experiencing changes in their traditional
agrarian systems, becoming less self-sufficient and more dependent on selling
their labor. These changes have significant demographic effects: in many
populations, fertility rates decline dramatically. However, little is known
about how this happens, how much variaibility there might be between households
when not all of them prosper in the new economy, and how this affects the health
and life quality of children whose labor often underwrote the old economic
systems. Kramer's research is designed to answer these questions.

The research will be carried out in the rural Maya village of Xculoc, Campeche,
Mexico. The research design takes advantage of the fact that detailed data on
labor, economy, health, and demographics were collected in this village in the
1990s. Since that time, the village has begun the process of transitioning from
a subsistence agricultural economy to one that is increasingly dependent on wage
labor, cash, and the market economy. These extant data will serve as the
baseline against which to measure change, determine increases in household
variability, and explore the possible causes. The researcher will collect
economic, demographic, growth, time allocation and energy expenditure data for
80 households and 390 children under the age of 20.

The project's primary research questions are: 1) What impact does subsistence
change have on child quality (growth performance, diet, education, medical
intervention and labor)? 2) What is the relationship between household economic
characteristics and fertility outcomes? 3) What is the relationship between
fertility trends and children's labor contributions? 4) Do parents with few
resources or opportunities to improve their children's futures, maintain or even
increase family size? While other parents have fewer children and invest more in
their health and education?

This research will help social scientists and policy makers to understand why
high fertility persists in traditional communities and its relation to economic
transitions. Small-scale anthropological studies and individual data offer
valuable insight into these demographic processes, which are otherwise masked by
national and regional trends. Findings from this resarch will be of interest to
organizations interested in understanding the family planning and changing
health and economic needs of communities experiencing economic transitions.
Funding this research also supports the training of students.