* 0964043
* Collaborative Research: Long-Term Dynamics of Caribbean Maritime Forest Ecosystems in the Context of Major Disturbance Events: The Role of  Hurricanes and Fires
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Kam-biu Liu, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2014
* USD 124,114.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE
FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BCS-0964138,
BCS-0964043&lt;br/&gt;Lisa M. Kennedy, Kam-biu Liu&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Tech,
Louisiana State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The body of literature on the
ecological impacts of hurricanes is large, but nearly all the studies have
focused on relatively short-term (years) changes. A persistent question arising
from many of these studies is whether hurricanes change forest composition over
the long term (decades to centuries). In addition, increased post-hurricane fire
hazards have been hypothesized for the subtropical maritime forests of the
southeastern U.S., but whether this relationship holds for tropical forests is
still a question mark. Recent advances allowing identification of proxy records
of hurricane landfalls in sediment profiles provide an opportunity to address
such questions. This project will examine the long-term (decades to centuries)
impacts of hurricanes on tropical forests and the possible link between
hurricanes and fire through paleoecological analyses of sediment records from
coastal lakes in the Dominican Republic. The investigators will analyze
geological, geochemical, and biological proxies contained in the sediments, and
use radiocarbon dating, to identify records of hurricane landfalls and to
examine how these landfalls influence vegetation composition and interact with
fire over long time scales. A key objective of this research is to document
whether post-hurricane vegetation changes persist over the long term and whether
fire hazards increase in tropical ecosystems after hurricane strikes (i.e., the
hypothesis of hurricane-fire interactions) through the study of pollen grains
and microscopic charcoal in closely spaced samples above and below hurricane
overwash deposits. Multiple study sites in the Dominican Republic, where there
are relatively high frequencies of hurricane landfalls, will allow comparisons
between hurricane effects on vegetation and fire in tropical dry and moist
forest ecosystems. The study of modern pollen rain and the signatures of
historical hurricane strikes in lake sediments will provide a basis for
interpreting paleoenvironmental changes and events from sedimentary proxy
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate and vegetation dynamics are poorly understood
in tropical areas in comparison to mid- and high-latitude areas. This project
will produce proxy records of paleohurricane activity from the Dominican
Republic, a location in the Caribbean region strategic for evaluating mechanisms
affecting hurricane activity on millennial timescales. The results of this study
will shed light on other aspects of climate and environmental history, including
possibly pre-Columbian human activities, and will help to provide a broader
understanding of environmental change in the Caribbean, where long-term history
is still poorly documented. This research will provide a long-term perspective
and generate the first proxy-based estimates of hurricane return periods and
landfall probabilities for the Dominican Republic, which may be useful to
decision makers in terms of disaster planning and management. This project will
provide opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to participate in
international research with field and laboratory components.