* 0964647
* SHF: Medium: MEDITA - Multi-Layer Enterprise-Wide Dynamic Information-Flow Tracking and Assurance
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Alessandro Orso, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2014
* USD 900,000.00

Enterprise Information Systems (EIS) continually face attacks ranging from data
leaks to the spread of malware; these attacks cost companies billions of dollars
annually and can result in critical loss or leakage of data. Existing defenses
typically either attempt to secure the hosts within the enterprise or add a
security perimeter to the network. These conventional defenses are ineffective
in the face of compromised hosts, mobile devices, and insider threats. Dynamic
Information-Flow Tracking (DIFT) techniques maintain data provenance information
about objects within the system and control information flow by defining and
implementing policies that dictate how that information should be allowed to
flow. Although powerful, existing DIFT approaches are limited by the fact of
targeting only a single layer on a single physical host, which limits their
effectiveness and practical applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will develop MEDITA, a multi-layer DIFT mechanism that can precisely, securely,
and efficiently track data flowing within a networked EIS and across layers, and
control the flow of such data based on the data provenance and the security
policy in place. Multi-layer DIFT holds great promise for controlling
information flow within an enterprise in many real-world scenarios. Despite its
appeal, however, realizing a system that could implement such DIFT policies in
practice is extremely challenging because of the wide variety of attacks that
can be mounted, ranging from copying and pasting the sensitive data to writing
the document to removable storage or a mobile device. To address these and other
challenges, this research will (1) refine existing techniques for performing
DIFT within the individual layers of an EIS, (2) design and implement the
integration and inter-operation of DIFT techniques between layers, (3) define a
language that can be used to express multi-layer security policies for the EIS
and mechanisms for translating those policies to tainting and enforcement
mechanisms; and (4) Develop a prototype implementation of MEDITA and perform
experiments by using the prototype to apply MEDITA to realistic information-flow
tracking control scenarios.