* 0964728
* Regulation of Type II Restriction-Modification Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Robert Blumenthal, University of Toledo Health Science Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Susannah Gal
* 08/31/2013
* USD 569,999.00

Intellectual Merit: The biosphere is dominated by over 10e30 bacteria and
archaea, a number roughly equivalent to the number of seconds since the "Big
Bang". Since bacteria are asexual, their rapid acquisition of new genes (for
things like antibiotic resistance or ability to degrade specific chemicals)
depends on the huge amount of gene exchange between species. Despite its
critical importance, what controls the rate of this gene flow between bacteria
is poorly understood. But it does seem clear that restriction-modification (RM)
systems play a key role. RM systems produce two enzymes, a nuclease that cuts
unprotected DNA (such as what enters from another cell or a bacterial virus),
and a methyltransferase that protects the bacterium's own DNA from the nuclease.
Many basic questions about the functioning and roles of these systems remain.
Given the great importance of RM systems for understanding ongoing bacterial
evolution, with implications for everything from plant diseases through
biogeochemistry and global warming, it is critical that this deficiency in our
understanding be addressed.

The purpose of this project is to elucidate the regulatory design of a C
protein-controlled model RM system, and how it acts in a living bacterial cell.
The C protein activates transcription of its own gene, and of the downstream
nuclease gene, and as a result nuclease expression is delayed until C protein
accumulates. The first aim is to determine the range of acceptable relative
levels of a paired nuclease and methyltransferase. If the
methyltransferase/nuclease ratio is too low, cells may die from DNA damage. If
this ratio is too high, the entire population may be killed by virus (phage)
that escaped the nuclease and became methylated. The second aim determines
naturally occurring changes in relative nuclease and methyltransferase levels,
under a range of growth conditions including stresses. The third aim is to
characterize the time sensitive control system that controls production of the
nuclease. Mathematical modeling has provided predictions that will be tested, to
see if the system design is accurately understood.

Broader Impacts: An integral aspect of the project is to promote education and
research training of scientists, ranging from high school science teachers
through postdoctoral fellows. The teachers and undergraduates will each study
one of the many already cloned but uncharacterized C protein orthologs. High
school science teachers and undergraduate science majors will be recruited for
summer research internships. The laboratory members will continue to host high
school students for science fair projects and will do volunteer biology/career
teaching at high schools. Additionally, at least one graduate student and one
postdoctoral fellow will be encouraged to earn certificates in bioinformatics as
part of their training. These individuals will be well prepared to contribute to
the burgeoning field of bacterial genomics. The project will also enrich
graduate level teaching and further promote the application to bacterial studies
of mathematical modeling.