* 0964114
* IDBR: Development of a High Resolution Serial Block-Face Scanning Electron Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Eduardo Rosa-Molinar, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

Detailed circuit maps of neural networks and their synaptic connections
between/among neurons of the central nervous system (CNS) are needed to advance
CNS studies. This need is particularly acute in the emerging field of
"connectomics" that requires a very large number of high-resolution three-
dimensional microscopy wide-field images to visualize and analyze CNS neural
circuitry. Instruments such as Focused Ion Beam Serial Block Face Scanning
Electron Microscopy (FIB-SBFSEM) and serial section transmission electron
microscopy (ssTEM) achieve high-resolution three-dimensional images and provide
the resolution required to trace fine dendrites and synapses. However, Serial
Block Face Scanning Electron Microscopy (SBFSEM) is the only three-dimensional
microscopy technique that can provide wide-field images. A single instrument
that provides high-resolution three-dimensional wide-field images is acutely
needed. The principal investigator (PI) in concert with JEOL Inc. will take the
first crucial step to meet that need by improving a thru-the-lens (TTL)
backscatter detector that will increase the backscattered electron image (BEI)
resolution and increase image acquisition speed. Intellectual merit:
Improvements in the TTL backscatter detector will greatly advance
neuroscientists' ability to 1) identify specific spinal neuron phenotypes and 2)
gain insights into the 'impenetrable jungles' of central nervous system regions,
thus overcoming obstacles identified over 100 years ago. Broader Impacts: TTL
backscatter detector improvements will: 1) permit mapping of basic synaptic
microcircuits of some regions of the central nervous system; 2) be used to train
next generation Hispanic scientists in the emerging field of connectomics; 3)
meet 30 Puerto Rican neuroscientists' need for access to instrumentation; upon
successful completion of the beta test and with development and marketing, the
instrument will 4) meet the need of many, many neuroscientists engaged in
connectivity and other CNS studies. Dissemination: The PI will offer Hispanic
neurobiology graduate students and 30 neurobiology faculty members training on
the new instrument. The PI's laboratory provides its research images to industry
which uses them in its brochures, appropriately crediting the PI and funding
agents. This arrangement will continue and expand. The TTL backscatter detector
will create opportunities to exploit stunning visual images as a way of
enhancing awareness of new developments in science. Towards this goal we will:
1) use images generated from these projects as artwork in UPR-RP class and
conference rooms; 2) submit articles to the UPR-RP alumni magazine and to
Inventio, a bi-lingual campus publication that presents research and scholarly
achievements to the larger business and industry community and to the general
public; and 3) use the images to persuade local newspapers and magazines to do
more stories on basic science. We hope to use riveting and beautiful images to
capture the imagination and interest of the lay public. Finally, through a
collaboration with the mouse Biomedical Imaging Research Network (mouse BIRN) in
the Laboratory of Neuro Imaging (LONI) at University of California Los Angeles
(UCLA), we use the Mouse BIRN Atlasing Toolkit (MBAT), a platform independent
image viewer with the ability to simultaneously present multiple images from
multiples sources on a single viewing "canvas". With MBAT, local and online
images can be compared and explored side-by-side. MBAT allows almost anyone with
a modest personal computer and internet connection to view virtual sections of
our image data on our website (http://pisces.cnnet.clu.edu-lab/final/).