* 0964646
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research:  From Retroactivity to Modularity:  Design and Implementation of a Genetic Insulation Device in Yeast
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Ron Weiss, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2014
* USD 442,500.00

From Retroactivity to Modularity: Design and Implementation of a Genetic
Insulation Device in Yeast Domitilla Del Vecchio and Ron Weiss

Modularity is an important property of engineered systems, yet it is debatable
whether it is a general property of natural bio-molecular systems. Discovering
the extent of modularity and understanding its mechanisms is one of the most
important open research problems in systems biology. Furthermore, the long term
success of synthetic biology critically depends on the ability to implement
modular systems in such a way that the properties of individual components do
not change unpredictably upon their interconnection. Our proposed research seeks
to understand the mechanisms of modularity in regulatory networks using a
combined theoretical/experimental effort through the design, implementation, and
analysis of a special genetic retroactivity insulation device in yeast. This
novel device effectively decouples transcriptional components that would
otherwise be highly interlocked by allowing propagation of a regulatory signal
in the forward direction while minimizing the undesired phenomena of
retroactivity in the reverse direction. Besides providing an important new
circuit element for synthetic biologists, the mathematical analysis of an
insulating device will lead to an improved understanding of the extent to which
modularity is present in regulatory networks in biological systems. The first
aim of our research is to show that retroactivity affects regulatory networks
without insulation and therefore that modularity is not a natural property of
bio-molecular signaling pathways. Second, we will demonstrate a novel insulation
device that counteracts retroactivity and allows a circuit to transmit
information reliably despite loading from downstream clients. This special
circuit will be designed and placed between two connected components to insulate
them from retroactivity effects. We will study the device?s performance, ability
to regulate many copies of a downstream component, and requirements for correct
operation. Third, we will study how well the insulation device is decoupled from
the cellular environment. To this end, we will perform system-level analysis and
investigate crosstalk between the device and various important cellular
processes. Intellectual Merit: Existing synthetic circuits lack an ability to
insulate a driving input signal from retroactivity of the output load,
precluding modular composition of complex biocircuits. To address this problem,
we propose to construct and characterize a synthetic phosphorylation-based
insulation device and instrumentation pathway that will demonstrate a general
and modular technique for building sophisticated, large scale biological
systems. Our novel technique leverages the integration of special rapid feedback
mechanisms into biocircuits in order to create insulation devices, and hence has
implications for the design and implementation of many other biological motifs
and networks. Our research includes new theoretical and computational analysis
of devices with feedback and retroactivity, and these new tools will also be
applicable for the study of biological network problems other than
retroactivity. This analysis is fundamentally important for tuning and
characterizing desired insulation properties while minimizing interference with
other cellular processes. Broader Impact: In synthetic biology, this research
will lead to a general understanding of the engineering principles of modularity
for bio-molecular systems design. Likewise, in systems biology, this research
will address a fundamental question ? To what extent is modularity an inherent
property of biological systems? The product of our collaborative efforts will
lead to the discovery in natural systems of motifs similar to our insulation
device and to the explanation of how modularity is achieved, including insight
into when and where natural systems implement modularity and for what purposes.
Ultimately, the resulting capability of modular composition to achieve defined
engineering goals in biological systems will have tremendous impact on human
therapeutics, including regenerative medicine, diabetes, and cancer therapy, as
well as in other diverse areas, including biofuel production, environmental
remediation, pharmaceutical production, and biosensing applications. This
research will contribute to new interdisciplinary courses and will be integrated
into a ten week undergraduate synthetic biology Summer program that culminates
in an international competition and has a track record of attracting women,
under-represented groups, and high schools students to the field.