* 0964830
* EAGER: A Novel Class of Magnetic Materials with Anisotropic Curie Temperature
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Harsh Chopra, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2014
* USD 180,772.00

NON-TECHNICAL All known crystals of magnetic materials possess magnetism
regardless of the crystal direction in which measurements are made. Moreover,
the magnetic properties disappear when the crystal is heated above a certain
temperature, called the Curie temperature. This EAGER project seeks to establish
the existence of an exciting and entirely new class of magnetic materials that
are magnetic in a given crystal direction while being non-magnetic along other
directions. While the existence of such materials has been conjectured ever
since the beginnings of the development of the modern theory of magnetism in the
late 19th and the 20th centuries, the proof of their existence has remained
elusive. Experimental proof requires unconventional and ultra-sensitive
instrumentation, employing a nanofabricated device to measure such small
quantities of heat exchange simultaneously with electrical properties of the
sample. While a high-risk project, positive results obtained from it would be
transformative and yield high payoff in spurring efforts to discover similar
materials and expanding current theoretical understanding of the physics of
magnetism. Since the Curie temperature is a fundamental material property, all
effects dependent on it would also exhibit unusual behavior, potentially leading
to a gamut of new magnetic sensors and actuators. The project would provide
opportunities for a post-doctoral fellow to work, and mentor two undergraduate
students, on experiments related to microfabrication, magnetism, calorimetry,
and electrical properties, which have broad relevance to academia and industry.

TECHNICAL This EAGER project seeks to establish the existence of an entirely new
class of magnetic materials that have anisotropic Curie temperature. Such
materials would have the unique property, at a specific temperature, of being
ferrimagnetic along a given crystal direction while being paramagnetic along
other directions. While their existence has long been conjectured and theorized,
the project identifies key materials characteristics necessary for the
manifestation of such unusual magnetic behavior. A novel set of experiments was
specifically designed to demonstrate the effect in a material that exhibits a
distinct dependence of its magnetic susceptibility on crystal orientation. The
successful outcome of this high-risk project would be transformative and yield a
high payoff from both fundamental as well as technological viewpoints, spurring
experimental efforts to discover similar materials as well as enabling the
expansion of the current theoretical framework of the physics of magnetism.
Since the Curie temperature of a material is an intrinsic property, all effects
dependent on it would also exhibit unusual directional behavior, leading to a
gamut of new magnetic sensors and actuators. The project will provide
opportunities for a post-doctoral fellow to pursue a tenure track faculty
position and to mentor two undergraduate students, working on experiments
related to microfabrication, magnetism, pJ calorimetry, and electron transport,
which have broad relevance for academia and industry.