* 0964197
* RI: Medium: Quantifying Causality in Distributed Spatial Temporal Brain Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Panos Pardalos, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 550,000.00

A key hurdle in studies of brain function is to be able to measure not only what
signals are correlated with one another, but also how they are causally related.
Correlation quantifies linear dependence, while causality is capable of
distinguishing which brain area is leading the correlated counterparts;
causality puts an arrow into correlation. Causality is a difficult problem in
data analysis and here a novel measure of conditional statistical dependence to
evaluate causality is proposed. The ultimate practical goal is to elucidate the
principles of cognitive processing and provide online cognitive feedback to
human subjects performing complex tasks. The objective of this project is to use
a recently developed paradigm for electroencephalogram (EEG) quantification
based on periodic visual stimulation to improve the signal to noise ratio of
visual stimulation on a pre-determined EEG frequency band (here around 10 Hz).
The goal is to develop advanced signal processing techniques based on
instantaneous frequency (Hilbert transform) to quantify the instantaneous
amplitude of a visual stimulus in 32 channels over the scalp.

A recently developed measure of local statistical dependence in the joint space
called correntropy will be utilized to evaluate the dependency among
instantaneous amplitude time series collected over the scalp. The maximum value
of correntropy is a measure of statistical dependence, which is the first step
towards causality. To achieve a causality measure, conditional dependence will
be evaluated by extending correntropy to conditional correntropy, first for
triplets of variables and them to subspaces of arbitrary dimensions. Correntropy
is a nonparametric measure of dependence; hence, the new method will be compared
to linear and nonlinear Granger causality methods implemented in reproducing
kernel Hilbert spaces.

These algorithms will be tested on data collected from human subjects in a study
of affective visual perception. The goal is to study and quantify the re-entry
hypothesis of emotional perception -- that re-entrant modulation originating
from higher-order cortices is responsible for enhanced activation in the
occipital cortex when emotionally arousing stimuli are perceived. The signal
processing and statistical methods developed here will provide a way to identify
dependent EEG channels and causal relationships amongst them during the
presentation of the stimulus, effectively tracing the flow of neural activity
from the stimulated visual areas to frontal areas and back to the visual cortex.