* 0964328
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Scaling the Implicitly Parallel Programming Model with Lifelong Thread Extraction and Dynamic Adaptation
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* David August, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The microprocessor industry has moved toward multicore designs to leverage
increasing transistor counts in the face of physical and micro-architectural
limitations. Unfortunately, providing multiple cores does not translate into
performance for most applications. Rather than pushing all the burden onto
programmers, this project advocates the use of the implicitly parallel
programming model to eliminate the laborious and error-prone process of explicit
parallel programming. Implicit parallel programming leverages sequential
languages to facilitate shorter development and debug cycles, and relies on
automatic tools, both static compilers and run-time systems, to identify
parallelism and customize it to the target platform. Implicit parallelism can be
systematically extracted using: (1) decoupled softwarepipelining, a technique to
extract the pipeline parallelism found in many sequential applications; (2) low-
frequency and high-confidence speculation to overcome limitations of memory
dependence analysis; (3) whole-program scope for parallelization to eliminate
analysis boundaries; (4) simple extensions to the sequential programming model
that give the programmer the power to refine the meaning of a program; (5)
dynamic adaptation to ensure efficiency is maintained across changing
environments. This project is developing the set of technologies to realize an
implicitly parallel programming system with scalable, lifelong thread extraction
and dynamic adaptation. At the broader level, the implicitly parallel
programming approach will free programmers to consider the problems they are
trying to solve, rather than forcing them to overcome the processor industry's
failure to continue to scale performance. This approach will keep computers
accessible, helping computing to have the same increasingly positive impact on
other fields.