* 0964018
* CIF: Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Interactive Security
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Kannan Ramchandran, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 04/30/2015
* USD 377,405.00

The wide use of wireless data services leads to sensitive and confidential
information delivered over wireless links. With e-crimes resulting from such
information being compromised to unauthorized parties at an all time high, the
?all wireless? vision can truly materialize only if the security of wireless
information transfer can be guaranteed. Conventional approaches to information
security are designed for wired networks with assumptions that lead to a
disassociation from the physical medium in which communication takes place, and
provide guarantees against adversaries that are computationally limited. This
project provides a new approach for wireless networks to deliver provable and
unconditional security.

This research designs wireless networks with a secure foundation guaranteeing
reliable and secure delivery of information. In doing so, the investigators
account for untapped and rich resources provided by wireless systems naturally,
including sources with correlated observations or application content, channels
that provide spatial and temporal diversity, network nodes that are helpers or
relays providing interaction, and broadcast and bi-directional nature of the
medium enabling communication with feedback. The project calls for a network
design paradigm that has security in its foundation and provides enlightened
system design principles and protocols that are optimized to jointly exploit
these resources. Some examples of this, which form the intellectual backbone of
this project, include the optimal use of correlated sources and broadcast
channels, the role of multinode interaction, the opportunistic use of
potentially untrusted relay nodes, the creative use of feedback channels, in
order to render intelligent and computationally unlimited (passive and active)
adversaries ineffective. An extended goal is to integrate the resulting design
principles for unconditional security with cryptographic approaches towards
exploiting synergies between the two.