* 0964581
* RI:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Trajectory Libraries for Locomotion on Rough Terrain
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Jessica Hodgins, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 06/30/2014
* USD 699,879.00

The objective of this project is to develop methods to design control systems
for humanoid robots that show human levels of competence, robustness and
flexibility in locomotion on human-scale rough terrain, focusing on responses to
errors such as slipping and tripping, and responses to perturbations caused by
irregular terrain. The research is motivated by the large disparity between
human performance and current robot performance. The project uses a data-driven
approach, utilizing motion data recorded from people to create trajectory
libraries of these behaviors. It develops algorithms that allow these libraries
to be adapted for robot control and generalized through interpolation,
resequencing, and optimization for new environments. The project also explores
strategy selection, modeling what strategies humans use in different situations.
The project will have intellectual impacts in making better robots and
understanding people better. The project will demonstrate better robot
performance as well as more accurate models and simulations of human behavior.
In both cases scientific publications will be augmented by extensive additional
material and data on the web. Potential applications include insight into how
the changes in the motor and sensory systems due to aging increase the risk of
falling. The project may develop ways to change environments and train at-risk
people to reduce the risk of falling.