* 0964977
* 2010 Aqueous Corrosion Gordon Research Conference and Graduate Research Seminar
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2011
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Alan J. Ardell
* 05/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

The 2010 Gordon Research Conference on Aqueous Corrosion (GRC) will be held July
25-30, 2010, at Colby-Sawyer College in New London, New Hampshire. There will be
about 22 invited oral presentations and about 50 posters. The preliminary list
of topics includes: Advances in mathematical modeling of corrosion and
protection; Understanding and controlling Environmentally Assisted Cracking;
Degradation and protection of non-metallic materials and coatings; Interfaces of
corrosion science with other disciplines; Corrosion issues in energy
technologies and sustainability The 2010 GRC will be immediately preceded by a
Gordon Graduate Research Seminar (GRS), a two-day weekend meeting run by and for
young researchers along similar lines to the GRC. The GRC will feature speakers
from academia, national labs, and industry worldwide, mostly mature leaders in
the field, but with a number of younger researchers. The demographic and gender-
diverse mix of speakers and discussion leaders will reflect the worldwide
community of people working in the field of corrosion as well as under-
represented minorities and women. Corrosion science is an interdisciplinary
field that draws together fundamental aspects of the physics, chemistry and
electrochemistry of interfaces, advances in modeling, and cutting-edge
characterization techniques. The selected topics highlight the fundamental
science that underpins practical solutions to corrosion problems, as well as
recognizing the common ground between corrosion science and related disciplines,
and bringing scientists from those disciplines into the wider corrosion science
community. Corrosion science has wide societal importance in view of the
enormous cost of corrosion to developed economies, and its impact on safety,
environment and quality of life. Corrosion control can be seen as critical to
the sustainability of raw materials supply. Beyond that, corrosion issues arise
in advanced technologies, including biomedical engineering and nanotechnology.
This GRC will promote education and the scholarly pursuit of research in this
technologically significant field. Almost all attendees, students in particular,
are expected to participate via talks or posters. Meanwhile, the GRS gives an
ideal opportunity for the next generation of corrosion scientists to develop
their ideas and confidence, fostering beneficial national and international
links. The engagement of women and under-represented minorities is already well
underway after the outstanding 2006 and 2008 GRCs and inaugural 2008 GRS.