* 0964985
* International Research Fellowship Program: The Solution Space of a Hypergeometric System
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Christine Berkesch, Berkesch                Christine
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 06/30/2012
* USD 90,649.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Christine Berkesch
to work with Dr. Mikael Passare at Stockholm University in Sweden. This project
consists of two independent components. The main goal of the first circle of
problems is to obtain an explicit understanding of the parametric behavior of
the solution space of a hypergeometric system of partial differential equations.
Other goals include gaining a better understanding of the complexity of the
combinatorics that impact its dimension, as well as making steps towards
explaining the parametric behavior of all derived solutions (Gevrey and regular)
of a hypergeometric system. This research is continuing work from the PI's
dissertation, where homological and combinatorial viewpoints were used to study
this dimension. It also requires techniques from the host's area of expertise,
complex analysis. The second project, based on a question of D. Eisenbud (U.C.
Berkeley), establishes a multigraded generalization of the new and powerful
Boij-SÃ¶derberg theory. The primary tools for this work are sheaf cohomology,
multigraded free resolutions, and the combinatorics of posets and polyhedral
fans. This project fosters interaction between several areas of mathematics,
including algebraic geometry, combinatorics, commutative algebra, and complex
analysis. An explicit understanding of the parametric behavior of hypergeometric
systems will have an impact across mathematics and physics. The Boij-Soderberg
component will not only shed light on the mysteries surrounding the standard
graded case, but will also develop a new theory with which to study enumerative
properties of foundational objects in algebraic geometry and commutative
algebra, namely vector bundles on products of projective spaces and multigraded
modules over Cox rings.