* 0964680
* TC: Medium: From Statistics to Circuits: Foundations for Future On-chip Fingerprints
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Patrick Schaumont, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 07/31/2015
* USD 691,557.00

In a world where everybody and everything is electronically connected, identity
is essential to support trustworthy transactions. This project investigates
novel techniques to design and implement on-chip fingerprints. Such fingerprints
establish the hardware identity of an electronic system. The on-chip
fingerprints are based on the existing, small and random manufacturing
variations of electronic chips. Using a cross-disciplinary approach that
combines recent advances in the field of statistics with those in circuit
design, this project develops on-chip fingerprint structures that are optimized
for stability, implementation cost, and security. Stable on-chip fingerprints
are maximally sensitive to random manufacturing variations, and minimally
sensitive to other environmental factors such as temperature, voltage, noise,
and aging. Low-cost on-chip fingerprints are obtained by using statistical,
architectural, and circuit-level techniques that maximize the amount of
extracted entropy. Secure on-chip fingerprints are resistant against common
attacks such as reverse engineering and model building. Thanks to its cross-
disciplinary character, this project establishes a much-needed link between
advanced statistical analysis and deep-submicron design for the purpose of
circuit identification. This leads to better PUF designs, applicable across a
wider range of applications: secure passports, anti-counterfeiting schemes, and
security and trust at the endpoints. The project includes strong integration of
research and education. For pre-college and entering freshman students, the
project offers an introduction to trusted hardware, in the context of existing
on-campus programs that involve minorities in engineering. For graduate
students, the project offers a team-taught course, shared between the electrical
engineering department and the statistics department.