* 0964983
* EAGER: Implementation of Computational Circuits Based on Neural Dynamical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* David Parent, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Zygmunt J. Haas
* 09/30/2010
* USD 57,300.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to realize silicon neurons as physical circuits. A key requirement is to
match the internal dynamics of the circuit, including timing, with the
biological system, as needed for hybrid hardware-biological systems. The
approach builds on existing work by the investigator that uses dynamical system
theory. This project extends this model to include physiologically relevant
parameters that are extracted from functioning biological cells. The project
will also develop extraction routines and tools for reverse engineering of small
biological neural networks. This offers the potential of enabling the
realization of a wider range of neural parameters and a wider range of neural
computational circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit,
the research is motivated by the ability of silicon neurons to implement hybrid
electronic-biological systems and to provide a fundamental understanding of the
neurobiological systems that are emulated. The specific goal of a physical
circuit implementation, versus a software implementation, is motivated by the
ability to enable real-time operation, ease interfacing to partial biological
systems, and enable integration into robotics and control systems. Expected
outcomes include physiologically relevant data to aid simulation, a parameter
extraction scheme, and reproducible circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect
to broader impact, the research has the potential to transform the understanding
of and the application of hybrid electronic-biological systems by coupling
circuit design, dynamical systems, and neuro-physiology. The research engages
undergraduates, including those from underrepresented groups, through capstone
design projects. Prototype circuits, documentation of the extraction method, and
parametric values extracted from identified cells will be made available to
other researchers.