* 0964827
* Degradation and Stabilization of Ionomeric Membranes used in Fuel Cells: Focus on Early Fragmentation Events and Diffusion Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Shulamith Schlick, University of Detroit Mercy
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2015
* USD 517,800.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

ESR and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopies, ESR imaging (ESRI) and
computational methods will be applied in order to provide details on and
formulate the mechanism of degradation and stabilization of ionomer membranes
used in fuel cells. The major objectives for the next four years are to: 1. Make
the transition from ?ESR in an in situ fuel cell? to ?ESR Imaging of an in situ
fuel cell? by combining in situ experiments with the ESR Imaging methods
developed in the previous grant period. This approach will make possible
measurements of the diffusion rate of nitroxide spin probes and spin adducts
between the anode and cathode sides of the fuel cell and thus visualize
crossover processes. 2. Focus on membrane stabilization by assessing and
comparing the effect of various neutralizing cations on the stability of
ionomeric membranes. 3. Increase the lifetimes of unstable intermediates by
encapsulation in the hydrophobic environment of cyclodextrins and cucurbiturils
as hosts. 4. Initiate density functional theory calculations in order to
understand the effect of conformations of radical fragments and adducts on their
magnetic parameters (hyperfine splittings and g values). The collaboration with
scientists and engineers from 3M, Ford Laboratories, and the General Motors
Electrochemical Energy Research Lab, as well as the contributions of
international participants, will contribute to the success of the proposed
project.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Fuel cells are a promising source of clean energy for automotive and stationary
applications. Polymer membranes are crucial for fuel cell operation, but their
durability is a major problem that must be solved before the fuel cells are in
use. This proposal describes the application of spectroscopic, imaging and
computational methods that are expected to provide important details on the
degradation and stabilization of membranes in fuel cells. The collaboration of
the Detroit group with scientists and engineers from 3M, Ford Laboratories, and
the General Motors Electrochemical Energy Research Lab is an example of
Translational Research: Fundamental studies on the mechanism of membrane
degradation will lead to the synthesis of more robust membranes. International
collaborations will add talent to the local group. This investigator will co-
teach a course entitled ?Fundamentals of Fuel Cells?; the course will be
tailored for engineers and scientists who lost their jobs due to the current
economic problems and need to be retrained so as to participate in ?green? ways
to generate clean energy.