* 0964751
* Acquisition of Dynamic Light Scattering Device for Nanoparticle Characterization (Small Equipment Proposal)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2011
* Jonathan Brant, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 07/31/2011
* USD 84,109.00

Over the past decade there has been a dramatic increase in the use of human-
engineered nanoparticles in manufacturing, electronics, food safety, and
consumer products. It is important, therefore, to understand the impact of
nanomaterials on the environment. State-of-the-art equipment is needed to carry
out the requisite analyses. This award funds the acquisition of a state-of-the-
art dynamic light scattering instrument at the University of Wyoming that will
be used to characterize nanoparticle size, charge, and stability in liquid
media. Accessories including a viscometer and automatic titrating attachment for
measuring nanoparticle aggregation, as well as a degassing unit for samples and
titrants, are included. The instrument will be used in a wide variety of
environmental nanotechnology studies. These include characterizing the
interactions between organic acids and phosphate-containing nanoparticles, the
synthesis of nanoparticles for photoactive films for solar conversion, studying
redox-linked conformational changes of cytochromes and redox enzymes in redox
catalysis, wastewater membrane pretreatment and nanoparticle filtering
efficiency, and the development of unconventional filtration membranes, among
others. Broader impacts of the work include increasing state-of-the-art
infrastructure for science at an EPSCoR institution and research support for a
minimum of seven faculty members and associated researchers, a number of whom
are early career and/or female. The instrument will also be used for student
research training and will be integrated into the curriculum of present
laboratory courses. The instrument will serve as a critical teaching tool during
the University of Wyoming's, College of Engineering, Middle School Girls Camp
which is dedicated to showing middle school girls the environmental implications
of nanomaterial usage and the tools used to study them. The instrument will also
be used to train in-service teachers of students in grades 6-12.