* 0964821
* A Randomized Study Comparing Batterer Intervention and Alternative Treatment Approaches for Domestic Violence Offenders
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2016
* Linda Mills, New York University
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 04/30/2016
* USD 298,953.00

Most offenders who are convicted of domestic violence crimes in the U.S. are
mandated to attend one of the nation's 2000 batterer intervention programs
(BIPs). BIPs bring groups of batterers together in treatment to hold them
accountable for their crimes. Recent research raises serious questions about the
effectiveness of BIPs due to high attrition rates, little evidence of
attitudinal and behavioral change, and inconsistent contact with victims. A
number of states are now offering other treatment approaches for domestic
violence crimes; some states, including Utah, require these alternative programs
to be offered after a period of BIP treatment. One alternative, Circles of Peace
(CP), involves developing a social compact with the offenders and weekly
conferences with voluntarily participating victims, extended family members, and
trained community members to encourage behavioral change. Another alternative,
Couple Conflict Group (CCG), offers a forum for multiple couples to address
grievances by engaging in group discussions in which they receive and offer help
to other members.

This study, sited in Salt Lake City, Utah, uses a randomized control design to
compare the effectiveness of BIP, CP, and CCG. The study specifically tests
combinations of BIP, CP, and CCG to determine which is most effective in
reducing violent behavior. Part I of the study randomizes intimate partner and
family violence offenders into either a BIP-only program or BIP-plus-CP program.
Part II of the study randomizes only intimate partner violence cases in which
the victim is willing to participate in treatment into BIP-only, BIP-plus-CP, or
BIP-plus-CCG.

The findings from this research will advance theoretical understanding of
domestic violence by testing treatments that are driven by different models of
violent behavior. They will also have the broader impact of informing the
development of more effective programs intended to combat domestic violence.