* 0964253
* IDBR: Development of a Miniaturized Implantable Satellite Transmitter to Monitor Survival, Predation and Reproduction in Marine Endotherms
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Markus Horning, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 03/31/2014
* USD 484,808.00

Oceans comprise the majority of the Earth's biosphere, and marine ecosystems are
faced with profound changes driven by natural and anthropogenic factors,
including resource extraction and climate change. Many upper trophic marine
linkages remain unresolved, largely due to a lack of viable approaches for
collecting life history and vital rate data from species that are often
impossibly to observe directly. Essential data include age specific survival as
well as causes of mortality such as predation. Such data are crucial to assess
prevalence of top down (consumer driven) and bottom up (resource driven)
effects, essential to our understanding of challenged marine ecosystems, but
cannot yet be collected by single experimental approaches at comparable temporal
and spatial resolutions. Building on a successful proof-of-concept development
that provided the first direct at-sea determination of predation on a marine
mammal from post-mortem satellite transmissions, a miniaturized implantable
life-long satellite monitor will be developed to provide high resolution data on
mortality, predation and vital rates in marine homeotherms. The new Life History
Transmitters are designed to be implanted into animals as small as sea otters,
and will record vital data through the life of the host. Data on reproductive
events and causes of mortality will be transmitted post-mortem via satellite.
The new instrument will allow innovative experimental paradigms for the study of
predator-prey relationships in multi-species upper trophic marine assemblages,
and should lead to a surge in our understanding of complex marine ecosystems,
upper trophic linkages and prevalence of consumer- and resource-driven effects.
This joint development will be led by Oregon State University's Pinniped Ecology
Applied Research Laboratory, with Oregon State's School of Mechanical,
Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering and Wildlife Computers Inc. (Redmond,
WA), a leading manufacturer of marine vertebrate telemetry devices.
Undergraduate and graduate students in the Computational Mechanics and Applied
Design Laboratory will participate in the multi-disciplinary integrative
application of technological innovation to promoting transformative biological
research. The engineering students will design a programmable pressure-cycling
dive simulator, as well as an antenna cover for the implantable device from
advanced composite materials. Existing miniaturized satellite transmitter
components will be modified by Wildlife Computers to allow the targeted size
reduction to 50% (by volume) of the proof-of-concept device. Computational
algorithms will be developed by the Pinniped Ecology Laboratory to allow
determination of reproductive events and predation by the operational software
of the devices. Through a dedicated education and outreach package, the linkages
between technological innovation and biological research will be brought to a
broad public audience including potential users of the new instrument, other
scientists, public people of all ages, as well as K-12 school children. The
outreach package will utilize a purpose built exhibit at the Hatfield Marine
Science Visitor Center in Oregon, a Sea Grant supported marine education venue
serving over 150,000 visitors and 12,000 K-12 students, as well as a project
dedicated web site (www.sealtag.org), and will provide specifically developed
curriculum elements that meet National Science Education Standards and Ocean
Literacy Principles. Curricula will be made available via the project website
and to the wider Sea Grant audiences. After completion of the development, the
new instrument will be made commercially available through Wildlife Computers
(www.wildlifecomputers.com).