* 0964029
* Second International Symposium on Sustainable Chemical Product and Process Engineering, Hangzhou, China, May 5-9, 2010
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/2011
* USD 30,000.00

0964029&lt;br/&gt;Huang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global warming and depletion of
stratospheric ozone, depletion of forests, depletion of nonrenewable resources,
pollution of air, water, and soil, scarcity of water for drinking and
agriculture, excessive population growth, etc., are the major challenges that
our global society is facing, regardless of developed or developing countries.
To ensure engineering sustainability is a focal point for long-term development.
The chemical and allied industries have been working collaboratively towards
solutions to these pressing issues. This has also greatly stimulated academic
institutions to develop sustainable engineering-focused innovative and
aggressive research and educational programs. A forum for researchers and
practitioners in this area to share their research and educational experience
will be highly desirable. In this regard, the Second International Symposium on
Sustainable Chemical Product and Process Engineering on Sustainable Chemical
Engineering is being organized and will be held in Hangzhou, China, May 9-12,
2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second
symposium will have the following main objectives: (i) to share knowledge and
research experience in studying engineering sustainability, (ii) to assess the
state-of-the-art green material, product and process engineering, (iii) to
bridge the gap between research and development and strengthen the linkage
between academia and industry, (iv) to discuss research directions for the
chemical and allied industries to move towards sustainability and educational
approaches for the integration of industrial sustainability into the chemical
engineering curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will (i) facilitate the exchange of
knowledge between US researchers and educators with those in over 10 countries,
and (ii) help the US delegates identify international collaboration
opportunities in the research and education of sustainable chemical engineering.
Junior faculty and researchers as well as graduate/undergraduate students,
especially members of underrepresented groups will be encouraged to participate
in the symposium, which will include two mini-workshops for catalyzing
international collaborations on sustainable chemical engineering research and
education.