* 0964876
* EAGER: Uplift and incision of the Ethiopian Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2011
* Nahid Gani, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 11/30/2011
* USD 31,398.00

This project will focus on the paleo-topographic evolution of the Ethiopian
Plateau, situated in an extensional tectonic regime, using techniques of
quantitative river-profile analysis and paleoaltimetry. The plateau is
characterized by the 1.6 km deep Gorge of the Nile, a true rival of the Grand
Canyon of North America, formed by the extensive incision of the Blue Nile
River. This project will test the hypothesis of early-Pliocene abrupt increase
of long-term incision rate of the Blue Nile drainage linked to pulsed plateau
growth. By collecting preliminary samples of paleosol carbonates sandwiched
between dated Neogene basalts, this research will conduct oxygen-isotope based
paleoaltimetry to investigate plateau uplift. From the age-elevation curve of
the Ethiopian Plateau, timing, phase, and rate of uplift will be constrained.
For some preliminary areas and using Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) DEM
data, this project will also undertake stream-profile analysis, with ground-
truthing, to quantify certain stream parameters such as steepness and concavity
indices. This research will produce detailed spatial maps of knickpoints and
steepness indices across the study area, and compare these maps with lithologic,
precipitation (present day), and structural/tectonic maps of the area to
specifically tease out tectonic signals of this elevated landscape.

Understanding the uplift history of the Ethiopian Plateau is crucial to
unraveling the tectonic and climatic evolution of the region during the last
several million years. This region has long been used as a natural laboratory to
understand the processes of continental rifting, which is the first stage in the
formation of a new ocean basin, and the evolution of hominids (early humans).
The geological information that this study will extract will document how the
dynamic landscape of East Africa controlled past climatic changes in the region
and created a highly-variable (both spatial and temporal) environment that acted
as a perfect cradle for hominid evolution. This project will support graduate
and undergraduate students and involve them in high-level research about Earth
history and human origins.