* 0964292
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Pay-as-you-Go Security and Privacy for Integrated Transportation Payment Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Marguerite Zarrillo, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 100,000.00

Pay-as-you-Go investigates security and privacy for Integrated Transportation
Payment Systems (ITPS). The research addresses integrated payments for trains,
subways, buses, ferries, and recharging of electric cars, as well as toll
collection for roads, bridges, and tunnels. Multi-disciplinary aspects include
novel cryptographic protocols and lightweight implementations of privacy-
preserving payment systems. Challenges include providing security and privacy in
a low-cost, usable, and reliable manner. Payments for transportation differ
significantly from general-purpose e-commerce in terms of both security and
engineering constraints. For instance, transportation operators wish to observe
user behavior to improve the overall performance of the system---seemingly
contradicting privacy. Moreover, payment devices must be extremely cheap, mass
produced, and tolerant of a wide range of passenger demands.&lt;br/&gt;The
expected results and activities include: (1) design of novel cryptographic
algorithms achieving privacy at low cost while retaining the benefits of
meaningful data collection for ITPS; (2) implementation of hardware and software
to perform modern cryptographic operations on low-cost devices; and (3) testing
of human factors and performance under realistic conditions that must balance
security and privacy with cost and usability. The broader impacts are extensive
as transportation systems are a critical part of most aspects of society, from
the economy, to defense, to public safety. Moreover, information gathered from
ITPS applications can facilitate advanced traffic management, travel time
estimation, emergency management, congestion pricing, carbon emissions control,
and environmental justice assessments. A substantial outreach plan builds on the
research team?s significant experience working with transportation professionals
in industry and government.