* 0964302
* III:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Integrating Behavioral, Geometrical and Graphical Modeling to Simulate and Visualize Urban Areas
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Bedrich Benes, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 449,818.00

In this project, the PI and his team will develop a new simulation framework to
interactively model and visualize socio-economic and geometric characteristics
of urban areas. The framework will consist of a synergistic collaboration of
three different areas: behavioral urban modeling, probabilistic graphical
modeling, and visualization and computer graphics. In machine learning and
statistics, the area of probabilistic graphical modeling offers a flexible
framework to build, estimate and simulate from models of substantial complexity
and scale, with partially observed data. By accounting for uncertainty and
interdependencies, including aspects of dynamic equilibrium that arise in
modeling the complex spatio-temporal dynamics of urban areas, the PI argues
there is significant potential for breakthroughs in modeling large-scale urban
systems. Similarly, by integrating behavioral and geometrical dimensions of
urban areas, he expects to exploit the power of behavioral simulations more
effectively by filling in geometric details that behavioral models are not well
suited to manage, and at the same time provide a powerful framework to generate
2D and 3D geometric representations of urban areas that are behaviorally and
geometrically consistent. The PI will take advantage of massive datasets
available for urban areas, including parcel and building inventories, business
establishment inventories, census data, household surveys, and GIS data on
physical and political features, and will fuse these data into a coherent and
consistent database to support his modeling objectives. This data fusion will
address imputation of missing data, accounting for complex spatial and
relational connections among the data sources. The PI will evaluate the accuracy
and usability of his system through several deployments in diverse contexts. The
PI has elicited engagement from the Urban Land Institute, the European Research
Council, and the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research. Several
organizations in the San Francisco Bay Area in California and the Puget Sound
region in Washington will serve as testbeds for the research. Finally, the PI
will collaborate with other NSF-funded research projects, such as the Drought
Research Initiative Network, in order to investigate correlations between urban
development and water/drought. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
results of this multidisciplinary project will have a transformative effect on
the area of urban simulation, in that they will enable non-professionals as well
as the general public to better understand urban phenomena. City planners,
researchers, students, and citizens will be able to efficiently simulate urban
processes not previously possible, and to visualize the effects of adopting
different urban policies on urban livability and sustainability outcomes, and to
address local and global concerns regarding equity, infrastructure, and economic
development. The framework will provide interactive desktop and web-based
interfaces for configuring urban scenario inputs to a simulation that may reach
petabytes in data size, and to visualize the simulation results using 2D aerial
views, 3D city walkthroughs, and choroplethic maps and tables of indicators
portraying the simulated area. Thus, the work will also advance the fields of
visualization and computer graphics, through development of new techniques for
large-scale urban modeling and rendering. The PI will develop an open-source
system to make the results of this research widely available.