* 0964178
* IDBR: Development of an Optical Sensor for Biological S-Nitrosothiols
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2012
* Kevin Lehmann, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

A new mechanism for cellular communication, S-nitrosylation, has recently been
discovered. This mechanism involves changes in proteins caused by chemical
reactions between sulfur atoms and a compound known as nitrosonium; the products
of these reactions are known as S-nitrosothiols. These chemical groups have been
demonstrated to be important post-translational protein modifications and are
part of many signaling pathways in living organisms. However, research in this
area has been hampered by the lack of instrumentation that can measure the level
of S-nitrosothiols with sufficient sensitivity and speed for many cases of
interest to biologists.

New instrumentation, based upon continuous wave, cavity ring-down spectroscopy
(CRDS) is being developed with a goal to detect Nitric Oxide (NO) in an inert
gas at the single digit parts per trillion level. NO can be liberated from
tissue either chemically or photochemically and the resulting gas flushed out
into analyzer. The instrument measure the optical loss is an optical cavity made
from mirrors with 99.97% reflectivity, which will result in an effective
absorption pathlength of over 3000 passes through the sample. A recently
introduced laser, external cavity, quantum cascade laser (ec-QCL) will be used
to efficiently excite the optical resonances of the cavity and will be tuned
across the rotational transitions in the strong stretching fundamental
transition of the NO molecule near 5.2 micro-meter. The concentration of NO is
determined by an increase in the decay rate of intensity of light in the cavity
when the laser wavelength is tuned to a NO absorption line. Based upon the
established sensitivity of similar CRDS instruments working in the near-
InfraRed, a lower detection limit of approximately three orders of magnitude
higher than for the existing technology is predicted, which is based upon
chemiluminescence. Further, this instrument should give dramatically improved
temporal resolution, require reduced sample sizes, and will distinguish isotopic
forms of NO, allowing labeling experiments to be done to determine the chemical
origin of the released NO. The first year of the project will be devoted towards
design, construction, and testing of the CRDS based instrument. The second will
be devoted towards interfacing the CRDS instrument with the biological
applications. In addition to applications in biological research, the
instrumentation could potentially be used for medical diagnostics. Progress on
this project will be reported at
http://faculty.virginia.edu/lehmannlab/NO_Detection.html.