* 0964763
* Thermal-Aware Multiprocessor System-On-chip Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2012
* Robert Dick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2012
* USD 209,983.00

Proposal ID: 0702761&lt;br/&gt;PI name: Robert Dick&lt;br/&gt;Title: Thermal-
Aware Multiprocessor System-On-chip Synthesis&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Embedded
systems are application-specific computers within other devices such as consumer
electronics, automobiles, medical devices, or networks of sensors used to
monitor the safety of buildings and the health of wildlife. Many embedded
systems are now implemented almost entirely on a multiprocessor system-on-chip
(MPSoC), a single integrated circuit chip containing a complex network of
microprocessors. In high-performance applications, the critical limiter on
computation speed is temperature. Designing MPSoCs is a difficult task because
the each application imposes different requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the PIs plan to develop methods of accurately predicting the
impacts of MPSoC design decisions on temperature, functionality, price, and
power consumption. We will also develop methods of automatically designing
MPSoCs that are well suited to particular applications. The planned work will
focus on ideas that can be widely re-used in many different MPSoC applications.
An estimate is that system-on-chip market is projected to reach $170 billion by
2007. The project will hopefully work to encourage industry to adopt the most
promising new design and automated design techniques developed in this project
by collaborating with our industrial affiliates on design projects and by
teaching new design techniques to students who will later join
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;