* 0964692
* Physics Modeling of Solar Wind Driven Storms and Substorms in the Earth's Magnetosphere-Ionosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* James Van Dam, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 05/31/2014
* USD 363,557.00

This project will examine how Earth's magnetosphere-ionosphere system reacts to
the high-speed plasma wind streaming from the Sun. It will extend the
mathematical model called WINDMI to describe the storage and release of energy
in multiple reservoirs for plasma trapped in the magnetosphere. It will develop
a theoretical description for the dynamics of the supersonic solar wind plasma
energy, through the magnetosphere to the high-density cold ionospheric plasma.
The model will be by projecting the ideal MHD continuum equations and the more
accurate kinetic theory equations onto the currents and plasma components of the
driven magnetospheric magnetic components. The projections will lead to a set of
coupled differential equations for the key plasma currents, densities, and
temperatures. New physics components will be developed for the dayside of the
magnetosphere. The dayside physics has a collisionless bow shock that reduces
the supersonic flow to subsonic, while compressing the plasma and the embedded
interplanetary magnetic field. A complex set of plasma currents control the
plasmas in the magnetosphere and in the magnetopause boundary layer. The model
will use kinetic theory calculations to describe the boundary layers and the
mechanism for how the plasma is heated. The model will integrate diverse aspects
of the plasma physics of the magnetosphere-ionosphere system and use scientific
computing to derive real-time dynamics for the system. The model will predict
the magnetic field that are used to define magnetic storms and substorms. These
predictions will be compared with observations to validate the model.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research is of intrinsic scientific interest in its
investigation of the interaction of supersonic plasma winds with dipole magnetic
obstacles. It also has societal relevance by providing a new tool for
forecasting the occurrence of dangerous space weather storms. Much of the
research will be performed by graduate students and the project therefore has
significant educational benefits.