* 0964075
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Surface Haptics via Tractive Forces
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Michael Peshkin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2015
* USD 995,100.00

Surface Haptics, or the creation of virtual haptic effects on physical surfaces,
is a topic of rapidly growing importance in human?]computer interaction because
of the increasingly widespread use of touch screens. Touch is at once an elegant
and maddening interface modality. It is elegant in its simplicity: one can make
a selection or tap a button or key with no intervening mouse or joystick.
Moreover, touch (especially multi?]finger touch) supports gestures, such as
swiping and expanding, which are satisfyingly natural. It is maddening, however,
due to the lack of tactile and kinesthetic feedback that are so critical to
natural touch. Typing on a virtual keyboard, for instance, is typically an
experience of visually guided hunt?]and?]peck with liberal use of the
back?]space key.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research the PIs will further
develop a new class of surface haptic devices, called xPaDs, that promise to
enrich the use of touch screen and touchpad interfaces for sighted as well as
blind users. xPaDs are notable because they provide controllable shear forces
between the fingertips and an ordinary sheet of glass. By controlling shear
force in response to a measure of fingertip position (which may be obtained
using a variety of existing technologies), it is possible to simulate a huge
array of virtual effects; examples include toggle switches that flip from one
state to another (each state is a "potential well" on the glass surface that
pulls the finger to a given location), and contours that can be easily
traced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heart of the current project lies in the
systems engineering that will lead to practical and effective devices capable of
controlling a force at one or more fingertips, and in the psychophysical and
application?]based studies that will teach us how these capabilities may best be
used. xPaDs are sophisticated dynamic systems that employ ultrasonic vibrations
to modulate friction synchronized with in?]plane vibrations to produce
controllable force vectors. The PIs will address the challenges of controlling
force individually at each fingertip, of producing xPaDs with large surface
area, and of minimizing energy consumption and audible noise generation. They
will use the idea and methodology of "pop?]out" experiments to find haptic
primitives, that is to say features the human perceptual system can extract with
minimal or no perceptual load. The PIs will measure the information transmission
capacity of surface haptic devices treated as symbolic channels. And they will
explore the ability of the perceptual system to "bind" surface haptic features
presented to different fingertips into a meaningful, coherent whole. These
studies will position the PIs for investigating a set of applications for the
blind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Computer interfaces for the blind
often rely heavily on speech, which necessarily presents information serially.
The PIs argue that a haptic surface can augment a speech?]based interface with
critical spatial information. They will study the editing and reading of
mathematical expressions, of locating key content on a web page, of navigating
intersections, and of planning routes with tools such as Google Maps. In
addition, the PIs will develop a low?]cost xPaD development kit, make the plans
and code available on the Internet, and develop a high school enrichment unit
based upon these materials.