* 0964432
* Integrated Field Research and Spatial Analysis of Multiple Modalities of Political Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2015
* Lene Pedersen, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2015
* USD 174,993.00

Dr. Lene Pedersen, Central Washington University, will undertake a three-year
research program to investigate the intersecting structures and meanings of
changing ties between rulers and ruled. The research will contribute to better
understanding of the significant emerging phenomenon of hybrid systems of
governance, as newly decentralized political systems are brought into relation
with older, multi-level traditional systems, in many parts of the world today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in a polity in Bali,
Indonesia. Taking a multi-sited and multi-method approach within a spatially
explicit analytical framework, the study has three components. First, the
researcher, working with a geographer and a Balinese research team, will map and
analyze land-based, ritual, and kinship ties and obligations between princes and
subjects. Second, she will examine the direct involvement of princes in multiple
aspects of community life, such as ritual, irrigation, and political decision
making Third, she will investigate how individuals perceive the princedom and
the nation-state, and whether and to what degree these ideas are shaped by
traditional political forms. From considering the present context of
decentralization in Indonesia and the rise of Bali-Hindu ethno-nationalism, both
of which have given new impetus to traditional institutions, Pedersen will also
be able to examine the consequences of post-colonial land reforms and local
political restructuring. Mapping and analysis utilizing a geographical
information system database will allow her to determine the inter-scalar and
multi-faceted web of ties to the palace and their relationships over time, while
interviews and surveys will contribute ethnographic and generalizable data on
associated behaviors and attitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Pedersen's research
is important because it takes a new approach to addressing long-standing
questions, in Bali and elsewhere, about political change as inter-scalar
political relations shift over time. Findings from this research will inform
social science theory of political transformation in shifting contexts of
institutional complexity. The project will also make important methodological
contributions through its integration of ethnographic and survey approaches
within a spatial framework. In addition, the research fosters international
research collaboration and supports student education.