* 0964196
* SHF:  Medium:Performance Analysis and Optimization for Logic Rule Engines
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2017
* Michael Kifer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2017
* USD 831,991.00

Rule systems are increasingly used in areas ranging from Program
Analysis,&lt;br/&gt;Semantic Web, Security Frameworks, Sensor Networks,
Cognitive Radio, and&lt;br/&gt;Disruption-tolerant Networking, each with its own
demands for efficiency&lt;br/&gt;and scalability. Advances in these areas will
lead to a new generation of&lt;br/&gt;robust and secure applications that
control devices on which human safety&lt;br/&gt;and even lives depend, supply
with critical information, and help people&lt;br/&gt;make informed decisions by
pulling together distributed Web-centric&lt;br/&gt;resources, analyzing them,
and automating complex information-bound tasks.&lt;br/&gt;However, existing
implementations of rule systems are not sufficiently&lt;br/&gt;scalable and have
been shown to vary widely in performance. To make the&lt;br/&gt;above vision of
next generation robust applications a reality, one must&lt;br/&gt;understand the
performance characteristics of rule systems and develop&lt;br/&gt;scalable
optimization and analysis techniques for them. Although advances&lt;br/&gt;have
been made in improving performance of rule systems, the
problem&lt;br/&gt;remained extremely challenging and poorly understood both
theoretically and&lt;br/&gt;implementation-wise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a comprehensive framework for
rigorous&lt;br/&gt;understanding and optimization of rule systems. The approach
is based on&lt;br/&gt;precise cost calculations and global program
transformations, and it&lt;br/&gt;combines and extends techniques from database
query optimization, compiler&lt;br/&gt;optimization, and recursive query
processing. It includes: (1) techniques&lt;br/&gt;for generating logically
equivalent but more efficient programs; (2) cost&lt;br/&gt;models and analysis
for generating parameterized cost formulas for the&lt;br/&gt;running time and
space usage of rule programs; (3) techniques for&lt;br/&gt;estimating parameters
of the cost formulas; (4) heuristics for searching&lt;br/&gt;the exponentially
large space of logically equivalent rule programs to find&lt;br/&gt;the ones
with the best predicted time, space, and tradeoffs; and
(5)&lt;br/&gt;implementation of the strategy as an optimizer for the widely
used,&lt;br/&gt;open-source XSB Logic Programming System. The method and
implementation&lt;br/&gt;will be evaluated using applications in Program
Analysis and Semantic Web.