* 0964908
* A Contingency Theory of Organizational Response to Paradoxical Requirements:  A Study of Emergency Response Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Marshall Poole, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 12/31/2013
* USD 231,975.00

Organizations often face paradoxical demands, dualities, and tensions, such as
the need for stability versus the need to change and adapt, the need for
employee participation versus the need for management control, and the need for
proactive planning versus the need for reactive responsiveness to external
conditions. Traditional organizational structures and processes are often not
effective in promoting organizational responses to paradoxical demands, and a
large literature on paradox has developed in an effort to grasp paradox, its
impacts, and possible responses.

This project advances a general contingency theory of organizational response to
paradoxical demands. The theory posits that it is not paradoxes per se, but
rather the organization's response to paradoxes that determines their impacts,
positive or negative on organizational effectiveness. The theory defines six
distinct responses organizations may take when confronted with paradoxical
demands, none of which is always the best response to paradoxical situations.
The degree to which each of the various responses is likely to effectively deal
with the paradox depends on four contingency variables: (1) press, the strength
and urgency of the paradoxical demands; (2) the balance between the two poles of
the paradox; (3) collaborative climate; and (4) the organization's level of
experience in dealing with the paradox.

The contingency theory is investigated in the context of the Netherlands
emergency management system. Emergency management is fraught with paradoxes, in
particular the integration-differentiation paradox and the paradox of
professionalism. We investigate how regional emergency management centers within
the Netherlands system respond to these two paradoxes and evaluate whether the
resulting responses are consistent with the predictions of the contingency
theory.

This project contributes through basic research that develops a more general
theory of paradox and response. The research also has the potential to ground
the development of more systematic instruments for assessing paradox, moderating
contingencies, and responses. The project also contributes to our understanding
of emergency response organizations, an important type of organization that is
representative of networked organizations and fluid organizational forms.
Emergency response is a critical function in society. By furthering our
understanding of emergency response the project can yield practical advice on
how to cope with conflicting demands in emergency situations. This can inform
design of structures and processes for emergency response organizations.