* 0964989
* EAGER - Exploratory Investigation of Active Vibration and Flow Control in Wind Turbine Blades
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Michael Amitay, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 12/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

0941859 Amitay

Summary

Wind energy is the fastest growing source of electrical energy in the world. The
current US target is to have wind provide 20% of the nation electricity by 2030.
Marching towards this ambitious target would necessarily involve larger turbines
than what is commonly used today, in order to more efficiently capture the wind
energy. However, large turbines also come with significant technical challenges.
The structural vibration of the turbine could compromise wind energy capture,
generate undesirable acoustic emission, and cause blade fatigue and premature
failure.

Intellectual Merit: The goal of this feasibility research is to explore the
application of active flow control to reduce structural vibrations during
dynamic motion of the blade. As part of the project the PI will characterize and
analyze the flow field around the blade, the blade/flow interaction, and use the
result to optimize blade design, improve turbine operation, and enhance the
overall system safety. The proposed research will develop full 3D
characterization of the flow field during a flapping/pitching blade under the
activation of active flow control via arrays of synthetic jets to mitigate blade
vibrations and to achieve improved performance in a variety of real-world
conditions. This research aims to achieve the following objectives: (1) reduce
vibrations at all operating conditions, and (2) reduce loads and vibrations on
the blades during gusts. These objectives will ameliorate blade fatigue, and
increase energy capture while maintaining safe operating limits. At high wind
speed and/or wind gusts, flow control strategy will be developed to reduce blade
loading and vibrations. Various sensors, mounted on the blades, would allow
determination of the environmental operating conditions, blade structural state,
and flow condition.

Broader Impact: The proposed research will result in longer life-time of the
blades, as well as enhanced power capture by enabling the design of larger
turbines and improving operation under various dynamic conditions. The proposed
project also has a strong educational component. Wind energy offers a timely and
intriguing application and opportunity to engage and attract students. The PI
will incorporate this research into his classroom to include the
interdisciplinary nature of the project, involving fluid/structure interaction
and aerodynamics. Prof. Amitay is a member of RPI's newly funded NSF GK-12
outreach program on Energy and Environment. He recently recruited a Hispanic
Ph.D. student that has been working 15 hours a week with a high school teacher
from Troy, NY in a wind energy related project. Furthermore, one grad student
(Victor Maldonano, Hispanic) as well as an undergraduate student (Becca Ostman,
female) will be appointed as research assistants for the duration of the
program. Finally, Amitay is one of the directors of the Summer at RPI program
and has been instructing short summer camps for middle and high school students
in the last two summers on the Wonderful World of Flight. He will propose Wind
Energy as next year's camp theme.