* 0964944
* Mineralized tissue research on the life history of Virunga mountain gorillas
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2016
* Timothy Bromage, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2016
* USD 354,072.00

The major objective of this project is to conduct a comprehensive analysis of
dental and skeletal tissue microanatomy in a known population of African apes
from the wild, Virunga mountain gorillas (Gorilla beringei beringei), Rwanda,
with an emphasis on testing relationships between hard tissue development and
specific environmental and life history factors. Using radiographic and
histologic techniques, specific aims include : (1) generating primary data on
dental and skeletal growth and development in mountain gorillas, establishing an
important comparative foundation on great ape development in the wild, and test
hypotheses concerning the influence of socioecological factors on variability in
great ape life histories; (2) determining the presence and chronology of
microanatomical features in hard tissues that record incidence of developmental
stress (i.e., accentuated enamel striae; lines of arrested growth in bone); and
(3) comparing these chronologies against climatic, behavioral and veterinary
records to determine the manner in which environmental factors and
characteristics of individual life histories (e.g., weaning, social status,
disease, human disturbance) impact the growth of hard tissues and are recorded
in their developing microanatomy. Given availability of associated life records,
hard tissue research on Virunga mountain gorillas can contribute significant and
unique insight into the biology and health of these critically-endangered great
apes, and establish a framework based on the combined study of dental and
skeletal tissues in well-documented natural populations that has significant
transformative potential for the study of life history evolution from fossils.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include new international
collaborations that foster integration among scientific disciplines; creation of
a digital archive of tooth and bone radiographic and microscopy images,
available to Rwandan and US students and scientists; and research and training
opportunities for US undergraduate and graduate students. Finally, support for a
research assistant and additional training opportunities in Rwanda will build
local expertise and capacity to ensure the long-term sustainability of mountain
gorilla skeletal preservation and research efforts, and broaden participation of
under-represented groups in science.