* 0964514
* SHF:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  System Level Self Correction Using On-Chip Micro Sensor Network and Autonomous Feedback Control
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Swarup Bhunia, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 299,999.00

With technology scaling and increasing integration density in the nanometer
technology regime, design considerations for yield and reliability have become
critical. The objective of this collaborative research is to explore low-
overhead formal design methodology with distributed micro-scale sensor network
and systematic feedback control to achieve auto-curing of digital, analog and
mixed-signal electronic systems under large process and temporal variations.
Such auto-curing approaches will play a key role in preventing yield loss for
nanoscale designs, while ensuring reliability of operation and low power
dissipation. The research investigates self-curing concepts/techniques for logic
circuits, digital signal processing (DSP) units, embedded memory and analog
components using appropriate variation sensing and compensation techniques to
achieve high yield with optimal power/die-area overhead. It also explores
system-level self-curing approaches using global parameter sensor and global
controller to determine optimal compensation of mixed-signal cores under power
constraint. To realize the curing methodologies in an automatic synthesis
environment, the research will aim at developing appropriate Computer-Aided
Design tools and a library of self-correcting mixed-signal cores.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, it will help the semiconductor industry
deliver complex nanoelectronic systems with high reliability, low power and high
yield. The proposed research will integrate education and training through
course development, summer research program for undergraduates, and senior
project design.