* 0964765
* Structured Fluids from Reduced Symmetry Molecules
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Samuel Sprunt, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 04/30/2014
* USD 723,916.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Recent studies of a team by A. Jákli, J.T. Gleeson and S. Sprunt at Kent State
University have clearly demonstrated that fluids built from "bent-core" (or
"banana" -shaped) molecules exhibit strikingly different properties from those
composed of rod-shape materials; examples include anomalous flow viscosity and
giant electro-mechanical coupling the latter being of high technological promise
for molecular-scale energy conversion applications. These materials also
apparently possess complex structure on the nanometer scale, and exhibit
indications of novel states of matter. To develop a complete comprehension of
these structures, the Kent State Group will utilize a powerful range of
carefully targeted experimental techniques, available in house or through active
participation in national user facilities. Specific new classes of reduced-
symmetry materials to be investigated include molecules having W, T, X and
H-shape, exciting new polymeric fluids and gels based on bent-core molecules, as
well as previously uninvestigated low molecular weight bent-core molecules. The
specific research objectives and scientific benefits of the proposed research
are: (1) specific elucidation of nanoscopic structure in bent-core fluids; (2)
investigation into the origins and limits of anomalously large coupling between
electric properties and mechanical deformation (3) studies of strongly
asymmetric bent-core molecules that form novel three-dimensional structures; (4)
investigation of the optical and electro-mechanical properties of main- and
side- chain polymers containing bent-core sub-units; and (5) studies of
structured fluids under high magnetic fields to search for field-induced
symmetry breaking transitions.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Structured fluids are not only of fundamental scientific interest but have also
enormous technological importance. Perhaps the most familiar example is liquid
crystals, whose applications range from iPod screens to bullet-proof vests. The
key factor determining the physical behavior of structured fluids is the
symmetry properties of the molecular constituents. The team of A. Jákli, J.T.
Gleeson and S. Sprunt at Kent State University will study compounds whose
building blocks are not simple rods as in traditional liquid crystals, but
either bent-shape, W, T, X and H shaped. A symmetry change in underlying
molecule shape can lead to dramatically different and technologically promising
behavior of a fluid composed of such molecules. This project offers the promise
of significant advances in technology, such as low-cost, wearable (or
potentially bio-implantable) electricity generators based on enhanced electro-
mechanical coupling and a new generation of fast, low-power reflective color
displays. The proposed research will provide critical feedback for synthetic
chemists to improve material properties; key collaborators in this effort
include Profs. R. Twieg (Department of Chemistry, Kent State University) and R.
Verduzco (Department of Chemical Engineering, Rice University). The team's
multi-faceted education program will train doctoral students to be effective
players in a twenty-first century entrepreneurial environment. The principal
investigators also will bring undergraduates, particularly from colleges serving
traditionally under-represented groups, into a cutting-edge research
environment, with the goal of increasing their participation in the high-tech
workforce of tomorrow.

Support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program is acknowledged.