* 0964884
* Shock Tube/Laser Absorption Measurements of Hydroperoxyl Radical Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,11/30/2015
* Ronald Hanson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 11/30/2015
* USD 466,666.00

0964884&lt;br/&gt;Hanson &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical need for the
measurement of elementary reaction rates for species and reactions relevant to
combustion. Our ability to model combustion processes with high fidelity relies
on the existence of accurate measurements of fundamental reaction rates of a
smaller set of key reactions that control the reaction progress. This project
proposes to measure the high-temperature rate coefficients for reactions of HO2
with CH3, C2H5, HO2, and OH. These reactions have been difficult to measure
because of both the highly reactive nature of the reactants and the challenges
in developing quantitative and sensitive diagnostics for the reactant and
product concentrations. These reactions have been identified as major
contributors to the uncertainty in the modeling of hydroperoxyl radical
concentration in combustion systems. Measurements of these reaction rates will
be performed in high-purity shock tubes using UV laser absorption of OH, HO2,
H2O2, and CH3 radicals and mid-IR laser absorption of H2O. The overall range of
temperature and pressure to be studied is from 800 to 2200 K and from 0.5 atm to
10 atm. This work will take advantage of a recently acquired tunable ultra-fast
(76 MHz) quasi-CW laser system for ready access to broad deep-UV absorption
transitions and recent advances in distributed feedback diode lasers in the mid-
IR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactions
involving the hydroperoxyl radical (HO2) play an important role in oxidation
pathways of hydrogen and hydrocarbons. Much of what we already know about the
role of these hydroperoxyl radical reactions has been derived from lower
temperature (below 800 K) experiments, or from estimates. Direct experimental
results for these reactions at high temperatures are rare (or non-existent) or
contradictory, and are critically needed to enable development and validation of
combustion kinetic models. The development of new and sensitive species
diagnostics methods are also needed to advance these
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will provide an opportunity to train a new generation of engineering scientists
in modern combustion kinetics and state-of-the-art laser diagnostic and shock
tube techniques. These techniques have provided, in the past, the highest
quality high temperature kinetic data available and continue to be a source of
reliable information.&lt;br/&gt;Public dissemination of this data through the
web using current databases (the Kinetic Database Utilizing Shock Tube
Measurements at Stanford and the PrIMe data warehouse currently located at
Berkeley) will provide the public, government workers, and other researchers
with the information needed to critically understand combustion processes. With
one of the important problems facing Americans today being the generation of
greenhouse gases from combustion processes and the subsequent effect of global
warming, the proposed research is both appropriate and needed.