* 0964705
* RI:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Optimizing Policies for Service Organizations in Complex Structured Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Alan Fern, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 588,401.00

This project studies an important class of complex structured planning
&lt;br/&gt;domains called ``service domains'' using simulators and
probabilistic&lt;br/&gt;action models. Examples of service domains include
optimizing emergency &lt;br/&gt;response in a typical city, scheduling doctors
and nurses in a &lt;br/&gt;hospital, administering tasks in a typical office,
optimally delivering &lt;br/&gt;products to shops from distribution centers.
These domains &lt;br/&gt;share many characteristics such as relational
structure, parallel actions, &lt;br/&gt;multi-time-scale decision making,
exogenous events, and the need for &lt;br/&gt;human interpretable solutions that
make them highly challenging.&lt;br/&gt;The project develops scalable and
principled planning algorithms for &lt;br/&gt;service domains through a variety
of techniques including a novel&lt;br/&gt;hierarchical framework of multi-time-
scale optimization, new&lt;br/&gt;model-free simulation-based planning
algorithms, and model-based &lt;br/&gt;planning via composition of first-order
decision diagrams. These &lt;br/&gt;techniques are applied to the real-world
problem of optimizing &lt;br/&gt;the fire and emergency response in cities
through a collaboration&lt;br/&gt;with the fire department of Corvallis, Oregon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the project include new
algorithms and frameworks to solve &lt;br/&gt;service domains, prototype
implementations of the algorithms&lt;br/&gt;in the emeregency response domain,
and new testbeds of service domains &lt;br/&gt;for research. The broader impact
of the work includes more cost-effective &lt;br/&gt;emergency response systems,
and development of new research-oriented courses, &lt;br/&gt;tutorials and
special workshops on the next generation decision support &lt;br/&gt;systems for
service domains.