* 0964579
* RI: Mediuim: Abstraction, Equilibrium Finding, Safe Opponent Exploitation, and Robust Strategies for Imperfect-Information Games
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Tuomas Sandholm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 719,830.00

While game theory has traditionally been used as a thinking tool to analyze
small stylized versions of real situations, this project is developing
operational tools for analyzing real large-scale settings in full detail. To
ensure true scalability, the techniques will be benchmarked on very-large-scale
games of negotiation, auctions, and poker. This work is on a path toward a
vision where software agents conduct commerce on behalf of humans, or at least
advise them to act more intelligently. This will lead to increased social
welfare through better decision making. This will also enable broader and fairer
access because it will help put less experienced/educated people/companies on an
equal footing with expert market participants. Broader access will, in turn,
increase the benefits of (electronic) commerce further, and the benefits will be
distributed more fairly across segments of society. The paradigm will also yield
a form of increased security because strategies generated by the proposed
techniques cannot be taken advantage of (at least not by much and not easily).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects particular contributions to computational
game theory include the development of (lossless and lossy) game-abstraction
methods to allow scale-up to larger 'games' of societal import, techniques for
settings with more than two agents, techniques for dealing with less-than-
rational opponents robustly, and derivation of worst-case guarantees on
approximate solutions via nemesis computation.