* 0964296
* 2010 Polymer Physics Gordon Research Conference; June 27-July 2, 2010; Hadley, MA
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2011
* Karen Winey, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 02/28/2011
* USD 5,000.00

The broad topic of polymer physics impacts every industrial sector from
electronics to transportation to medicine to textiles to energy generation and
storage. Similarly, there is a breadth of cutting edge topics in polymers from
new understanding in polymer crystallization to energy conversion and
transmission to mechanical properties of soft gels to simulating polymer
dynamics at the nanoscale. This Polymer Physics GRC will be designed both to
extend the wellestablished topics in the field and to introduce the community to
less familiar and overlooked topics, such as mechanical properties and
electroactive polymers. Speakers will include past participants of this GRC and
also bring in leaders from related fields. The conference will feature 22
invited lectures, wherein the opening 10 minutes are specifically designed for a
general polymer physics audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference seeks, as
do all GRC's, to gather leading people in the field and to bring them into
extended contact with one other and with younger researchers (specifically,
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers). Extended discussions in both
formal and informal settings over many days are accomplished by the retreat-like
atmosphere of the GRC format that is known to build and nurture lifelong
friendships and to ignite new collaborations. In addition to the scientific
content of these discussions, it is also an opportunity for mentoring. I have
set specific diversity objectives for the speakers and discussion leaders with
respect to career stage, gender, and geography. To integrate the new and
returning conferees, a speakers' table will be established where speakers will
dine with junior scientists and a variety of afternoon and social activities
will be organized to encourage mingling.