* 0964563
* Foundational Research for the Geographic Information Science and Technology Body of Knowledge 2.0
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Andre Skupin, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2013
* USD 409,292.00

This project will create and maintain a current Body of Knowledge (BoK) in the
relatively new, rapidly evolving, and multi-disciplinary field of Geographic
Information Science and Technology (GIS&amp;T). A new environment is needed that
will enable the maintenance and expansion of the knowledge base of GIS&amp;T in
a dynamic, interactive, and collaborative fashion. The new environment also
needs to provide for new ways to facilitate teaching, research, and professional
advancement in GIS&amp;T. Developing a common language in such a new, rapidly
evolving, and multi-disciplinary field is critical to its future viability. This
project creates a transformational, dynamic environment for pedagogy, knowledge
building, discourse, collaboration, and research in GIS&amp;T by leveraging
persistent immersive synthetic environments, ontological analysis, and knowledge
visualization approaches. This project has four key components. The first
component provides an assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of the existing
Body of Knowledge that was published in 2008, and develops a more comprehensive
and inclusive organizing framework for the next version of BoK. Second, this
project examines a hybrid methodology for generating ontology through top-down
development and bottom-up knowledge discovery processes. Third, a visually
centered and highly interactive representation of the GIS&amp;T knowledge domain
will be developed. This interactive representation will serve as a foundation
upon which existing knowledge will be modified and new knowledge will be built.
Finally, this project explores dynamic wikis and persistent immersive synthetic
environments for their efficacy with respect to knowledge building, pedagogy and
research to create viable active collaborative virtual
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected result of this research will be the
construction of a solid foundation upon which to build and expand the existing
knowledge domain of GIS&amp;T in a new transformative environment which fosters
learning, collaborative knowledge building, and research through the creation of
functioning virtual communities of students, teachers, practitioners, industry,
and researchers. This project will produce a build-out plan for the GIS&amp;T
knowledge domain, will develop viable methods to visualize, navigate and build
an ontology of the field of GIS&amp;T, will contribute to a comprehensive
understanding of the optimal virtual environments for the GIS&amp;T knowledge
domain. This project will create of a fundamental resource for both research and
education within the field of GIS&amp;T that will promote the advancement of the
field and maintain the United States' lead in this critical component of our
national economic and scientific base. The results of this project will provide
a resource to link many of the GIS&amp;T disciplines for grounding
interdisciplinary activity.