* 0964079
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Static Pipelining, an Approach for Ultra-Low Power Embedded Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Zhi-Hong Mao, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

As mobile embedded systems become more prevalent, there is an increasing demand
to make processor pipelines more power efficient. Conventional pipeline
inefficiencies include unnecessary accesses to the register file due to
duplication or avoidable computation from constantly checking for forwarding and
hazards at points where they cannot possibly occur, repeated calculation of
invariant values, etc. It is desirable to develop an alternative processor
design that can avoid these wasteful energy consumption aspects of a
traditionally pipelined processor while still achieving comparable
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A statically pipelined processor is expected
to achieve these goals by having the control during each cycle for each portion
of the processor explicitly represented in each instruction. The pipelining is
in effect statically determined by the compiler, which has several potential
benefits, such as reducing energy consumption without degrading performance,
supporting a less complex design with a lower production cost, and being able to
apply more effective compiler optimizations due to instructions having more
explicit control of the processor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
broader impact of this research is manifold. The use of ultra-low power embedded
devices, such as bio-implantable microelectronic devices, can significantly
affect everyday activities. A new generation of ultra-low power processors will
enable these devices to be more feasible to develop and deploy. Educational
efforts to introduce the latest architecture and compiler enhancements in the
classroom complement our research. Steps will also be taken to increase female
and minority enrollment at both institutions in their Computer Science and
Computer Engineering programs.