* 0964807
* Conference: Contemporary Combinatorics 2010
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Bela Bollobas, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2011
* USD 20,000.00

This conference will bring together a group of outstanding mathematicians who
work on topics loosely related to combinatorics, understood in the widest sense.
The meeting will give a chance to mathematicians from the Mid-South to benefit
not only from the lectures but also from personal contacts with the speakers.
This is bound to be very inspiring for all the participants, especially for
those who otherwise do not do not have a chance to come into close contact with
some of today's the leading mathematicians. The main speaker at the conference
is Gregory Margulis of Yale University, who has done much brilliant work in
combinatorics, differential geometry, ergodic theory, dynamical systems and
discrete subgroups of Lie groups. For his great contributions to mathematics he
was awarded a Fields Medal in 1978, and a Wolf Prize in 2005. There will be
several other excellent mathematicians and speakers at the meeting; they have
been chosen because they are not only powerful research mathematicians, but also
wonderful expositors and very approachable people. Among other speakers, we
shall have Alexander Barvinok of University of Michigan, who has proved
outstanding results about distance geometry, convexity and algorithms related to
them; Ralph Faudree, one of the most frequent collaborators of the late Paul
Erdos, who has done much work on Ramsey theory and extremal graph theory; Oliver
Riordan of the University of Oxford, one of the most brilliant combinatorialists
in the world, who has contributed to many areas, most recently to the theory of
convergent sequences of sparse graphs; Laszlo Szekely of the University of South
Carolina, who is well known for his very elegant contributions to discrete
geometry; Slava Krushkal of the Unversity of Virginia, who has done outstanding
work on polynomials of surfaces related to the Tutte polynomial; Tsz Ho Chan of
the University of Memphis, the young analytic number theorist, who has worked on
pair correlation of the zeros of the Riemann zeta function, diophantine
approximation and the distribution of primes, Andras Gyarfas of the Computer and
Automation Institute in Budapest, the prolific combinatorialist, who has done
much work on applications of Szemeredi's Lemma, and Jean-Paul Thouvenot, a
Director at CNRS in Paris, one of the foremost people working on ergodic theory
and dynamical systems.

Two of the lectures will be aimed at a general audience, including good high
school students. In the first lecture, Ralph Faudree will not only introduce the
audience to the immense contributions Paul Erdos made to mathematics, but will
also paint a personal picture of Erdos, one of the most colourful mathematicians
of the 20th century. In the second lecture Gregory Margulis will attempt to
bring difficult mathematical ideas concerning geometry within reach of the
audience. Unlike the East Coast or the Bay Area on the West Coast, the Mid-South
cannot boast of many high-level mathematical conferences; the Contemporary
Combinatorics 2010 meeting in Memphis goes some way towards redressing the
balance. The formula whereby personal contacts between the lecturers and the
other participants is greatly encouraged has been found very successful so far,
so this is what we are planning for this year as well. There is no doubt that
listening to lectures by Gregory Margulis, Alexander Barvinok, Oliver Riordan
and others, and, especially, talking to them during the conference will be very
inspiring for young and established mathematicians alike.