* 0964277
* Conference: Social Biomimicry: Insect Societies and Human Design (February 18-20, 2010, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Jennifer Fewell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 12/31/2012
* USD 16,838.00

Biomimicry is the practice of imitating nature's forms and processes to more
effectively and sustainably meet human design challenges. The conference, Social
Biomimicry: Insect Societies and Human Design, will explore how social insects
such as ants, bees, and termites can inform human design. Over millions of
years, the social insects have evolved tightly integrated societies rivaled only
by humans in their scope and sophistication. Individual social insect workers
are relatively simple in their behavioral capabilities, but through their
collective behavior they have solved many practical problems inherent in large
social groups organizing and communicating around common goals. Already,
computer models based on ant foraging behavior are being used to route traffic
in busy communications networks such as the Internet, and architects are
mimicking termite mounds to build passively-cooled buildings that save energy.
However, the implementation of social-insect-inspired design has been limited,
in part, by lack of communication and coordination across disciplinary and
professional boundaries. The conference will address this shortcoming by
bringing together biologists - including leaders in the field of social insect
biology and complexity theory - with designers, engineers, and businesspeople,
with the goal of promoting the exchange of concepts, perspectives, and tools.
This activity should (1) enrich biology, by revealing new applications of basic
research and stimulating new areas of problem-driven research, and (2) advance
the field of biomimicry, which is an important engine for innovation and
economic growth. The conference also features a public Social Insect Science
EXPO! which will connect researchers at Arizona State University with members of
the Phoenix community, including underrepresented students from local K-12
schools. The conference is organized and led by a panel of graduate students
from ASU's Social Insect Research Group, and encourages participation by
undergraduate and graduate students from the U.S. and abroad. The conference
provides a unique opportunity in training future scientists with the leadership
skills necessary to organize and run a professional meeting and to communicate
and apply their work in an interdisciplinary context. Conference results will be
disseminated broadly through peer-reviewed and popular articles and Internet
resources.