* 0964997
* An Assessment of the Microbial Diversity Associated with Selected Caribbean Corals
* BIO,DEB
* 08/08/2009,08/31/2010
* Pamela Morris, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 08/31/2010
* USD 89,000.00

Abstract: An Assessment of the Microbial Diversity Associated with Selected
Caribbean Corals Coral reefs occur along one-sixth of the world's coastlines and
are the most biologically diverse shallow water marine ecosystem, supporting
numerous animal and plant species. Unfortunately, these ecosystems are being
degraded worldwide due to infectious disease, human activities, and climate
change. Poorly studied members of this rapidly deteriorating ecosystem are the
Bacteria and Archaea. Although recent studies have made progress toward our
understanding of coral-associated microbial communities, there are substantial
areas that have not been explored. Since these coral reef ecosystems are at
risk, it is important to assess microbial biodiversity before habitat
destruction worsens. Their two key objectives for the NSF Biodiversity Survey
and Inventories proposal are to (1) survey microbial diversity associated with
three different coral species collected from two sites in the Caribbean, and (2)
disseminate this information in an online database while promoting education and
training of students and junior personnel. Samples of coral mucus, coral tissue,
and background seawater will be analyzed to distinguish the microbial
communities uniquely associated with each sample type. They will take both a
culture-dependent and a culture-independent approach to the survey. Carbon
source utilization patterns and DNA fingerprinting approaches (e.g., denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis, 16S rDNA cloning) will be used to characterize
whole communities. Microbial isolates will be characterized in terms of cell
morphology and motility, growth characteristics, antibiotic resistance patterns,
production of cell-signaling molecules, and phylogeny. The data obtained will be
channeled into a public, online database that will be developed by all members
of the research team for the purposes of disseminating and sharing of
information regarding coral microbial communities among the broader scientific
community. Educational opportunities at the high school, undergraduate (through
two NSF undergraduate research programs), graduate, and postdoctoral levels will
be incorporated into each stage of the proposed project. All members of the
research team will work cooperatively in a very dynamic setting to both collect
and evaluate the data, as well as contribute to website development and database
design. They will also develop a special topics course to be offered each summer
of the proposed project entitled "Coral Biology: The Complex Role of
Microorganisms in Coral Health and Disease." The proposed work will foster
collaboration between two US-based educational institutions (Medical Univ. of
South Carolina, Univ. of South Carolina-Aiken,), The Institute for Genomic
Research (TGIR), and an international organization, the Colombian Institute for
Marine and Coastal Research (INVEMAR).

