* 0964063
* CT: Collaborative Research: Experience-Based Access Management (EBAM) for Hospital Information Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Bradley Malin, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 03/31/2015
* USD 395,011.00

Insufficient attention has been given to enterprise Identity and Access
Management (IAM) as a process that needs to be carried out on a continuing basis
in the presence of change and evolution. In particular, there is little formal
support for how IAM can exploit experience the enterprise collects over time.
This project is developing a lifecycle model of IAM called Experience Based
Access Management (EBAM) that provides a set of models, techniques, and tools to
reconcile differences between the "ideal" access model, as judged by high-level
enterprise, professional, and legal standards, and the "enforced" access
control, specific to the operational IAM system. The principal component of an
EBAM support system is an "expected" access model that is used to represent
differences between the ideal and enforced models based on information collected
from access logs and other operational information. The project is developing
and validating an approach to the expected model based on using probabilistic
information to inform the design of access rules. The project focuses on EBAM
for hospital information systems since these are an especially important class
of enterprise systems that present diverse and interesting challenges but also
provide potential insight into similar issues in other types of enterprise IAM
systems. The team consists of specialists in cyber security, biomedical
informatics, and a physician who serves as chief medical information officer
within a major hospital system. The project will demonstrate how analysis of
clinical experience can address gaps between ideal and enforced access control
models in a representative hospital.