* 0964639
* TC: Medium:  Security and Privacy Preserving Data Mining and Management for Disctributed Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2018
* Walid Aref, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,238,318.00

A fundamental but challenging issue in information security is secure sharing
and management of sensitive data and information among numerous organizations
that form large-scale e-enterprises. Today, an increasing number of enterprises
are using the Internet for managing and sharing users? and enterprise
information through online databases. However, security and privacy of data is
an overriding concern currently limiting the proliferation of information
technology. Among others, the two key security issues are; (a) interoperability
challenge of diverse security policies exercised by collaborating organizations
for sharing sensitive information and; (b) using collaborative knowledge for
detecting and responding to any emerging security or emergency threats. The
objective of this project to develop a scalable multi-domain information
security framework which: (a) facilitates large-scale integration, mining, and
analysis of multimedia data residing in multiple domains for identifying
sensitive information that require controlled dissemination (b) allows
distributed real-time content analysis of multimedia data streams across
multiple-domains for correlating detectable events, (c)l provides integration
and evolution of inter-domain access control policies for distributed multimedia
applications, and (d) ensures protection of user?s information. The project uses
several innovative approaches to meet these objectives. First, novel real-time
data mining and stream-correlation methods is used for extracting useful content
and detecting events embedded in data streams by using multiple sliding window
operators. Second, an efficient privacy/security based multimedia data
clustering mechanism allows a prevailing security policy to be adaptable to the
changing context and the datasets. The uniqueness of this approach is the
adaptive nature of security policies. In addition, a novel XML-based integrated
mechanism is used for encoding of multimedia data in conjunction with multi-
domain security policies for ensuring technical viability and portability of the
system. The proposed research is expected to have direct and long-term impact on
developing secure information infrastructures, such as e-commerce, digital
libraries, and healthcare systems, which are projected to have an important role
at a global scale for the next several decades. The research results can help in
alleviating the heavy financial risks associated with information and system
security and in general, meeting the national information infrastructure
security needs and threat management. The research will be pursued in
collaboration with Cyber Center, the Center for Education and Research in
Information Assurance and Security (CERIAS) and PURVAC facilities at Purdue
University with which the PI?s have strong affiliation and on-going
collaboration. Results and tools developed will be made available over the Web
to research community. In The team has a track record of providing their
research results and tools to various research communities in the areas of
multimedia databases and information security management.

For further information see the project web site at the URL:
http://cobweb.ecn.purdue.edu/~dmultlab/
<http://cobweb.ecn.purdue.edu/%7Edmultlab/>