* 0964102
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research:  Semi-Supervised Discriminative Training of Language Models
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Brian Roark, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2015
* USD 519,050.00

This project is conducting fundamental research in statistical language modeling
to improve human language technologies, including automatic speech recognition
(ASR) and machine translation (MT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A language model (LM)
is conventionally optimized, using text in the target language, to assign high
probability to well-formed sentences. This method has a fundamental shortcoming:
the optimization does not explicitly target the kinds of distinctions necessary
to accomplish the task at hand, such as discriminating (for ASR) between
different words that are acoustically confusable or (for MT) between different
target-language words that express the multiple meanings of a polysemous source-
language word.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discriminative optimization of the LM, which
would overcome this shortcoming, requires large quantities of paired input-
output sequences: speech and its reference transcription for ASR or source-
language (e.g. Chinese) sentences and their translations into the target
language (say, English) for MT. Such resources are expensive, and limit the
efficacy of discriminative training methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a radical
departure from convention, this project is investigating discriminative training
using easily available, *unpaired* input and output sequences: un-transcribed
speech or monolingual source-language text and unpaired target-language text.
Two key ideas are being pursued: (i) unlabeled input sequences (e.g. speech or
Chinese text) are processed to learn likely confusions encountered by the ASR or
MT system; (ii) unpaired output sequences (English text) are leveraged to
discriminate between these well-formed sentences from the (supposed) ill-formed
sentences the system could potentially confuse them
with.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This self-supervised discriminative training, if
successful, will advance machine intelligence in fundamental ways that impact
many other applications.