* 0964094
* TC: Medium:  Dissemination and Analysis of Private Network Data
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Donald Towsley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2014
* USD 889,125.00

The goal of this research project is to enable statistical analysis and
knowledge discovery on networks without violating the privacy of participating
entities. Network data sets record the structure of computer, communication,
social, or organizational networks, but they often contain highly sensitive
information about individuals. The availability of network data is crucial for
analyzing, modeling, and predicting the behavior of networks.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The team's approach is based on model-based generation of synthetic
data, in which a model of the network is released under strong privacy
conditions and samples from that model are studied directly by analysts. Output
perturbation techniques are used to privately compute the parameters of popular
network models. The resulting "noisy" model parameters are released, satisfying
a strong, quantifiable privacy guarantee, but still preserving key properties of
the networks. Analysts can use the released models to sample individual networks
or to reason about properties of the implied ensemble of networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By synthesizing versions of networks that would otherwise
remain hidden, this research can advance the study of topics such as disease
transmission, network resiliency, and fraud detection. The project will result
in publicly available privacy tools, a repository for derived models and sample
networks, and contributions to workforce development in the field of information
assurance. The experimental research is linked to educational efforts including
undergraduate involvement in research through a Research Experience for
Undergraduates site, as well as interdisciplinary
seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web site
at the URL:&lt;br/&gt;http://dbgroup.cs.umass.edu/private-network-data