* 0964204
* IDBR: A GPU-accelerated 3D-imaging and 3D-Illumination Sytem for Feedback Control of Light Fields in Biological Light Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Jonathan Taylor, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 05/31/2013
* USD 130,000.00

Recent developments in molecular neuroscience allow scientists to both optically
record neuronal activity and to cause neurons to fire by stimulating them with
light. In genetic model organisms like zebrafish and mice, these technologies
can be used to observe and manipulate the activity patterns of thousands of
neurons at once using non-invasive all-optical methods. While such techniques
promise to revolutionize how we look at brain circuits, neural circuits are
fundamentally three-dimensional structures. As a result, optical tools able to
both image and selectively stimulate 3D volumes of brain tissue must be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a device that can
record a volume of neurons at each camera exposure, extract information from
thousands of these neurons over time, and then use this information to choose
which groups of individual neurons in the volume to stimulate with light. This
feedback loop will allow scientists to test causal hypotheses about brain
network function and its relationship to behavior in a fast and powerful way,
leveraging feedback-control technologies currently used in robotics and
aeronautics to build and refine dynamical models of the brain online. At the
core of this device are new developments in computational microscopy: the light
field microscope (LFM), which can computationally reconstruct an entire volume
from a single snapshot, and the light field illuminator (LFI), which can create
(nearly) arbitrary patterns of light in three dimensions. The project will
couple these two devices and accelerate their performance using commercial
graphics cards (GPUs) to allow real-time control of biological neural networks
in behaving animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project outcomes, including scientific
findings resulting from the application of the device to biological specimens,
detailed directions on how to construct the physical device, and free, open-
source software to run the device, will be provided online at
http://graphics.stanford.edu/projects/lfmicroscope/.