* 0964254
* IDBR: A Cell-Phone Based Wildlife Monitoring System
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Martin Lukac, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 03/31/2013
* USD 381,438.00

Seabirds are important marine predators that consume about 7% of marine primary
productivity and are a key link between marine and terrestrial ecosystems.
Seabirds are also the most endangered group of marine species, composing 25%
recent marine extinctions and 27% of threatened species.

Seabirds disperse over thousands of kilometers of ocean to forage, but
concentrate on islands to breed, often at extremely high densities. It is on
these breeding islands where they encounter invasive animals and other threats
that are the major causes of extinction and endangerment. Fortunately, seabirds
can be protected by such measures as invasive species eradications,
establishment and effective management of protected areas, or prohibitions
against overexploitation. Thus, there is a very real potential to reverse the
tide of seabird endangerment and population declines and restore their
functional role to thousands of island ecosystems and adjacent waters.

One significant impediment to realizing this conservation goal is the high cost
and difficulty of measuring seabird population responses to management actions
on isolated breeding islands. Monitoring seabird populations is made difficult
by three factors: 1) the cost of deploying and maintaining survey teams on
remote islands, 2) the ability of teams to regularly arrange travel to remote
sites, and 3) the disturbance that survey teams can cause while working in
seabird colonies.

A collaboration between ecologists at the University of California-Santa Cruz
Coastal Conservation Action Lab and computer scientists at Lorax Analytical will
develop easy-to-use, low-cost automated acoustic sensors for monitoring changes
in seabird populations breeding on islands that can dramatically improve seabird
monitoring and drive more effective conservation actions. The collaboration will
lead to novel contributions in both fields. The instrument will lead to
innovations in sensor design and networking software. It will also greatly
expand the geographic and temporal scale at which biologists can conduct
research on ecological communities in remote locations.

Expected Outcomes: By providing a low-cost, long-term, and minimally invasive
tool for monitoring seabirds on islands, the instrument will provide data that
was previously unattainable with traditional methods. This will greatly enhance
research on seabird ecology, invasive species, and conservation biology. UCSC's
Coastal Conservation Action Lab will immediately begin to deploy the system in
ongoing seabird monitoring projects around the world. Other uses include
wildlife monitoring, research in behavioral ecology, measurements of
conservation effectiveness, and documenting soundscapes at Long Term Ecological
Research (LTER) sites, and monitoring ecological changes related to climate
change.

Outreach: This instrument will find wide application with end-users in a variety
of research fields. The researchers will present papers introducing the
instrument and its application to end users at 2-3 relevant conferences in
ecology and computer science,and initiate collaborations to further seabird
research with potential end users including state and federal wildlife managers,
restoration ecologists, conservation organizations, and citizen scientists. The
software developed as part of this project will be released as open source at
the end of the project. The source code, documentation, and user manual will be
available to end users through a project website at the Coastal Conservation
Action Lab http://bio.research.ucsc.edu/people/croll/WAM/ , allowing biologists
and managers to build and tailor the system to fit their needs.