* 0964261
* Did Native Americans Significantly Alter Forest Structure in California? A Paleoecologic Reconstruction of Vegetation and Fire History from Two Different Ecosystems
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Scott Mensing, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2014
* USD 350,000.00

It is well-documented that Native Americans across the United States used fire
to manipulate the environment. Fire is a primary tool for clearing trees or
removing brush and if used extensively can fundamentally alter the landscape.
There is great interest in better understanding the degree to which Native
Americans used fire but broad disagreement over the extent of the impact they
had on forests in the western United States. One argument, supported by
paleoecological evidence of vegetation and climate change, states that the
impacts were limited to small zones of occupation around village sites and that
climate was the primary control on western forests. The other argument,
supported by anthropological evidence, notes that fire was essential to Native
American subsistence and forest structure was heavily controlled by people.
There are few studies that have tried to bridge this divide, however such an
approach is imperative to obtain a better understanding of the impacts that
Native American use of fire had on western forests. This project will use
paleoecological methods for reconstructing past vegetation and fire history as
well as anthropological data from areas with well-documented histories of Native
American land-use. The project will collect sediment cores from lakes and
meadows and use pollen and charcoal analysis to reconstruct vegetation and fire
history during the last 4,000 years. Fire history during the last 200 to 300
years will be reconstructed from fire-scarred trees near the core sites to
establish modern fire dynamics. The project will also use existing archeological
evidence to document the arrival and distribution of Native Americans across the
region of study. The long-term climate history for the project sites will come
from previous paleoecological studies in the region. The records of vegetation
change and fire history for the project sites will then be compared to changes
in Native American technology and land use practices in an effort to identify
anomalous shifts in forest structure that are not explained by the climate
record. Such changes would be attributed to Native American impacts.

This study is specifically designed to test the assertion that Native Americans
had a larger role than previously supposed in shaping forest composition and
structure through the use of fire. The results have the potential to contribute
directly to land management decisions through a better understanding of pre-
European forest dynamics, since current management practices often do not
account for possible human intervention. The research will further demonstrate
the extent to which past Native American land use practices may have been
responsible for creating the forest structure inherited by modern land use
managers. Native American groups concerned with preserving subsistence practices
important to their culture may benefit from a better understanding of how
forests were affected by similar activities in the past.