* 0964424
* Ancient Hunters of the Alpena-Amberley Ridge: Archaeological Investigations beneath Lake Huron
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* John O'Shea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 267,196.00

With National Science Foundation Support, Dr. John O'Shea and a team of
colleagues from the University of Michigan will conduct three seasons of
archaeological field work on the Alpena-Amberley Ridge, beneath the waters of
modern Lake Huron in the Great Lakes. The team brings together specialists in
the use of remote operated vehicles (ROV) and autonomous underwater vehicles
(AUV), underwater archaeology, and computer science in an effort to identify
archaeological sites associated with early hunting groups that once inhabited
the Alpena-Amberley Ridge area during the Lake Stanley low water stage. At this
time, some nine thousand years ago, the ridge existed as a corridor of dry land
extending from Presque Isle in Michigan to the Point Clarke region of southern
Ontario. The research builds on a prior National Science Foundation supported
study that identified a series of stone structures which bear a strong
resemblance to hunting structured used historically in the Arctic in the pursuit
of caribou. The goal of the current research effort is to confirm the human
origin of these structures and to begin the process of identifying and
describing the ancient human sites and associated artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;The
Alpena-Amberley ridge holds a potential treasure trove of information relating
to the early occupation of the Great Lakes. Unlike anywhere else in the region,
the ancient landscape remains much as the original occupants left it. There has
been no development, land clearance or farming to destroy sites, and no looting
to remove important or attractive artifacts. Not only does it provide the
opportunity to identify sites from a time period that is poorly known on land,
it also offers the potential for the preservation of intact sites, stone
constructions, and plant and animal remains that rarely are preserved in the
Great Lakes region. It also will provide a laboratory in which to investigate
the life ways of the early inhabitants to the Great Lakes, and particularly the
transition from Paleo-Indian to Archaic patterns systems. The preserved layout
and distribution of inundated sites may also provide insights into the culture
and organization of these early hunters of a kind that is only rarely preserved
on land.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Apart for the extraordinary anthropological
potential of the work, the research promises a number of broader benefits. The
work will provide a detailed view of the Lake Stanley era terrain and the Lake
Huron lake bottom, and will yield important geological, environmental, botanical
and faunal evidence from this important time period. It will also provide data
on the current conditions of the mid-Lake environment, and particularly the
impact of invasive species. Finally, the work brings together researchers and
students from a wide range of departments and institutions, such as the
Department of Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering and the Museum of
Anthropology at the University of Michigan, Computer Science at Wayne State
University, and archaeologists and educators from the Thunder Bay National
Marine Sanctuary. The research effort represents the creative combination of
existing equipment, capabilities, and expertise to address a novel new range of
problems. The "cross-training" benefits of the research are shared not only
among the senior investigators, but by the interdisciplinary group of graduate
and undergraduate students that participate in the research.