* 0964236
* NetSE: Medium: Discovering Hyperbolic Metric Spaces Hidden beneath the Internet and Other Complex Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 05/31/2014
* USD 1,231,999.00

The lack of predictive power over complex systems, either designed by humans or
evolved by nature, is a foundational problem in contemporary science. The
Internet offers a paradigmatic example:&lt;br/&gt;nothing in its architecture
and design explains its complex large-scale structure. Many complex networks in
nature share this peculiar structural character of the Internet, but they also
manifest phenomenal behavior: they efficiently route information without any
observable routing communication protocol. Hence, the main objective of this
project is to explore the relationship between the structure and communication
function of complex networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An international team of
researchers assembled for this project includes computer scientists from the
Cooperative Association for Internet Data Analysis (CAIDA) at the University of
California San Diego, and physicists from the University of Barcelona, Spain.
The project includes theoretical modeling and computer simulations to discover
if the Internet 30-year old interdomain topology has naturally evolved toward a
structure for which nature has superior routing
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is in
the utilization of this natural routing technology for infinitely scalable
Internet routing with minimal communication overhead. If successful, this
project will solve a long-standing theoretical problem of constructing a
maximally efficient algorithm for routing in complex networks. These results may
help to remove serious scaling limitations within the existing Internet routing
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact is in improving our
knowledge of the basic principles of organization, function, and evolution of
large-scale complex networks, transforming research on how to model, predict,
and control them. The elucidation of fundamental connections between network
structure and function has far-reaching impact on the study of many complex
systems, including search engines, recommender and reputation systems, terrorist
network modeling, cancer and brain research, protein folding, and drug design.