* 0964515
* ESE: Collaborative Research: Climate Change and Variability and Armed Conflicts in Africa South of the Sahara
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,11/30/2013
* Arlene Laing, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2013
* USD 63,810.00

The number of armed conflicts has declined after the end of the Cold War. There
is also a long-term trend towards less severe armed conflicts, though climate
change threatens to reverse this favorable trend. Rising in temperatures are
likely to cause drought and increase natural hazards (including floods and
hurricanes). Resulting migration and in turn, conflict with host communities can
lead to local scarcities, increasing the risk of conflict. Climate change will
possibly weaken politically-unstable regimes in low-development countries, in
turn strengthening the hand of insurgent movements challenging governments and
adding to communal conflict. The PIs will look at specific physical phenomena
(droughts and natural hazards) whose social and economic effects will then be
traced to estimate the probable implications for conflict. The projected impacts
of climate change will not result in elevated conflict risk in all societies but
depends on country-specific and contextual factors. The investigation will take
place at two scales, the regional and the local, for the countries of sub-
Saharan Africa. Using a predictive model of the coupled natural (climate) and
social (violence) systems, with feedback loops and mediating socio-political-
economic variables, the PIs will measure the impact of adverse climate change
and/or changes in climate variability on the rate of armed conflict, determine
which mediating factors influence the rate of this impact, and project the
violence outcomes on the basis of different climate change/variability
scenarios. The data from the substantial climate, satellite imaged environmental
(land-use), socio-economic and violence sources will be integrated in a
geographic information system, with 100 kilometers grids being the primary scale
of analysis. Local studies in selected contexts in East Africa (with the support
of local research networks) will complement the statistical study by exploring
the locally-varying processes linking climate/environmental change to violent
events.

Efforts to assess the security implications of climate change have foundered on
the paucity of empirical evidence and the lack of consensus in the scientific
literature of the extent of the possible relationship. Recent statements by U.S.
and international agencies propose climate change/variability as a threat
multiplier to existing problems (poverty, social tensions, environmental
degradation, ineffectual leadership, and weak political institutions) that might
threaten domestic stability in weak states. Possible impacts of climate
change/variability are mediated by contextual conditions, especially
governmental policies, socio-economic resources, and existing fractures along
regional and ethnic lines. Sub-Saharan Africa has been identified as the most
vulnerable region, with the possibility of significant intra-regional
migration/emigration to escape a worsening quality of life leading to communal
conflict over declining resources. The research will contribute to policy
debates within the US and internationally which, to date, have skirted the issue
due to unreliable conflict measures, debatable climate change indicators,
information on local differences, and the lack of contact between the
natural/climate science and conflict studies communities.