* 0964873
* Travel support for conference on Meso-Scale Sculpting and Fabrication in Soft Materials: Self-organization, Self-assembly and Novel Functionalities, IIT Kanpur, India.
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Arijit Bose, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2011
* USD 17,500.00

CBET - 0964873 &lt;br/&gt;Bose, Arijit &lt;br/&gt;University of Rhode
Island&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Travel support is provided for conference
on Meso-Scale Sculpting and Fabrication in Soft Materials: Self-organization,
Self-assembly and Novel Functionalities, IIT Kanpur,
India.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides funding for seven US based
participants to attend the conference on Meso-Scale Sculpting and Fabrication in
Soft Materials: Self-organization, Self-assembly and Novel Functionalities,
December 9-12, 2009 at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur, India.
This conference is a part of the year long Golden Jubilee celebrations at IIT
Kanpur, as the Institute steps into its 50th year. It is also a meeting ground
for the members of the Indo-US Center for Research on Fabrionics supported by
the Indo-US Science and Technology Forum, New Delhi, with participation from
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Northwestern University, UC Irvine,
IIT Kharagpur, IIT Kanpur and a few other universities and institutes. There
will be approximately 20 speakers from the US, and about the same number from
India. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;India is making a
strong investment in science and technology. This meeting represents an
important avenue for interactions between US universities and Indian
counterparts. The conference will focus on micro, nano and meso-scale
fabrication and its relation to structure and properties and functionalities
with emphasis on soft materials, self-assembly, self-organization and novel
functionalities and applications in energy and environment. It will help explore
cutting-edge of micro/nano fabrication, which is a highly interdisciplinary area
with equal interest across many departments including chemical, mechanical,
electrical and materials engineering, materials science, biosciences, chemistry
and physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact &lt;br/&gt;This conference
will allow US participants to learn about advanced research in leading
institutions in India. This will directly enhance possibilities of international
collaborations. It will provide exposure of participants to students at one of
the best institutes in India, and help attract some of those to research
laboratories in the US. Through both these avenues, one expects this interaction
to directly impact the quality and quantity of research output in the US.