* 0964127
* IDBR:  Development of Heterogeneous Excited State Flow Cytometry Sorting and Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Jessica Houston, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 03/31/2014
* USD 321,373.00

Phase-sensitive flow cytometry is a traditional and minimally disseminated
method of capturing the average fluorescence lifetime on an event-by-event
basis. That is, early incarnations of frequency-domain cytometry techniques
involved a high degree of complexity with cumbersome analog hardware. Owing to
the intricate nature of such techniques, the cytomics community has lacked a
widespread and robust means of capturing excited-state decays. This project
explores new digital methods as a means to introduce multiple lifetimes for
additional separation power in cytometry. These include: (1) introduction of
multiple-frequency modulation, (2) implementation of innovative approaches for
capturing time-resolved signals through non-modulated digital signal processing,
and (3) application of fluorescence lifetime parameters to sorting systems so as
to separate cells or particles based on decay kinetic measurements. A cytometry
system capable of not only average fluorescence lifetime measurements but also
multi-exponential decay is appealing for several reasons which include:
improving the separation of autofluorescence from exogenous signals, capturing
surface enhanced Raman scattering in flow, and quantifying fluorescence protein
expression during cell sorting.

The development of a multiple lifetime cytometry instrument will significantly
impact the cytometry community at large. A temporal method for sorting and
analysis may directly affect a wide range of staining and analysis protocols in
flow cytometry, improve accuracy of low-density antigen studies, reveal possible
rare events that exhibit unique excited state decays, and allow users of all
kinds to implement the capability on their commercial instrument. The
advancement of excited-state cytometry techniques will also broaden the
participation of underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students at New
Mexico State University, a Hispanic Serving Institution. Minorities working on
the development of the cytometer will be exposed to high-impact bioengineering,
chemical engineering, and other multidisciplinary fields needed for the project
outcomes. The end goal for all or part of the described cytometry techniques is
the integration into the biotechnology industry. All project outcomes can be
perused at the Principle Investigator research website:
http://che.nmsu.edu/JPH/index.html.