* 0964269
* RI:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Unlocking Biologically-Inspired Computer Vision:  A High-Throughput Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* James DiCarlo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 410,000.00

This project exploits advances in parallel computing hardware and a
neuroscience-informed perspective to design next-generation computer vision
algorithms that aim to match a human's ability to recognize objects. The human
brain has superlative visual object recognition abilities -- humans can
effortlessly identify and categorize tens of thousands of objects with high
accuracy in a fraction of a second -- and a stronger connection between
neuroscience and computer vision has driven new progress on machine algorithms.
However, these models have not yet achieved robust, human-level object
recognition in part because the number of possible "bio-inspired" model
configurations is enormous. Powerful models hidden in this model class have yet
to be systematically characterized and the correct biological model is not
known.

To break through this barrier, this project will leverage newly available
computational tools to undertake a systematic exploration of the bio-inspired
model class by using a high-throughput approach in which millions of candidate
models are generated and screened for desirable object recognition properties
(Objective 1). To drive this systematic search, the project will create and
employ a suite of benchmark vision tasks and performance "report cards" that
operationally define what constitutes a good visual image representation for
object recognition (Objective 2). The highest performing visual representations
harvested from these ongoing high-throughput searches will be used: for
applications in other machine vision domains, to generate new experimental
predictions, and to determine the underlying computing motifs that enable this
high performance (Objective 3). Preliminary results show that this approach
already yields algorithms that exceed state-of-the-art performance in object
recognition tasks and generalize to other visual tasks.

As the scale of available computational power continues to expand, this approach
holds great potential to rapidly accelerate progress in computer vision,
neuroscience, and cognitive science: it will create a large-scale "laboratory"
for testing neuroscience ideas within the domain of computer vision; it will
generate new, testable computational hypotheses to guide neuroscience
experiments; it will produce a new kind of multidimensional image challenge
suite that will be a rallying point for computer models, neuronal population
studies, and behavioral investigations; and it could unleash a host of new
applications.