* 0964173
* DC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Data Intensive Computing: Scalable, Social Data Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2010,10/31/2013
* Jeffrey Heer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 10/31/2013
* USD 333,333.00

Analysts in all areas of human knowledge, from science and
engineering&lt;br/&gt;to economics, social science and journalism are drowning
in data. The&lt;br/&gt;proliferation of digital information requires tools and
techniques for&lt;br/&gt;exploring, analyzing and communicating data in a manner
that scales as&lt;br/&gt;both the data and the organizations analyzing it grow
in&lt;br/&gt;size. Throughout the data life-cycle, sensemaking is often
a&lt;br/&gt;collaborative process. As different analysts each contribute to
data&lt;br/&gt;acquisition, cleaning, analysis, and interpretation they
contribute&lt;br/&gt;contextual knowledge that deepens understanding. Analysts
may disagree&lt;br/&gt;on how to interpret data, but then work together to
reach&lt;br/&gt;consensus. Many data sets are so large that thorough exploration
by a&lt;br/&gt;single person is unlikely. In short, social cognition plays a
critical&lt;br/&gt;role in the process of scalable data analysis. New analysis
tools that&lt;br/&gt;address human cognitive characteristics, social interaction
and data&lt;br/&gt;analytics in an integrated fashion can improve our ability to
turn&lt;br/&gt;data into knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scalable data analysis
requires social interaction and therefore&lt;br/&gt;social context must be
embedded in data analysis tools. The goals of&lt;br/&gt;this project are (1) to
understand how social interaction and social&lt;br/&gt;context can facilitate
successful data analysis, (2) to develop models&lt;br/&gt;and tools for
representing and annotating data transformations,&lt;br/&gt;visualizations, and
social activity (e.g., textual and graphical&lt;br/&gt;annotations, discussions,
links, tags), and (3) to design and test&lt;br/&gt;visual interfaces that
leverage our tools to support collaborative&lt;br/&gt;analysis practices,
including data entry, transformation,&lt;br/&gt;visualization, and
interpretation. Central concerns include (a) a&lt;br/&gt;focus on enabling
social interaction throughout the data life-cycle&lt;br/&gt;and (b) the use of
scalable data transformation routines that can&lt;br/&gt;return results in a
time frame concordant with interactive,&lt;br/&gt;exploratory data
transformation and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information
on this project can be found at:
&lt;br/&gt;http://vis.berkeley.edu/projects/scalable_social_data_analysis/