* 0964512
* RI:Medium: Collaborative Research: Creating Organizationally Adept Software Agents and their Organizations
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2010,12/31/2014
* Edmund Durfee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 12/31/2014
* USD 359,999.00

The centerpiece of this project is the design, development, and evaluation of
computational representations and algorithms for making software agents that are
organizationally adept. An organizationally-adept agent is not only aware of its
role(s) in an organization, but can also monitor how well it is fulfilling its
organizational responsibilities and can proactively adapt its behaviors to meet
organizational needs better. Organizationally adept agents evaluate their
behaviors based not on their (agent-centric) self-interests but rather on their
(organization-centric) responsibilities to each other, and autonomously adapt to
achieve organizational objectives emergently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elaboration
and adaptation by organizationally adept agents means that the ultimate
organization design is formed by a combination of top-down design (to produce a
"ballpark" organization) and emergent refinement processes. Further, this
combination can be iterative and ongoing, where organizationally adept agents
can detect tension between top-down and emergent influences, and inform the
design processes of runtime interaction patterns and environmental tendencies
that suggest useful top-down organization
restructurings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual problems being pursued are
central to practical issues in scaling multi-agent systems to help solve
complex, long-term, global problems. Many critical challenges facing society
including climate change, health care, and sustainable energy|require a
prolonged commitment to monitoring and managing distributed activities.
Networked computer systems populated by software agents, which can be constantly
measuring, comparing, and interpreting information to understand and respond to
wide-scale phenomena, promise to address such challenges, but need the kinds of
innovations proposed in this project. Second, while the project is specifically
looking at organizations for computational agents, our results will inform, and
be informed by, research on human organizations. To stimulate sharing insights
and results, the investigators will organize a multi-disciplinary symposium on
organization-centric reasoning, and will train an inter-disciplinary cohort of
graduate students.