* 0964481
* AF: Medium:Smoothed Analysis in Multi-Objective Optimization, Machine Learning, and Algorithmic Game Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Shanghua Teng, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 02/28/2015
* USD 1,099,858.00

Technical description of the project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smoothed analysis has
been introduced to study the behavior of algorithms when their good practical
performance cannot be predicted by the traditional frameworks such as the worst-
case and average-case analyses. In the original paper that introduced smoothed
analysis, Spielman and Teng proved that the simplex method, which was one of the
amazingly practical heuristics known to have poor worst-case performance, had
good smoothed complexity. Since its introduction, smoothed analysis has been
applied to heuristics in areas that include mathematical programming, numerical
analysis, and combinatorial optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To follow up on
this breakthrough in linear programming, whose primary concern is to optimize a
single linear objective function, the goal of this project is to extend smoothed
analysis to optimization problems involving multiple objective functions and
multiple agents, as often considered in Computational Game and Economics Theory.
The plan of the project will also include the design and analysis of machine
learning algorithms in the smoothed setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plan for
multiobjective optimization is to improve the recent work which show that the
Pareto set of any binary linear optimization problem with a constant number of
objective functions has a polynomial size in the smoothed model. In game theory,
the research will focus on the smoothed complexity of several potential games
for resource allocation and scheduling. For both of these problems, a new
analytical approach for the performance of an iterative process is needed. In
machine learning, the goal is to extend the results on the smoothed analysis of
PAC and agnostic learning from product distributions to other more practical
distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and
importance of the project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide
insight into why heuristics in multi-objective optimization, local search, and
machine learning are successful and allow researchers in Theoretical Computer
Science to incorporate these heuristics into the canon of Algorithms. It will
also provide algorithmic insights into the differences between game-theoretic
problems involving multiple agents and multi-objective optimization problems
concerning only a single agent. By developing a theory that better predicts the
performance of algorithms in practice, this research has the promise to allow
researchers to develop more powerful algorithms. When one designs an algorithm,
one does so with some reason in mind as to why it should work. By providing a
new analytical notion of what it means for an algorithm to "work in practice,"
this research can shape the intuition of algorithm designers to include
algorithms that might otherwise have been discarded for being "bad in the worst-
case."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary objective of this project is to build
bridges between the discipline of Theoretical Computer Science (TCS) and
communities within the disciplines of Operations Research, Game Theory, and
Mathematical Economics. If successful, the project will help to provide a
framework within which researchers in TCS can understand some of the great
practical achievements of these disciplines. In turn, by providing analyses that
respect the sensibilities of researchers in these disciplines as to what
constitutes a "practical input," this project will increase the value of
theoretical analyses to researchers in these fields. As this project combines
ideas from many disciplines within one coherent research effort, lectures and
tutorials presented on the fruits of the project will help cross-fertilize the
disciplines within its scope. The development of theoretical explanations for
the success of the heuristics examined in this project should simplify education
in algorithms and allow discussion of practically important heuristics at
earlier stages of a computer scientist's education. These explanations also
simplify the task of designing easily digestible lectures on these topics, and
such lecture notes inspired by this research will be made available by the PI
and collaborators on the internet.