* 0964703
* SHF: Medium:  How Do Static Analysis Tools Affect End-User Quality
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Premkumar Devanbu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2015
* USD 722,118.00

The perceived quality of a software product depends strongly on field failures
viz., defects experienced by users after the software is released to the field.
Software managers work to constantly improve quality control processes, seeking
to reduce the number of field failures. Static analysis is a powerful and
elegant technique that finds defects without running code, by reasoning about
what the program does when executed. It has been incubating in academia and is
now emerging in industry. This research asks this question: How can the
performance and practical use of static analysis tools be improved ? The goal of
the research is to find ways to improve the performance of static analysis
tools, as well as the quality-control processes that use them. This will help
commercial and open-source organizations make more effective use static analysis
tools, and substantially reduce field failures.

Using historical data from several open-source and commercial exemplars, the
research will retrospectively evaluate the association of field failures with
static analysis warnings. The research will evaluate the impact of factors such
as experience of the developer, the complexity of the code, and the type of
static analysis warning on failure properties such criticality, and defect
latency (time until a defect becomes a failure). A wide variety of projects will
be studied, including both commercial and open-source. The resulting data will
be analyzed using statistical modeling to determine the factors that influence
the success of static analysis tools in preventing field failures. Some field
failures may have no associated static analysis warnings. This research will
identify and characterize these failures, paving the way for new static analysis
research. An integrated educational initiative in this proposal is the training
of undergraduates by using bug fixes as pedagogical material; undergraduates
will also help annotate the corpus of field failures with information relevant
to our analysis. An important byproduct of this research, is a large, diverse,
annotated corpus of field failures of use to other educators and researchers in
empirical software engineering, testing, and static analysis.