* 0964978
* 2010 Gordon Research Conference on Mutagenesis to be held August 1 through August 6, 2010, at Colby College in Waterville, Maine
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2011
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 06/30/2011
* USD 5,000.00

The 2010 Mutagenesis Gordon Research Conference will address in molecular detail
how mutations occur, how conserved pathways promote repair of such mutations,
and how mutations can affect cellular processes. As the source of biological
diversity, mutations enable subsets of organisms to survive despite changing
conditions, and thus have been essential for life from its start. Mutagenesis
drives the emergence of organisms which are better able to survive changing
environmental conditions, but also promotes emergence of novel pathogens. Some
mutations are spontaneous and inevitable, while others are induced by mutagens
present in the environment either naturally or as a result of human negligence.
Using experimental tools that span genetics, cell biology, biochemistry and
structural biology, scientists have made dramatic progress in defining
mechanisms of mutagenesis in recent years. Much of this progress has depended
upon basic insights gained from experimentation with simpler microbial systems,
especially the bacterium E. coli and the yeast S. cerevisiae. There is a growing
understanding of how oxidative DNA damage, which may be an inevitable
consequence of respiration, promotes mutations that contribute to genomic
instability and aging; of how specific genomic sites and regions may be hotspots
for mutagenesis; and of how regulated mutagenesis is essential to the
pathogenesis of microorganisms and to the immune response. Mechanisms of
mutagenesis and repair have proven to be highly conserved, and there has been
continuous and fruitful interactions between investigators using a wise range of
organisms and approaches. The 2010 Mutagenesis GRC will bring together a diverse
group of scientists whose interests focus on mechanisms of mutagenesis and its
consequences, in a format that promotes active discussion, presentation of new
ideas, and development of collaborations that transcend disciplines and national
boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mutagenesis Gordon Research Conference
seeks to bring together leading investigators, both those who are established
and those whose careers are still in their early stages, for a highly
interactive meeting in a retreat-like environment. Participants will represent a
wide range of research interests in areas including replication and repair
fidelity, DNA modifications (both natural and synthetic), carcinogenesis,
evolution and genetic toxicology. The chair of the 2010 meeting is a woman and
it is anticipated that the speaker roster will be at least 25% women, with at
least one Hispanic speaker. The organizers will strive to ensure that women,
junior scientists (recently independent investigators, post-docs and graduate
students) and underrepresented minorities are selected to attend the meeting,
giving preference to such individuals when selecting meeting participants. The
spectrum of topics and the breadth of expertise, perspectives, approaches and
systems will set this meeting apart from more specialized conferences. This
breadth, together with the intensity of a focused meeting with a limited number
of participants, fosters the cross-fertilization of ideas and the collaborations
that ultimately will lead to novel insights into mutagenic mechanisms and their
results. The small size and unusually collegial and informal nature of the
Mutagenesis Gordon Research Conference, along with its emphasis on discussion
among investigators with diverse expertise, make it unique within the
mutagenesis field. Through this meeting new collaborations will form and new
knowledge will be disseminated. Funding from the National Science Foundation
will help support the participation of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows,
and investigators whose careers are just getting underway.