* 0964606
* SHF: Medium:  Power-Adaptive, Event-Driven Data Conversion and Signal Processing Using Asynchronous Digital Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Yannis Tsividis, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,062,607.00

This research addresses an increasing demand and need for very low power and
high-quality microelectronic systems that can continuously acquire and process
information, as soon as it becomes available. Such data acquisition and real-
time signal processing are used in a wide range of applications, such as
environmental sensor networks (powered by solar cells or by energy harvesting
using vibrational energy), and implantable or ingestible biomedical devices for
prosthetics or for continuous diagnostics and monitoring. In these applications,
new information is often generated infrequently, at irregular and unpredictable
intervals. This event-based nature calls for a drastic re-thinking of how these
signals are monitored and processed. Conventional synchronous (i.e. clocked)
digital techniques, which use fixed-rate operation to evaluate data whether or
not it has changed, are a poor match, often leading to high power consumption.
This research aims instead to provide viable "event-based" systems: controlled
not by a clock but rather by the arrival of each event. Such continuous-time
data acquisition promises significant power and energy reduction, flexible
support for a variety of signal processing protocols and encodings, high-quality
output signals, and graceful scalability to future microelectronic technologies.
Asynchronous (i.e. clockless) digital logic techniques, which are ideally suited
for this work, are combined with continuous-time digital signal processing, to
make this task possible; both of these areas have been researched by the
principal investigators under prior NSF support. A series of silicon chips will
be designed and fully evaluated, culminating in a fully programmable, event-
driven data acquisition and signal processing system, which can be used as a
testbed for a wide variety of real-world applications.

This work is expected to have broad impact. The resulting chips and methodology
will provide significant practical benefits in widely-used applications where
energy resources are scarce, such as in biomedical electronics, sensor networks
and portable communications devices, which must operate on a small battery for a
long lifetime. The chip development will be directed towards these applications
through close consultation with expert colleagues in biomedical engineering, and
through the investigators? existing close ties with US microelectronics
companies. In addition, the research is expected to provide fundamental new
advances in ultra-low-power microelectronics systems, which can have an impact
on such diverse areas as power electronics and new types of control systems for
mechanical vibration control. Finally, the results of this work will be
extensively disseminated to the research community, to promote and advance the
practical use of these techniques, as well as to promote further research and
education in this area, including through its incorporation into curricula at
Columbia University and other leading universities.