* 0964806
* Integrated Paramagnetic Resonance of High-Spin Cobalt(II) Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* David Tierney, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2011
* USD 249,721.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor David L. Tierney at the University of New Mexico
to systematically investigate a library of model compounds by a combination of
x-ray absorption spectroscopy and paramagnetic resonance (PMR), simultaneously
applying mutli-frequency electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR, 9 and 35 GHz),
electron-nuclear double resonance (ENDOR, 9 and 35 GHz) and nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR, H = 100, 300 and 500 MHz; NMRD, H . 1 75 MHz), to define the
field- and temperature-dependence of electronnuclear hyperfine interactions in a
broad array of high-spin Co(II) systems. Electronic relaxation will be examined
in detail by field- and temperature-dependent NMR relaxation and by NMR
dispersion (NMRD). The behavior of the model systems will guide spectroscopic
studies of systems of unknown structure, where x-ray absorption spectroscopy
(XAS) will provide additional, critical structural constraints. The systems
mimic two key structural elements in the metallobiochemistry of cobalt: Co-
Nhistidine and Co-Scysteine. A series of bis- (Bp) and tris- (Tp)
pyrazolylborate complexes will be studied to emulate metal-histidine
interactions. Homoleptic and heteroleptic complexes allow preparation of neutral
hs Co(II) complexes that are 4-, 5- or 6-coordinate, all with the same donor
set. Complexes of Mn(II) and V(II), defining the contributions of global
symmetry and spin-orbit coupling to the observed electron-nuclear interactions,
will be examined. Efforts to model Co-Scys interactions will involve common
alkyl- and arylthiolate small-molecule chemistry, and methyl transfer reactions
will be examined, affording a unique opportunity to evaluate the Co-for-Zn
substitution in a functional model system. To bridge the gap between small-
molecule and metalloprotein studies, a set of de novo metal-binding peptides,
designed to present cys4, cys3his and cys2his2 binding sites, will be studied.
PMR studies are proposed that will greatly advance our knowledge of cobalt-
sulfur bonding.

Minority enrollment University-wide represents 49 % of the student body. Of
this, 28% of the students are Hispanic and 11% are Native American. At the
present time, the overall number of declared chemistry undergraduate majors is
110, with 46% of these coming from traditionally under-represented groups. The
ethnic breakdown of both the graduate program and the Tierney labs are similarly
diverse. The PI has re-developed the senior-level, undergraduate Synthesis and
Characterization laboratory, with experiments developed out of results from
previous and current research experience and will incorporate new developments
derived from the proposed research into the course material.