* 0964710
* TC: Medium: Privacy and Declassification Policy Enforcement Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* William Winsborough, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,162,668.00

Information systems that handle personal information must adhere to legal
regulations, corporate privacy policies, and contractual agreements designed to
protect personal privacy. Relying exclusively on application designers and
developers for such assurances is unrealistic. There is a need for methods and
tools that can identify errors in the handing of personal data and provide
formal assurances that personal information is handled appropriately.

This project is developing a software development framework that uses novel
language-based techniques to ensure that software enforces privacy policies.
Privacy policies (based on legal and regulatory requirements) are formally
specified in temporal logic, and identify circumstances under which information
can be shared (based on criteria such as the roles of individuals involved,
prior events, and whether the data has been aggregated) and future obligations
that are incurred as a result of the information sharing. The framework consists
of policy analysis tools, a programming language, program analysis tools that
verify both privacy and declassification policies are enforced, and a runtime
environment. Used in concert, these components produce distributed information
systems that verifiably handle personal information appropriately.

The framework being developed by this project will address problems faced by
many information systems. However, the project will focus especially on the
needs of the medical industry, both with respect to patient records and clinical
trials. As medical practice transitions to electronic medical records, the need
for high-assurance systems becomes increasingly acute. This project will develop
the capabilities needed to verify that electronic medical records systems comply
with applicable privacy policies.