* 0964217
* Leveraging Thought Leadership for Computational Thinking in the PK-12 Curriculum
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Christine Stephenson, International Society for Technology in Education
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 11/30/2010
* USD 31,014.00

&lt;br/&gt; The Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) and International
Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) are serving as a national convener
and consensus builder around defining a common language surrounding
computational thinking, articulating the challenges and opportunities of
integrating computational thinking throughout PK-12 education, and creating a
pathway forward for bringing computational thinking into the mainstream. This
project responds to the pressing need for consensus around key definitions,
concepts, and strategies for implementing computational thinking into PK-12
classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project covers the first of a two-phase
process. In Phase I, the PIs are convening a small steering committee to plan
for two larger workshops. The first workshop convenes thought leaders, builds a
shared understanding of and vision for computational thinking, and identifies
the stakeholder community that will participate in the second workshop. The
second workshop convenes stakeholders to begin to identify opportunities and
challenges and define the resources, curriculum and assessments, and support
required to bring about real and sustained changes to PK-12 education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Jeannette Wing published a germinal
paper (Wing, 2006) where she posited that computational thinking encompasses a
diverse set of skills that enables us to systematically and efficiently process
information and solve complex problems. Grounded in the core activities of
problem definition, abstractions, and solution development, Wing further argued
that computational thinking could be directly applied, not just to computer
science problems, but to the problems in virtually any discipline or field of
human engagement. At the PK-12 level, the discussion and the actual
implementation of computational thinking concepts across PK-12 education have
been hampered by confusion regarding the nature of computational thinking, the
absence of a shared lexicon for cross disciplinary discussions, and the absence
of a plan for moving forward that addresses the complexity of achieving real and
sustained change in PK-12 education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
contributes to the advancement of computational thinking throughout PK-12
education through the following strategies: &lt;br/&gt; Developing a better
understanding of computational thinking through creating a shared working
definition of ?computational thinking? as it applies across disciplines PK-12.
&lt;br/&gt; Strengthen the teaching of computational thinking skills PK-12
through supporting the development and dissemination of classroom resources
including model curriculum and assessments. &lt;br/&gt; Create broad scale
dissemination of examples of computational thinking across the curriculum
through working collaboratively with subject area specialists across the
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The drive to embed
computational thinking concepts across disciplines and subject areas will
require the entire education community to grapple with core issues relating to
developing precise and yet generalized definitions of concepts and practices. To
achieve this, the computing community must move beyond the limitations of
individual disciplines to a more cohesive and shared understanding of the ways
in which computation underlies all problem definition and solution and improve
our understanding of the ways in which computational thinking can enrich
understanding and practice. This project addresses the pressing need to create a
more inclusive language to facilitate the identification and sharing of key
concepts, challenges, strategies, and best practices and provide a mechanism for
convening the larger community in the implementation of these powerful concepts
and ideas across PK-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;