* 0964764
* CAREER: Analysis, Design, and Synthesis of High-Performance, Low-Power, Real-Time Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Robert Dick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 06/30/2011
* USD 114,852.00

Embedded systems are computers within devices that are not generally recognized
as computers, e.g., computers within automobiles, medical devices, and personal
communication devices. The design of embedded systems is complicated by their
numerous conflicting objectives, e.g., short design time, low price, low power
consumption, high performance, and reliability. Manually designing embedded
systems that meet all these goals is an arduous task. This project targets the
automatic analysis, design, and control of embedded
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing optimization algorithms
and software that automatically designs low-power, low-price, high-performance
embedded systems and integrated circuits. A fast and accurate profiling and
memory access tracing based infrastructure for detailed power and performance
analysis of embedded applications and operating systems will be implemented. The
theory for power-aware operating system scheduling and device control will be
further developed and the results embodied and made public in a new version of a
widely used embedded operating system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Embedded systems
(special-purpose computers) make it easier to communicate, improve the speed and
safety of travel, manage information, and assist people with hundreds of other
tasks. This project is making it possible to build better and less expensive
embedded systems. In addition, software developed in this project is publicly
released as a reference implementation to improve the battery lifespan of
embedded systems that run open-source operating systems. This project is
integrated with Northwestern University courses on embedded system design and
real-time systems. Through it, undergraduate students are benefiting from, and
actively participating in, academic research.&lt;br/&gt;