* 0964439
* Algebraic Knot Homology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/19/2009,06/30/2011
* Sabin Cautis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2011
* USD 46,656.00

The proposal is to construct knot invariants using algebraic geometry. Recall
that to each pair of a Lie algebra and a representation one can associate a
Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant of knots. For example, the Jones polynomial is one
such invariant. In the case of the general linear group and the standard
representation the PI and Joel Kamnitzer categorify these invariants, meaning
that to each knot they assign a (bi-graded) homology group whose Euler
characteristic is the original invariant. This is analogous to the way
(singular) homology of topological spaces "categorifies" the Euler
characteristic. Their construction involves studying the (derived) category of
coherent sheaves on certain flag-like varieties. All this parallels the earlier
pioneering work of Khovanov and Rozansky who discovered such categorifications
using algebraic and combinatorial constructions. Using the algebraic geometric
approach the investigator and his colleagues have a conjecture for how to
categorify some of the remaining Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants. Checking, for
instance, invariance under Reidemeister move 2 involves proving that certain
integral transforms between (derived) categories are equivalences. The existence
of such equivalences, which include Seidel-Thomas spherical twists, is a lively
area of research which is interesting in itself.

The simplest example of a knot is obtained by taking a tangled-up shoe lace and
glueing the ends together. A fundamental question in low-dimensional topology is
to determine when two such knots are different (you are allowed to move the
knots around without cutting them). One way to do this is to assign a number (an
invariant) to each knot so that if two knots are assigned different numbers then
they must be different. How to assign such numbers is a deep problem which is
related to various areas of mathematics in surprising ways. For example, the
Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants are obtained from representation theory (which is
the study of matrices). There are also constructions of such invariants using
algebra and others that are inspired by physics and string theory. The proposed
research suggests yet another approach using algebraic geometry (which is the
study of systems of polynomial equations). This approach may extend, unify and
shed more light on the other constructions.