* 0964471
* DC:  Medium:  Tackling and Understanding Intermediate Data in Cloud Applications as a First-Class Citizen
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Indranil Gupta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2015
* USD 600,000.00

Cloud computing infrastructures involve thousands of servers, petabytes of
storage, and hundreds of users running various applications that involve
gigabytes to terabytes of data. This project focuses on intermediate data that
is generated during the execution of parallelized dataflow programs in clouds.
Such cloud intermediate data brings forth several unique characteristics: they
are massive-scale, distributed, subjected to computational barriers, and prolong
job run-times when subjected to server failures. Further, the size of
intermediate data in a cloud application is often comparable to or larger than
input or output data size, and it can thus range in terabytes. Thus, in spite of
extensive existing work on traditional storage problems, there is a critical
need for new algorithms and systems that target cloud intermediate data. This
project is the first to treat cloud intermediate data as a first-class citizen.
The project will involve new algorithm design and analysis, original systems
building and implementation, deployment in real world testbeds, and performance
of measurement studies. Concretely, this project will build a new system that
explicitly manages intermediate data in cloud dataflow programs in order to
improve their fault-tolerance, and design and realize barrier relaxation
strategies to improve performance of cloud programs. We will implement using
open software, deploy, and experimentally evaluate our systems atop the NSF
infrastructure called the Cloud Computing Testbed (CCT) that is hosted at the
University of Illinois. Finally, we will perform measurement studies of workload
characteristics of cloud intermediate data. A fuller understanding of
intermediate data in clouds can spawn research in managing cloud
infrastructures, improve run-time performance of cloud applications, and lead to
new cloud programming paradigms. Our contributions will directly improve the
performance and fault-tolerance of applications that are run on the community
infrastructure CCT, and positively impact design and deployment of existing and
emerging industry clouds. Our results will be published and released in open
software and datasets.