* 0964695
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Guiding Folksonomy Development to Enable Novel Tagging Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2016
* Loren Terveen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2016
* USD 997,788.00

This is a study of tagging, the assignment of labels to information objects by
users, and the "folksonomy" categorization systems that can result. By the 19th
Century, increasing amounts of information were being published, and it was
clear that efficient methods of organization were needed for the information to
be accessible. In response, categorization schemes like the Library of Congress
Classification and the Dewey Decimal System were invented. The overall
information dissemination system contained clear roles and divisions of labor:
editors decided what got published, information professionals categorized
published works, and most people simply consumed the results. The Internet has
toppled this traditional approach. There is no publication barrier, so orders of
magnitude more information is available online and information professionals
cannot keep up. However, new technologies have arisen that work in this context,
notably tagging. Any user can associate tags with items such as documents,
movies, or photos, and the tags serve as keys for retrieval. Since tags can be
created by any user, the number of tags contributed scales with a community's
size: thus, tagging works at Internet scale. Tagging lets users represent their
own perspectives, which aids retrieval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, tagging is
a young technology, with significant challenges and unmet potential. Individual
tags are often of poor quality, and many tagging systems are globally
incoherent. Empirical evaluations of tagging systems in use are few, and formal
comparisons to traditional approaches have not been done. Tagging applications
have been limited mainly to search. This project addresses these challenges. It
will develop a firmer scientific understanding of the strengths and weaknesses
of tagging as a categorization method. It will explore the potential of tagging
to enable powerful applications beyond information retrieval. The project
consists of three main research activities: (1) Creating a set of metrics to
quantify the value of a categorization structure; using these metrics in formal
and empirical comparisons of tagging systems to traditional categorizations; (2)
Designing mixed-initiative interaction techniques for computational agents and
people to detect, evaluate and resolve problems in tagging systems; (3)
Developing novel tag-based applications for users to express their preferences
and navigate complex information spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
create both information-theoretic and usage-based metrics to measure the value
of a categorization structure. Studies will be done to show relations between
the two types of metric, letting designers predict, for example, how many tags
per item are required for effective user search. Systematic cost-benefit
comparisons of tagging systems to traditional expert categorizations will be
done, thus providing empirical data to a debate that has been characterized by
heated conjecture. The utility and generality of a set of mixed-initiative
interaction techniques and novel applications will be established by (a)
implementing them in multiple platforms, and (b) evaluating them in careful
field experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving the effectiveness of tagging
will help millions of users find the information, products, and services they
seek. More directly, the techniques of this project will be implemented in four
working online communities, for movie viewers, cyclists, ethics researchers, and
politically interested citizens. Collectively these sites have tens of thousands
of users, all of whom will benefit directly. Many students will be trained,
learning multiple research methods and gaining valuable experience with real
online communities. Finally, the software will be developed under an open source
license and datasets will be published, thus facilitating other researchers and
web site developers in their work.