* 0964037
* AF:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Solutions to Planar Optimization Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Philip Klein, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 06/30/2015
* USD 636,988.00

The aim of this research is to develop new algorithms and algorithmic techniques
for solving fundamental optimization problems on planar networks. Many
optimization problems in networks are considered computationally difficult; some
are even difficult to solve approximately. However, problems often become easier
when the input network is restricted to be planar, i.e. when it can be drawn on
the plane so that no edges cross each other. Such planar instances of
optimization problems arise in several application areas, including logistics
and route planning in road maps, image processing and computer vision, and VLSI
chip design.

The investigators plan to develop algorithms that achieve faster running times
or better approximations by exploiting the planarity of the input networks. In
addition, in order to address the use of optimization in the discovery of some
ground truth, the investigators will develop algorithms not just for the
traditional worst-case input model but also for models in which there is an
unusually good planted solution; for a model of this kind, the investigators
expect to find algorithms that produce even more accurate answers.

The research will likely uncover new computational techniques whose
applicability goes beyond planar networks. In the recent past, once a technique
has been developed and understood in the context of planar networks, it has been
generalized to apply to broader families of networks.

In addition, new algorithms and techniques resulting from this research might
enable people to quickly compute better solutions to problems arising in diverse
application areas. For example, research in this area has already had an impact
in the computer vision community. Further research has the potential to be
useful, for example, in the design of networks, the planning of routes in road
maps, the processing of images.