* 0964396
* Satellite Remote Sensing Study of Dayside Magnetospheric Ultralow-Frequency Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Kan Liou, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 09/30/2015
* USD 375,500.00

The objective of this project is to use global far-ultraviolet (FUV) images
Earth's auroral regions and polar caps to address several questions concerning
the occurrence of ultra-low frequency (ULF) waves in the Pc5 frequency range (2
- 7 mHz). Compared to the traditional ground-based Pc5-detecting techniques such
as magnetometers and HF radars, the global auroral images have much better
spatial coverage and/or resolution, and are not subject to the ionospheric
screening effect of the higher-m ULF waves in terms of magnetic disturbances.
The first question to be considered is how often quasi-periodic pressure
variations in the solar wind excite Pc5 waves. A related question is whether or
not Pc5 ULF waves occur preferentially for high solar wind speed. The project
will also address the question of the relative significance of solar wind
pressure pulses versus magnetic flux transfer events in generating Pc5
pulsations. These questions will be addressed by analyzing auroral images
acquired by Polar UVI, along with other in situ magnetic field measurements from
spacecraft (Polar, Geotail, Interball-1, Cluster, and THEMIS), using a spectral
analysis technique known as the S-Transform. The S-Transform makes it possible
to extract the global Pc5 ULF wave features. The project will determine if the
magnetosphere responds to quasi-periodic solar wind pressure variations as a
breathing mode or as a cavity/waveguide mode by determining whether or not the
ULF waves are directly driven and propagate antisunward. It will distinguish
between Kelvin-Helmholtz driven and pressure pulse driven events by determining
whether they are associated with solar wind features or tend to occur during
high speed streams, it will distinguish between Pc5 events associated with
magnetic flux transfer events and pressure pulse driven events by checking if
the wave motion depends on the magnetosheath flow speed and IMF orientation

Ultralow-Frequency (ULF) waves in the magnetosphere and ionosphere have been
studied in a wide variety of contexts for a very long time. They constitute an
important diagnosis of the ways the magnetosphere responds to external
disturbances. A great volume of literature has resulted from such studies. Yet,
the region of applicability of the current theoretical models are still
uncertain. This is in large measure due to the lack of knowledge on the global
characteristics of Pc5 ULF waves. This knowledge is hard to obtain using
traditional techniques. Waves in the Pc5 frequency range have important effects
in the energization of electrons in Earth's radiation belts. Applications of a
new, advanced spectral analysis tool (the S-transform) in 2-D auroral images can
be readily generalized to the study of ULF waves of higher frequencies and their
cross-scale coupling