* 0964324
* HCC: Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Low Cost, Portable, Multi-User, Immersive Virtual Environment Systems for Education and Training in Worlds of Unlimited Size
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2015
* David Waller, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2015
* USD 659,010.00

In recent years immersive real-time interactive 3D computer environments
(virtual reality or VR) have become an invaluable tool for research and
development, training, healthcare, commerce, communication, and education, as
well as a medium for entertainment. Yet, in general, the use of current VR
systems requires travel to specialized facilities in which a sophisticated
infrastructure has been pre-installed at great expense. Furthermore, although
fully immersive systems that allow teams of users to concurrently explore a
simulated environment by walking, turning, and looking around in a natural
manner are particularly useful because they provide increased realism through
multisensory stimulation, current VR facilities often support only one user at a
time who is constrained to explore the virtual world by means of an artificial
interface or a movement metaphor that is arbitrary and awkward (e.g., treadmills
or walking in place). For most people, the benefits of VR are thus relatively
inaccessible and fall quite short of their promise. In this collaborative effort
between Miami University and the Naval Postgraduate School, the PIs will conduct
research whose goal is to develop an innovative immersive VR system that is
completely portable, that will allow multiple users to be immersed
simultaneously, and that can be used in any large indoor or outdoor area such as
a gymnasium or parking lot. Users will be able to walk naturally for miles in a
virtual world without ever becoming aware of the physical limits of the tracking
space or the locations of other users. A system capable of immersing a single
user will cost an order of magnitude less than current systems. To these ends
the PIs will exploit two emerging techniques: redirected walking, an algorithm
that imperceptibly steers users away from obstacles such as walls and which the
PIs have previously shown can, given a physical area of sufficient size, enable
users to navigate through a virtual world of unlimited size in a natural manner
without encountering real-world boundaries and obstacles; and self contained
inertial position tracking, which prior research has shown can be used to
accurately monitor and track the position and orientation of the user's
viewpoint in space without the need for pre-installed permanent infrastructure.
In addition, the PIs will integrate into the new VR technology ultrasonic
mapping and positioning, a technique commonly used in robotics to provide
estimates of absolute position.

Broader Impacts: By creating VR systems that are portable and relatively
inexpensive, this research will take significant steps toward making VR
technology available to a much broader range of people than has heretofore been
possible, providing first-hand exposure to cutting-edge concepts and models in
science and technology to any population that educators or researchers chose. In
particular, the work will enable students at any grade level to experience
computer simulations and models by walking within them, instead of by reading
about them or by viewing them as an outside observer. The synthesis of
redirected walking and self-contained inertial position tracking will offer rich
research potential in the computer and behavioral sciences. Implementing
relative position tracking through inertial sensors and periodic position fixes
instantiates a biologically plausible model of navigation and can parallel
research on how humans and other animals find their way through environments.