* 0964888
* Autonomous Particulate Inorganic Carbon Sensor and Carbon Explorer Deployment
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2010,02/28/2017
* James Bishop, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,340,324.00

The PI's request funding to complete the development of Particulate Inorganic
Carbon (PIC) sensors to create an integrated system for autonomous profiling of
a suite of parameters that characterize the ocean's biological pump. The
proposed system will measure PIC, Particulate Organic Carbon (POC) and a measure
of the Carbon Flux Index (CFI) chlorophyll fluorescence, conductivity and
temperature, and likely other parameters. This suite of sensors will
characterize the ocean's biological pump, as well as its sensitivity to changing
environmental conditions. It is being designed for over-the-side CTD packages as
well as autonomous, neutrally buoyant floats and gliders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ocean's biotic carbon pump exports approximately 10 Pg
C/year of particulate organic matter below 100 m. It is fueled by phytoplankton
populations, which turn over completely on week time scales. The bio-carbon pump
is thus fast and very dynamic, but is poorly observed by conventional means. The
changes in its substantial carbon flows brought by effects of CO2 induced global
ocean warming and ocean acidification, are not predictable. Better observations
of key biological pump variables, including concentration variability of
Particulate Inorganic Carbon and Particulate Organic Carbon (PIC and POC) will
enable prediction of the evolving carbon cycle of the ocean. Knowledge of the
PIC dynamics is fundamental to the understanding and prediction of carbon
sedimentation and depth profiles of
remineralization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work are clear in its
fostering of a better understanding of the ocean carbon cycle. This is critical
to track the role of the oceans in the fate of anthropogenic CO2. To be able to
easily and autonomously measure profiles of PIC would provide a wealth of badly
needed data for remarkably little cost, shiptime, and effort. It would also
compliment the work currently being done to image the particles that exist in
the deep sea. The PI instructs a large number of undergraduate and graduate
students and will involve them in the results of these tests. The project
involves an undergraduate assisting in laboratory testing and at sea field
trials.