* 0964597
* III:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Linguistically Based ASL Sign Recognition as a Structured Multivariate Learning Problem
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Dimitris Metaxas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 739,000.00

The manifestation of language in space poses special challenges for computer-
based recognition. Prior approaches to sign recognition have not leveraged
knowledge of linguistic structures and constraints, in part because of
limitations in the computational models employed. In addition, they have focused
on the recognition of limited classes of signs. No system exists that can
recognize signs of all morphophonological types or that can even discriminate
among these in continuous signing. Through integration of several computational
approaches, informed by knowledge of linguistic properties of manual signs, and
supported by a large existing linguistically annotated corpus, the team will
develop a robust, comprehensive framework for sign recognition from video
streams of natural, continuous signing. Fundamental differences in the
linguistic structure of signs, distinguishing signed languages in 4D, with
spatio-temporal dependencies and multiple production channels from spoken
languages, are critical to computer-based recognition. This is because finger-
spelled items, lexical signs, and classifier constructions, e.g., require
different recognition strategies. Linguistic properties will be leveraged here
for (i) segmentation and categorization of significantly different types of
signs, and then, although this subsequent enterprise will necessarily be limited
in scope within the project period, (ii) recognition of the segmented sign
sequences. Through the 3D hand pose estimation from a team-developed tracker, w
significant tracking accuracy, robustness, and computational efficiency will be
attained. This 3D information is expected to greatly improve the recognition
results, as compared with recognition schemes using only 2D information. The 3D
estimated information from the tracking will be used in the proposed
hierarchical Conditional Random Field (CRF) based recognition, to allow for
tracking and recognition of signs that are distinct in their linguistic
composition. Since other signed languages also rely on a very similar sign
typology, this technology will be readily extensible to computer-based
recognition of other signed languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This linguistically-
based hierarchical framework for ASL sign recognition?based on techniques with
direct applicability to other signed languages, as well?provides, for the first
time, a way to model and analyze the discrete and continuous aspects of signing,
also enabling appropriate recognition strategies to be applied to signs with
linguistically different composition. This approach will also allow the future
integration of the discrete and continuous aspects of facial gestures with
manual signing, to further improve computer-based modeling and analysis of ASL.
The lack of such a framework has held back sign language recognition and
generation. Advances in this area will, in turn, have far-ranging benefits for
Universal Access and improved communication with the Deaf. Further applications
of this technology include automated recognition and analysis by computer of
non-verbal communication in general, security applications, human-computer
interfaces, and virtual and augmented reality. In fact, these techniques have
potential utility for any human-centered applications with continuous and
discrete aspects. The proposed approach will offer ways to address similar
problems in other domains characterized by multidimensional and complex spatio-
temporal data that require the incorporation of domain knowledge. The products
of this research, including software, videos, and annotations, will be made
publicly available for use in research and education.