* 0964955
* Characterization of defect energy levels due to As, Co, and Ni impurities in pyrite: A step toward understanding charge transfer kinetics at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Kaye Savage, Wofford College
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2010
* USD 54,842.00

SAVAGE, Kaye&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0617396&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the molecular scale
mechanisms of pyrite oxidation is fundamental to a variety of fields including
environmental geochemistry, materials science, and mineral processing. In a new
electrochemical study using synthetically grown single pyrite crystals doped
with As, Co, and Ni, we show that bulk electronic structure, as influenced by
these electroactive impurities, influences the rate of oxidation. We observe, in
order of highest to lowest oxidation rate: pyrite with As, Co, Ni and negligible
impurities. This suggests that electroactive impurities fundamentally affect the
rate of pyrite oxidation, raising the questions: How are differences in observed
oxidation rates related to charge transfer resistance, carrier concentration and
type, and concentration of surface states? What is the effect of different
impurities on the concentration and reactivity of surface states? &lt;br/&gt;The
principle hypotheses to explain the observed behavior are:&lt;br/&gt;. Bulk
defect states in the band gap arising from impurities become reactive surface
states at the electrode-solution interface and act as a conduit for charge
transfer&lt;br/&gt;. P-type As-doped pyrite oxidizes faster because holes
reaching the surface from the valence band accept electrons from Fe2+ and S2 2-
surface states, resulting in broken bonds.&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives
are:&lt;br/&gt;. to characterize and measure the energy levels of bulk defect
and interface surface states in undoped pyrite and pyrite doped with As, Co, and
Ni using EPS;&lt;br/&gt;. to characterize the surface atomic environment and
valence state of Fe, As, Co, and Ni;&lt;br/&gt;. to propose charge transfer
mechanisms explaining the observed oxidation rates&lt;br/&gt;We propose a set of
experiments using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), electrochemical
photocapacitance spectroscopy (EPS) and AC voltammetry aimed at characterizing
the kinetic behavior and surface electronic structure of doped and undoped
synthetic pyrite. Parallel X-ray absorption spectroscopy experiments, including
grazing-incidence XAS, will provide information on the local atomic environment
and electronic structure of the impurities in the bulk and at the
surface.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Our collection of well-
characterized synthetic doped and undoped pyrite puts us in a unique position to
further explore the kinetics and mechanisms of pyrite oxidation. EPS will reveal
the energy levels within the bandgap and the nature (donor or acceptor) of
active defect states at the pyrite surface. The characterization of surface
states in pyrite with different impurities (As-doped: p-type, Co and Nidoped:
n-type with shallow and deep donor levels respectively) and its relation to
oxidation rates will suggest electron transfer pathways. AC voltammetry will
measure charge transfer kinetics, and suggest whether Fermi level pinning is
controlling the surface electrochemical behavior. EIS will suggest equivalent
circuit models for the charge transfer mechanism and provide additional
information about charge transfer kinetics. Relating the energy of the bulk
defect and surface states to the acceptor and donor levels of the redox couple
in solution will allow us to propose specific charge transfer mechanisms related
to the presence of As, Co, and Ni impurities.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Pyrite oxidation in mine tailings and waste rock piles leads
to acid drainage posing serious environmental risk. The results of this study
will lead to more accurate reaction models and improved ecological risk analysis
of mining and proposed mining sites. Understanding pyrite oxidation is critical
for the mineral processing industry particularly in the use of flotation methods
for ore enrichment. Additionally, materials scientists interested in pyrite for
photovoltaic and liquid junction solar applications, and electrochemical storage
devices will benefit from this knowledge. This study will continue to foster
collaboration between the departments of Earth &amp; Environmental Sciences and
Chemistry at Vanderbilt University, and support a new researcher as he completes
his doctoral dissertation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;