* 0964526
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Data Mining and Cleaning for Medical Data Warehouses
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Christopher Jermaine, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

A clinical data warehouse (CDW) is a repository that aggregates medical patient
data from many different sources: billing records, electronic medical records
including structured data (e.g., codes for diagnoses, procedures, vital signs,
etc.), semi-structured reports and free-text dictations. A key benefit of
maintaining a CDW lies in its ability to provide the raw data that are needed
for large-scale study of real-world health care -- for example, finding a
previously unknown association between a pain killer (e.g., Vioxx) and heart
disease. Unfortunately, CDWs are riddled with systematic errors that make it
difficult to answer even the simplest questions (such as "What fraction of
female outpatients have breast cancer?") with any accuracy.

This project focuses on statistical models and learning algorithms for
quantifying and correcting errors in CDW records. For example, the project is
developing semi-supervised learning methods that use the structured data present
in electronic medical records (patient age, weight, medications, billing codes,
etc.) in order to quantify the likelihood of error that is associated with the
diagnosis codes present in the record (for example, being able to state "There
is a 0.2 probability that the correct code was migraine instead of the listed
headache"). The project will also develop methods that attempt to control for
confounding variables present in the records, in order to remove systematic
biases from the data.

These models and learning algorithms will allow CDW users to manage and monitor
the uncertainty and error in the data. This in turn will allow fundamentally new
types of analysis to be undertaken, which will result in the discovery of
actionable medical knowledge that saves both lives and money. To make the models
and algorithms accessible to medical professionals who may lack computational or
statistical background, they will be added to an open-source release of the
widely-used I2B2 CDW software.

The project is a collaboration between the Computer Science Department at Rice
University and the School of Biomedical informatics at the University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston. All project results will be made available
online (http://www.cs.rice.edu/~cmj4/CDW.htm).