* 0964776
* Consolidation of Visual Perceptual Learning During Sleep
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Yuka Sasaki, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 02/28/2013
* USD 478,118.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of evidence suggests that sleep plays an
important role in strengthening what is learned before sleep and making the
learning persist for a long time. This is called consolidation. Although
consolidation in sleep is a key function in learning, the detailed mechanism is
not clear. In this project, Dr. Yuka Sasaki of the Massachusetts General
Hospital aims to clarify consolidation in sleep by combining cutting-edge brain
imaging technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
electroencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG), and functional MRI
(fMRI). Particularly, the focus of the project is on examining the mechanism for
sleep consolidation of learning of a visual task (perceptual learning) that is
known to be associated with changes in a highly localized region in the visual
cerebral cortex. Researchers are measuring spatio-temporal activation changes in
the localized region during the initial period of sleep (non-REM sleep) after
training on the visual task. Brain activity with high spatial resolution is
obtained using MRI along with high temporal resolution brain signals obtained
with EEG and MEG. By combining these signals with both temporally and spatially
high resolution, the detailed mechanisms of sleep consolidation are being
clarified. How such brain activity changes during sleep is related to
improvement in performance on the visual task (the amount of perceptual
learning) is being examined. The results from this project will contribute to a
deeper understanding of the mechanism of sleep consolidation of perceptual
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides rare opportunities of
training and educating undergraduate and graduate students. Students learn
cutting-edge neuroimaging techniques, such as the use of multimodal combinations
of EEG/MEG/MRI, as well as functional MRI technique applied to retinotopic
mapping. They also learn the theoretical backgrounds of the techniques. In
addition, students learn how to analyze behavioral data through psychophysical
experiments. Moreover, understanding of the consolidation process of memory and
learning during sleep can help to improve education, by informing us how what is
learned can be more efficiently and firmly memorized. In addition, therapeutic
methods can be developed to eliminate or weaken bad and undesirable memory and
learned habits, including traumatic memories, smoking, and obsessive behaviors.