* 0964909
* The Performance Effects of Administrative Innovations--IT Organizational Design Changes in US State Governments
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* M. Lynne Markus, Bentley University
* Continuing Grant
* mo wang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 376,471.00

Organizations, whether private or public, devote enormous resources to
developing, adopting, learning about, and communicating the changes they make in
organizational structures and management processes, but many observers argue
that changes often fail to produce the intended results. Consequently, careful
analysis of the results of major organizational innovations has considerable
potential to inform and guide future decisions about their
adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines whether and how innovations
in management practices improve the functioning of complex organizations.
Focusing on information technology (IT) management innovations in state
governments, this study employs surveys and interviews in all 50 states to
examine combinations of innovative IT management practices, the sequence and
timing of practice adoption, and effects on state government performance. In-
depth case studies will complement the population study to reveal the processes
by which innovative practices can lead to performance improvements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The need for better IT management is especially clear in
government organizations, which continually struggle with the need to "do more
with less." This set of studies will help answer the question: under what
conditions do innovative practices pay off in terms of better state government
performance? The project emphasizes IT governance, IT architecture design, and
IT procurement, because these practice areas are believed by experts to be most
critical for improving the success of government IT projects. However, the
findings will contribute to knowledge about innovation in management practices
in general, not just to state governments. Study results will be disseminated
both to academic researchers and to practitioners.