* 0964260
* EAGER: Understand the concentration dynamics of fecal-specific chemical and bacterial markers in a tropical residential sewershed
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Tao Yan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2011
* USD 72,980.00

0964260 Yan

Aging sanitary sewer systems in the U.S. are undermining municipalities ability
to safeguard public health. To fix the problem will require enormous sewer
rehabilitation efforts in coming years. Efficient implementation of such efforts
requires a thorough assessment of sewer deterioration status, so that proactive
rehabilitation can be achieved by directing resources toward the most vulnerable
sections of sewer systems. Current sewer inspection technologies, however, are
not suitable for such a task. The proposed exploratory research will test the
novel concept of using sewage markers to rapidly and reliably rank sewer
deterioration severities among different sewer sections. The hypothesis is that
pollutographs based on quantitative PCR of certain fecal specific markers
exhibit stable and signature diurnal influx patterns under dry weather
conditions, and that their fluctuations under wet-weather conditions are
quantitatively related to sewer deterioration severities. The objective of this
project is to obtain preliminary data testing this hypothesis. If this
hypothesis is proven out, there will be potential to transform the handling of
the rehabilitation of sewer systems. Both graduate and undergraduate students
will be involved in the project. Additionally, a working relationship will be
enhanced with underrepresented student communities via the university's native
Hawaiian Science and Engineering Mentoring program.



