* 0964238
* Collaborative Research: Colorado Airborne Multi-Phase Cloud Study (CAMPS)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Linnea Avallone, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2014
* USD 486,420.00

This project will focus on in situ and remote sensing measurements of wintertime
clouds over the Park Range of the Rocky Mountains in northern Colorado. These
clouds are generally mixed-phase; the combination of ice, liquid and water vapor
presents challenges both to measurements and modeling, and consequently, to
understanding their impact on atmospheric radiation and on precipitation. The
Colorado Airborne Multi-Phase Cloud Study (CAMPS) will use the Wyoming King Air
research aircraft instrumented with both remote (cloud radar and cloud lidar)
and in situ sensors (cloud and particle probes, total water hygrometer) to
elucidate the vertical and horizontal structure of cold mixed-phase clouds.

Intellectual Merit:

The data gathered during CAMPS will include information about macro- and
microphysical parameters of mixed-phase clouds obtained by both in situ and
remote-sensing methods. These data will be analyzed to address a number of
important questions about the structure, properties and impacts of mixed-phase
clouds. Specific goals include:

1. To assess the vertical and horizontal structure and spatial and temporal
variation of cloud properties (particle size distribution, ice and liquid water
content, particle habit) in liquid, mixed-phase and precipitating clouds at a
mid-latitude continental site with complex terrain during winter.

2. To assess the impact of topography and associated variations in vertical
forcing on cloud generation and cloud properties.

3. To develop a data set that provides the information necessary for improving
the representation of mixed-phase clouds in cloud-resolving and climate models.

4. To provide correlative data for validation of the Department of Energy (DOE)
Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) program mobile facility and the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration A-Train satellite-borne remote sensors.

5. To provide observational confirmation of the redistribution of snowfall
associated with riming inhibition due to enhanced CCN.

Broader Impacts:

Ultimately, by enhancing the community's understanding of cloud-scale processes,
the data from CAMPS will be the basis for improvements in the representation of
clouds in global climate models. This will lead to more accurate calculations of
current and future climate. In addition the CAMPS project will contribute to
both formal and informal education at a number of levels. At least one graduate
student from each of the participating universities will be involved with the
field work and/or data analysis related to this project. The investigators will
include undergraduates from their institutions in flight-planning and/or
meteorology exercises related to CAMPS when possible. Formal educational
opportunities for elementary school students will be coordinated by the Storm
Peak Laboratory staff, including visits to the laboratory and aircraft and
classroom exercises. Outreach activities will include signage at the Steamboat
Springs Ski Resort, an interactive display at the gondola building and
coordination with the 2011 Steamboat Weather Summit.