* 0964575
* TC:Medium:  The impact of operating systems on application robustness
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2010,12/31/2014
* Jon Solworth, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,167,381.00

It is widely estimated that one in four computers is part of a botnet, and
therefore under the control of an attacker. These computers are used to loot
bank accounts, send spam, and perform DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service)
attacks. The attacker almost always gains control of these computers by remotely
attacking applications or the operating system on which these applications
depend. The robustness---the ability to withstand attack---of the operating
system has long been known as essential to produce secure systems. But even the
most robust operating system cannot prevent applications from being exploited,
and therefore has a limited effect on application
robustness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the effect of the
operating system on application robustness, and in particular the effect that
the operating-system interface (the architecture and details of its system
calls) has on the ability to write more robust applications. In particular, this
project seeks to eliminate pitfalls in system calls; these pitfalls lead to
security holes and make application development much more difficult. Eliminating
pitfalls (and thus the resulting security holes) makes it more difficult to
successfully attack applications. To evaluate the extent to which pitfalls can
be eliminated, this project is building a operating system called Ethos. The
Ethos interface will be analyzed and evaluated on its own and versus those in
traditional operating systems.