* 0965721
* An Investigation of a Bifurcating Pathway to Tropical Cyclogenesis
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Melville Nicholls, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 325,807.00

Tropical cyclone formation is still a largely unsolved scientific problem.
Numerical modeling studies have recently examined how a weak incipient mid-
tropospheric cyclonic vortex (MCV) transforms into a tropical cyclone. These
studies show tropical cyclone development along distinctly different pathways.
Consequently, two competing theories have emerged: respectively referred to as
processes of "bottom-up," during which an MCV is developed following an initial
spinning up of surface winds; and "top-down," during which surface winds are
strengthened after a formation of a strong MCV. In this project we will
investigate whether these apparently conflicting simulation results are due to
the model initial condition is near a bifurcation point. If this is the case,
then relatively small changes to the initial conditions, or model physics, could
alter the pathway for tropical cyclogenesis.

Simulations will be conducted with the Weather Research and Forecasting model
(WRF; developed at National Center for Atmospheric Research) and Regional
Atmospheric Modeling System (RAMS; developed at Colorado State University) to
examine which pathway is taken for a wide variety of environmental conditions.
In particular, the hypothesis will be explored that the cause of the apparent
bifurcation is related to the quantity of ice produced in deep convective
towers. The role of sea surface temperature in cloud ice production and the
pathway taken to cyclogenesis will be investigated. The sensitivity to
microphysics, radiation, and vertical wind shear will also be analyzed.

Intellectual merit. This research will explore the possibility that there exist
bifurcating pathways to tropical cyclogenesis, as suggested by recent numerical
modeling studies. It will evaluate the physical causes for the existence of a
bifurcation point and examine the sensitivity of the pathways to environmental
conditions. A unique aspect of this study will be a comparison between two
different modeling systems (WRF and RAMS) that will allow a better assessment of
the veracity of the results and the possible existence of a bifurcation point.
If the results of this study provide evidence for the existence of bifurcating
pathways, it will provide a new perspective of tropical cyclogenesis.

Broader impacts. Knowledge of the existence of a bifurcating pathway to tropical
cyclogenesis would be beneficial to weather forecasting. One of the pathways
appears to often form very small, rapidly intensifying tropical cyclones, which
are currently particularly difficult for tropical forecasters to predict. This
study would elucidate the environmental conditions favoring tropical cyclone
development and also provide details of their morphology and observable features
that would be useful for predicting their development. This study would also be
of interest to researchers who study the effect of changing climatic conditions,
such as sea surface temperature and vertical wind shear, on tropical cyclone
activity. The sensitivity tests to the microphysical and radiation schemes could
help lead to improved numerical prediction of tropical cyclones. The use of a
double-moment microphysical scheme may provide improved capability for remote
sensing comparisons, such as multiparameter radar. Additionally, the
identification of a bifurcation point would be of interest to researchers in
other fields who study bifurcating systems. The results of this work will be
actively disseminated through participation at conferences and in peer-reviewed
journals. Furthermore, the project will directly contribute towards the
education of a graduate student.