* 0965674
* International Research Fellowship Program: Evolution of Nickel Hyper-accumulation in the Plant genus Stackhousia
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Dylan Burge, Burge                   Dylan          O
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/2013
* USD 177,671.00

0965674 Burge

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Dylan
Burge to work with Dr. Balwant Singh at the University of Sydney in Australia,
with Dr. Maurizio Rossetto at the Royal Botanic Gardens in Sydney, with Dr. Bill
Barker at the State Herbarium of South Australia and with Dr. Loren Rieseberg at
Indiana University in the US.

Beginning with the origin of life itself, evolution has been characterized by
adaptation to extreme environments. To gain understanding of organismal
diversity and anticipate the response of living things to predicted
perturbations in the global environment such as global warming, it is important
to study extremes of adaptation. More than 320 species of flowering plants
accumulate the element nickel in their tissues to levels exceeding 0.1%,
concentrations that would be toxic to most organisms. This phenomenon, known as
nickel hyper-accumulation, represents a unique adaptation to soils that are rich
in nickel. Nickel hyper-accumulation is thought to have evolved independently in
several plant lineages. Recent research has focused on ecology, genetics, and
physiology of nickel hyper-accumulation, work that is motivated in part by the
potential use of these plants for detoxification of nickel contaminated soils.
In spite of this great interest, little is known about evolution of nickel
hyper-accumulation in specific plant groups, hindering research on the evolution
of this intriguing and extreme plant adaptation. This project will combine
methods from soil science, ecology, population genetics, and genomics in a
synergistic approach designed to elucidate how nickel hyper-accumulation has
evolved in the Australian plant genus Stackhousia. The research will also
develop Stackhousia as a model system for research on the evolution and genetics
of Ni hyper-accumulation. Furthermore, the approach developed here will be
applicable to other plant groups containing Ni hyper-accumulating species,
leading to greater insight into the evolution of this intriguing trait, which
appears to have developed independently at least 15 times during the
diversification of flowering plants.