* 0965911
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: US-BRAZIL IRES / Development and Applications of Microfluidic Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Frank Gomez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 05/31/2015
* USD 53,355.00

Microfluidic devices offer great versatility, high throughput, low analysis
time, low cost, and, more importantly, performance that is comparable to
standard bench-top instrumentation. Microfluidics is also an excellent platform
to introduce students to microfabrication and nanotechnology, bridging chemistry
with other fields such as engineering and biology. To spark interest in this
emerging technology and to increase the science participation of students from
underrepresented minorities, this International Research Experiences for
Students (IRES) award will enable four U.S. undergraduate students per year to
engage in research on microfluidics devices in São Paulo, Brazil. Participants
in the IRES program will work mainly on the design and characterization of novel
methods for the quantification of phenolic compounds. These compounds have been
associated with a variety of health issues ranging from headaches to cancer, and
are one of the research priorities of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student researchers will be mentored by Dr. Emanuel
Carrilho of the University of São Paulo, São Carlos, Brazil, and will spend
eight weeks in the host researcher?s lab. Research projects will be complemented
by the students? interaction with on-campus research groups and departmental
activities, as well as a teaching module that includes ethics, safety and
presentation skills. A focus on minority recruiting, combined with the
involvement of graduate students as mentors, will promote the engagement of
underrepresented minorities in this international research opportunity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Office of International
Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Division of Chemistry (CHE).