* 0965432
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Science of Science and Innovation Policy: From Cycles to Spirals: Structural Analysis of Scientific Consensus Formation
* SBE,SBE
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2011
* Peter Bearman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 03/31/2011
* USD 3,200.00

The project develops a new strategy to explain and measure scientific consensus
formation. It develops a quantitative measure of scientific consensus, based on
an analysis of the structure of scientific citation networks. The measure is
validated by exploiting changing consensus levels across time regarding several
scientific propositions, such as "smoking causes cancer", "Human activity causes
a climate change", etc. The analysis reveals a surprising dynamic of consensus
formation in one case - the carcinogenicity of smoking - during the 1970s
(before scientific consensus on the issue was consider a fact). The work is
validated by qualitative, in depth interviews with the scientists who produced
these high contestation levels through their work on developing a safer
cigarette.

Intellectual Merit: The project advances the literature in three ways. First,
the research develops a model for the process of consensus formation in science.
Second, the project develops a new metric that measures consensus/contestation
degree in scientific literatures. Finally, the research develops a new approach
to account for temporality in scientific debates.

This project contributes to the history of science by explaining why claims such
as "Coffee (does not) cause cancer" are accepted with no contestation, while the
climate change claim met social contestation coupled with minor scientific
contestation, and the carcinogenicity of smoking met social contestation coupled
with surprising scientific contestation.

Broader impact: This project offers a new property for comparative research into
science policy, supplying a measure of scientific consensus levels that may be
utilized over multiple dimensions, including time, space and social
organization. The project offers a way of informing the public and policy makers
on important scientific issues; currently, scientific claims are often discarded
as "premature" or "inconclusive", while the experts promoting them may be
considered to be promoting a political agenda. The proposed approach overrides
such claims by evaluating consensus without expert interpretation, relying
solely on the structure of scientific literature.