* 0965353
* BREAD:   Engineering Novel Resistance against Fungal and Oomycete Pathogens in Developing Country Crop Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Mark Guiltinan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,450,975.00

PI: Brett Tyler (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Shunyuan Xiao (University of Maryland
Biotechnology Institute) and Mark Guiltinan (Pennsylvania State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: Brian Bailey (USDA-ARS
Sustainable Perennial Crops Lab, Beltsville,
Maryland)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small-holder agriculture in developing countries
is exceptionally susceptible to fungal and oomycete disease due to lack of local
breeding programs, tropical climate, abundant insect vectors, cost of and poor
access to fungicides, and lack of farmer education. Small-holder farmers in
Africa and South America are responsible for more than 95% of cacao production,
providing economic benefits to millions of cacao farmers and their dependents,
as well as important ecological benefits such as rain-forest preservation.
Fungal and oomycete diseases have devastated cacao production in South America
and West Africa, dislocating populations of farmers and resulting in destruction
of the rain-forest sheltering the cacao trees in favor of large-scale open
farmland. This project will test two novel approaches to protecting developing
country crops against a broad-spectrum of oomycete and fungal pathogens, using
cacao as the initial target. The first involves targeting anti-microbial
proteins to pathogen feeding structures called haustoria, using RPW8, an
Arabidopsis protein that has a natural affinity for these feeding sites. The
second approach involves blocking the entry of virulence proteins (effector
proteins) that pathogens secrete into host cells to suppress the plant host's
immune system. The most effective strategies will be identified first using fast
growing Arabidopsis and tomato plants before being tested in
cacao.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The novel technologies that will be
tested in this project are potentially applicable to an extremely broad array of
crop diseases important to the developing world. The most destructive diseases
of broad acreage staples such as rice and wheat are potentially amenable to this
approach, as are many of the most limiting fungal and oomycete diseases of crops
of importance to smallholders, such as yams, cassava, groundnuts, pearl millet,
finger millet, sorghum, maize, potato, bean and cowpea. The project includes
visits from scientists from developing countries, a colloquium in Ecuador, and
regular communication with scientists from cacao-producing countries. Project
outcomes as well as access to biological resources that include DNA constructs
and germplasm will be disseminated through a project website (accessible via
https://www.vbi.vt.edu/faculty/research_groups/brett_tyler) and through
publications.