* 0965259
* Predictive Modeling of the Emergence and Development of Scientific Fields
* SBE,SBE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* David Kaiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 563,284.00

The explosion of scientific publishing in recent decades has created an
embarrassment of riches. More information is available about more subjects in
ways that are more accessible than ever before. Searches on PubMed or Web of
Science routinely return thousands of hits. The easy accessibility of gigantic
numbers of publications creates substantial problems for researchers and
granting agencies alike: scientists cannot possibly read everything published in
their own fields, and policymakers have few clear&lt;br/&gt;bases upon which to
form judgments of quality. How can reasonable decisions be made about which
fields are likely to blossom into transformative research, if the problem of
separating wheat from chaff grows exponentially with each passing year? Given
the ever-increasing outpouring, it is more important than ever to develop some
quantitative means of describing -- and, in turn, predicting -- the growth and
development of scientific research. What factors might explain the changes over
time of numbers of publications on a given topic, or numbers of researchers
working in a given field? What interactions between researchers might account
for a scientific community's growth and change? And how might various
interventions -- policy initiatives, market forces, or other factors -- alter
the dynamics of how scientific fields emerge and
develop?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research develops new
measures to model and predict processes of scientific research and innovation.
The measures are based on mathematical models that capture various aspects of
the research enterprise. These tools are sharpened with application to a suite
of examples from the physical and biomedical sciences. These examples permit the
investigation of different modes of supporting and steering the course of
scientific research in six key areas: the growth and development of research
publications on string theory, molecular electronics, and nanotechnology from
the physical sciences; and research publications on H1N1 influenza, coronary
angioplasty, and interventional cardiology from the biomedical sciences. These
cases traverse a wide range of scales, from research topics within well-defined
subfields to large, discipline-spanning endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The dissemination of the results includes scientific publications,
workshops with expert researchers, an informal bi-weekly seminar series for
scholars across a wide range of disciplines - from history and sociology of
science, to business and economics, to library science and computer science. In
addition, new courses are offered at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
Finally, the structure, materials, and resources for these courses are freely
disseminated via the internet via MIT's OpenCourseWare initiative.