* 0965418
* BREAD:  Molecular and Genomic Strategies to Engineer Durable and Sustainable Disease Resistance to Bacterial Blight of Cassava
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Brian Staskawicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,309,463.00

PI: Brian Staskawicz (University of California Berkeley)

Co-PIs: Wilhelm Gruissem (ETH Zurich, Switzerland), Adriana Bernal (Universidad
de Los Andes, Colombia)

Cassava bacterial blight, incited by Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. manihotis (Xam)
is a serious threat to cassava plants in several developing countries in both
Africa and South America. This project will first focus on the genome
characterization of Xam to sequence, annotate, and characterize the
constellation of bacterial effector (virulence) proteins that are present in
naturally occurring field isolates of this important bacterial pathogen. The
ability to rapidly and inexpensively determine the genome sequence of natural
field isolates of Xam will provide novel insights into the evolution of pathogen
virulence and the allelic diversity of effector genes that occur in natural
populations. The genome assemblies of Xam will be employed to identify new
sources of disease resistance in wild populations of cassava plants. Previous
work has demonstrated that the PthB effector is present in all strains of the
pathogen and is essential for the pathogen to cause disease. Work in this
project will engineer cassava plants to recognize the PthB protein to provide
effective and durable disease resistance. Results from the project are expected
to provide a durable source of resistance to this very important bacterial
pathogen of cassava. In addition, the knowledge generated in this project will
greatly benefit cassava researchers in both Africa and Latin America.

The project will have a major impact in cassava breeding and will hence benefit
smallholder agriculture in developing countries from Latin America, Africa and
Asia. The collaboration between experts in genomics, plant-microbe interactions
and cassava transformation with scientists who work on this important crop in
developing regions will have synergistic effects in the deployment of new
resistant varieties to this and other diseases. Furthermore, two Colombian
graduate students will be trained under this project. The training of Colombian
scientists in cutting edge technology at the Staskawicz and Gruissem
laboratories will greatly benefit Colombian agricultural science.

Access to project outcomes Genomic sequences of Xam will be made available at
NCBI and at a dedicated project website that will be created for this project to
both facilitate the sharing of results between the groups involved, and the
prompt dissemination of reliable data for the research community. The project
web site, which will be accessible from http://plantbio.berkeley.edu/~stask,
will include a description of bioinformatic algorithms developed for the
assembly and annotation of the genomes, information on the bacterial strains
analyzed, and description of the constructs and cassava plants developed in the
project. All of these resources will be made freely available to the research
community.