* 0965918
* NSF IGERT: Training the Next Generation of Researchers in Cellular &amp; Molecular Mechanics and Bionanotechnology
* EHR,DGE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Michael Sheetz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2016
* USD 3,201,080.00

This goal of this Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT)
award is to create a graduate training program that will produce the next
generation of intellectual leaders in Cellular &amp; Molecular Mechanics and
Bio-Nanotechnology. This program represents a highly coordinated and
interdisciplinary effort to educate Ph.D. students across the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of California at Merced, North Carolina
Central University, and partner institutions to tackle the important problems in
bionanotechnology spanning the molecular-cellular-tissue scale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How living cells transduce mechanical signals to
functionalities at different length scales, from inside cells to their
communication with the extra cellular matrix, presents a scientific grand
challenge of our times. Recent advancements in micro/nanotechnology, molecular
scale imaging, and computational methodologies will catalyze this quantitative
biological revolution at a cellular and molecular scale. Students who have been
trained at the intersection of these domains have the potential to revolutionize
tissue and regenerative engineering, biological energy harvesting, sensing and
actuation, cells-as-a-machine, and synthetic biology, to name a few. Unique
training efforts in this program include a two-track educational program to
educate engineering and biology students to develop depth and breadth in their
area of research, new experimental modules and a summer workshop introducing the
IGERT trainees to state-of-the-art equipment and laboratory procedures, an
exciting iWORLD program with collaborators around the world that will provide
IGERT trainees with international research experiences, and a student leader
council that participates in the leadership and drives the management of the
IGERT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.