* 0965807
* Scholarships to Enhance Recruitment and Retention of Underserved and Underrepresented Students in Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2017
* John David, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 594,744.00

This scholarship program continues a successful partnership between the
University of Missouri-Columbia and high needs inner-city high schools in St.
Louis. The focus is to provide scholarships for a minimum of 18 academically
talented, financially needy students, enabling them to enroll in and complete a
BA or BS degree in Biological Sciences. These Scholars are from populations that
are economically disadvantaged and underrepresented in the sciences. The
Scholars are identified before their senior year in high school, encouraged and
enabled to achieve their best academic performance in their penultimate year of
high school, and then provided direct academic and financial support while they
are at the University. The long-term objective is to prepare the Scholars to
enter highly respected graduate programs in major research institutions in the
life sciences or to immediately enter the life science workforce. Throughout the
Scholar's undergraduate program, the program emphasizes collaborative work,
undergraduate research, the development of quantitative skills, and integrative
approaches to critical problems in the life sciences. With a successful
experience in this program and the strong partnership between the University and
St. Louis high schools, the Scholars also inspire other students in their former
high schools to seek opportunities to pursue undergraduate programs in science
at research universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals for the
scholarship program are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Identify talented financially needy
high school students prior to their senior year and work with them and their
teachers to help prepare the students to succeed in Biology at the University of
Missouri;&lt;br/&gt;2. Provide sufficient scholarship support to meet their full
financial need allowing these Scholars to enroll in the Biological Sciences at
the University, whereas they would not have been able to do so without that
support;&lt;br/&gt;3. Provide academically challenging coursework, personal
interactions with faculty, special mentoring, and undergraduate research
opportunities for the Scholars;&lt;br/&gt;4. Develop new student support
services and career discovery activities for the Scholars;&lt;br/&gt;5. Assure
that the Scholars are retained through the academic 'danger points' in the
undergraduate curriculum and complete a BA or BS degree in Biology;&lt;br/&gt;6.
Motivate and prepare most Scholars for acceptance into and successful completion
of quality Ph.D. programs at major research institutions;&lt;br/&gt;7. Motivate
and prepare those not interested in advanced study for entry into BA/BS-level
research positions in academia or industry or for positions teaching science in
K-12; and&lt;br/&gt;8. Thus increase the number of underserved and
underrepresented students well prepared for creative research and teaching, and
eventual leadership positions, in the life sciences.