* 0965213
* International Research Fellowship Program:  New World Bird Migration:  Fast in the North, Slow in the South?
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2012
* Alex Jahn, Jahn                    Alex           E
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 07/31/2012
* USD 204,746.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support an eighteen-month research fellowship by Dr. Alex Jahn to
work with Dr. Victor R. Cueto at the University of Buenos Aires in Argentina.
Although bird migration has been the subject of substantial scientific study for
decades, there is still surprisingly little known about the mechanisms driving
bird migration at a global scale. A major reason for this is that most research
on bird migration has been conducted in the Northern Hemisphere. How does bird
migration in the Southern Hemisphere compare to migration in the Northern
Hemisphere? Because the ultimate goal of spring migration is to successfully
arrive on the breeding grounds to reproduce, the reproductive strategies of
migrants could influence the strategies they use to get to the breeding grounds.
North temperate breeding birds typically lay more eggs but have lower adult
survival than south temperate breeders. Furthermore, food availability at north
temperate latitudes is generally more predictable between years compared to
south temperate latitudes. As a result, compared to south temperate breeders,
migrants to north temperate breeding grounds should expect a greater
reproductive payoff if they arrive on the breeding grounds in a timely manner.
North temperate breeders should therefore migrate faster and possibly take more
risks on migration than migrants headed to south temperate breeding grounds. The
genus Tyrannus represents an ideal group with which to test this prediction
because several species in this genus migrate to North American breeding
grounds, while others migrate to South American breeding grounds. On each
continent, these species are outfitted with geolocators, which allow researchers
to track their movements throughout the year, permitting an evaluation of
migration speed and migration routes. Their reproductive success is also studied
on both continents to compare their reproductive strategies to their migratory
strategies. This project not only offers a more complete picture of the
mechanisms driving New World bird migration, it also opens new avenues to
research on such pressing questions as: How does climate change affect birds in
the Northern vs. Southern hemispheres? What time of year represents the major
bottleneck to survival for migratory birds in each hemisphere? And, could
adaptations for migration (e.g., navigation by stars, physiological endurance,
cues to time migration) be different for species in each hemisphere?