* 0965816
* Engineering the Husky Promise
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Edward Lazowska, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 08/31/2014
* USD 600,000.00

Through the S-STEM project "Engineering the Husky Promise," the University of
Washington (UW) establishes a scholarship program for talented low-income
undergraduates in UW's College of Engineering, thereby supporting the "Husky
Promise" - a guarantee for full tuition and fee scholarships for Pell Grant-
eligible Washington State residents. In the S-STEM program, each student is
awarded a scholarship for up to $9000 per year for up to two years, depending on
financial need. The program supports at least 15 students per year, and more, if
not all students have this much unmet need. The significant financial support
offered by S-STEM scholarships provides financially disadvantaged students
additional time to focus on their studies, because they can work fewer hours at
part-time jobs. Beyond the scholarships, College of Engineering professors serve
as mentors to S-STEM Scholars, especially through undergraduate research, and
the scholars are offered an opportunity to develop a professional portfolio. The
College also reserves slots for scholarship recipients in its Engineering
Community, an exciting experiential learning opportunity for engineering and
pre-engineering students. Four Resident Advisers, mostly engineering students,
connect Community members with resources and programs and act as peer mentors.
On-site academic support, such as drop-in advising sessions, registration
assistance, departmental and corporate information sessions, and tutoring
sessions, is provided by the College of Engineering. Social and informational
events are planned by both the Advisors and the
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives for "Engineering the Husky
Promise" are that:&lt;br/&gt; - minority students underrepresented in
engineering, including those from local programs (Washington State GEAR-UP,
MESA, and Rainier Scholars), receive at least 20% of the S-STEM
scholarships;&lt;br/&gt; - women receive at least 35% of the S-STEM
scholarships;&lt;br/&gt; - transfer students, of which half will be from UW MESA
partner Community Colleges, receive at least 25% of the S-STEM scholarships,
&lt;br/&gt; - 81% of the S-STEM freshmen be admitted to a UW College of
Engineering Department by the end of the sophomore year; &lt;br/&gt; - 95% of
S-STEM transfer students from community colleges graduate from a College of
Engineering Department within three years; and&lt;br/&gt; - at least 60% of
S-STEM recipients participate in undergraduate research with College of
Engineering faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to serve students in the
future and build on the basis of the S-STEM program, the College of Engineering
is raising a sustainable endowment for additional scholarships.