* 0965013
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Science of Science and Innovation Policy: Modeling Pharmaceutical Innovation Pipelines
* SBE,SBE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Kenneth Flamm, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 03/31/2012
* USD 14,100.00

In the late 1990s, the U.S. government doubled investment in basic biomedical
research to spur pharmaceutical innovation. The policy strategy was based on the
assumption that more basic research would lead to greater technological
opportunities for innovation. However, the anticipated results from increased
R&amp;D spending have not been realized. U.S. pharmaceutical companies received
approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for fewer drug
candidates in the early 2000s, after the increases in R&amp;D spending, than in
the early 1990s. Measures of returns to R&amp;D spending in terms of the number
of FDA approved drugs indicate stagnating productivity and likely declines in
growth.&lt;br/&gt;The apparent declines in the productivity of the
pharmaceutical industry may reflect changes in the nature of technological
opportunities and the R&amp;D process. Productivity metrics that do not account
for the methods used by firms integrate scientific and technological advances
into innovation activities may be inaccurate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit. This dissertation research construcs a new data set that can be utilized
to map the production of scientific advances through publicly funded research,
and subsequent use in downstream innovation activities at the project level. The
research develops and applies multiple metrics of innovative productivity,
including the completion status of innovation activities and the time to
complete an innovation activity to develop stylized facts about the use of
scientific advances generated from publicly funded research by
firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. This research advances the
understanding of the role of scientific advances in pharmaceutical innovation by
shedding more light on the innovation activities in which firms use externally
generated knowledge inputs to improve productivity. The project-level models of
productivity that are developed in this research may be used by policy makers to
evaluate the impact of the scientific advances generated through publicly funded
research on private-sector innovation activities, and should be applicable in
other science intensive-industries, such as nanotechnology, energy technologies,
and information technology.&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research analyzes
opportunities to promote the diffusion of scientific advances generated through
government funded research, and thereby stimulate innovation. Policy makers
should be able to use the models and stylized facts generated by this research
in order to identify ways in which research programs can be structured to more
effectively stimulate commercial innovation. The results of this research are
likely to be useful in designing intellectual property rights, organizing and
funding public-private research consortia, and developing research priorities
that align with industry needs.