* 0965965
* (IRES) International Research Experience for Students: Duke - Aarhus DNA NanoTech Collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Thomas LaBean, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,999.00

This International Research Experience for Students (IRES) activity links expert
nano research groups at Duke University in North Carolina and the University of
Aarhus in Denmark for a three-year program of interdisciplinary mentoring,
academic education, and research-based learning for participating students and
junior researchers from both countries. Principal Investigator (PI), Thomas H.
LaBean, and colleagues from Duke will work with Danish partners, led by Kurt V.
Gothelf, to manage a balanced, team-based approach for research training at the
interface between complex DNA nanostructures and DNA-guided chemistry. This
builds on a program of cooperation in education and research that features the
melding of leading Aarhus conjugation chemistry for coupling diverse compounds
to oligonucleotieds with the Duke team?s expertise in design and implementation
of complex nanostructures. Overall, research efforts promise significant
outcomes in molecular engineering with potential applications in molecular and
nano-electronics, nanochemistry, biosensors, or other biomedical
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational value of the IRES rests with the
students? exposure to the productive, cooperative research of the two leading
institutions and involvement in their mentors? cutting-edge research. The Duke-
Aarhus IRES model involves post-doctoral mentors and diverse, research-ready
high school students as well as U.S. graduate and undergraduate students. The
PI?s participation in Project SEED, supported by the American Chemical Society,
assists with identification of appropriate high school students. For balance and
heightened interaction, the program also engages junior Danish researchers,
supported independently by the Danish National Research Foundation. Each of the
junior participants will be assigned projects that are designed to contribute to
program-wide research goals. Through planned cross-disciplinary teamwork, they
will acquire knowledge of techniques in synthetic chemistry, DNA structural
engineering, protein biochemistry, materials science, and molecular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Danish IRES collaboration in molecular
engineering fulfills the program objective of developing global scientists and
engineers by enabling experts in the United States and Europe to combine
complementary talents and share research and education resources in an area of
strong mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts include the introduction
of U.S. junior researchers and students to international leaders in
nanotechnology through involvement in cutting-edge research so new that even
recent textbooks do not address it and through exposure to the collective
research life of two outstanding institutions. If successful, results will
continue to improve our ability to use DNA self-assembly to organize
nanomaterials and to program sophisticated nanochemistry. The students? early
career experiences are expected to increase the probability of their
establishing international collaborations in the future.