* 0965192
* International Research Fellowship Program: Using Kinematics to Identify Juvenile-Aged Cool Stars in Nearby Moving Groups.
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jacqueline Faherty, Faherty                 Jacqueline     K
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 127,552.00

0965192&lt;br/&gt;Faherty&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International
Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct
nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four-month
research fellowship by Dr. Jacqueline K. Faherty to work with Dr. Maria T. Ruiz
and Dr. Nicole van der Bliek at the University of Chile and with Dr. Andrew West
at Boston University in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Star formation studies
address questions at the center of modern astrophysics producing results on
topics ranging from the planetary frequency in the Galaxy to the conditions of
the primordial Universe under which the first stars were born. The most abundant
stars in the Galaxy are the lowest-temperature M dwarfs therefore they are a key
to understanding how chemical, environmental and/or spatial conditions affect
the processes of star formation. Astronomers have long studied regions such as
Orion, Ophiucus, Taurus etc, in great detail and our knowledge of many physical
characteristics of star formation come from studies of these dense and highly
active areas on the sky. Unfortunately, the distances to these star-forming
regions make detailed studies--directly detecting and resolving disks, looking
for low-mass companions--of the intrinsically faint M dwarfs, difficult.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most promising M dwarf targets for current and future
star and planetary formation studies will be found in the recently identified
juvenile aged (8-50 Myr), close (&lt;100pc), co-moving collections of stars
called moving groups. The youthfulness of moving groups makes them appealing
targets for searching for circumstellar and/or accretion disks and the proximity
to the Sun makes them easy targets for imaging and spectroscopy to resolve disk
structure and companions. The objective of the proposed research is to take
advantage of a unique kinematic dataset of M dwarfs, and investigate potential
new members of intermediate-aged moving groups in the local vicinity of the Sun.
These new members fill large gaps in our understanding of the processes of
planetary and stellar development.