* 0965103
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Science of Science and Innovation Policy: How Do Prizes Induce Innovation? Learning from the Google Lunar X-Prize
* SBE,SBE
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2011
* Philip Shapira, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 09/30/2011
* USD 10,440.00

This project investigates technology prizes and the means by which they induce
innovation. Specifically, the project examines three aerospace prize
competitions: (1) the Ansari X-Prize (rewarding "the first non-government
organization to launch a reusable manned spacecraft into space twice within two
weeks") (2) the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander Challenge (NGLLC) (for "building
and flying a rocket-powered vehicle that simulates the flight of a vehicle on
the Moon"), and (3) the ongoing $30 million Google Lunar X-Prize (GLXP), which
requires participants to land a robot on the surface of the Moon. This project
studies three main aspects of those competitions: (1) how prize entrants respond
to incentives, (2) how they organize R&amp;D activities, and (3) how technology
advancement takes place in this context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The project combines a two-stage research design, multiple data sources,
and different data gathering methods, including questionnaires, interviews and
direct observation. The first stage tests a model of prizes that links
incentives with entrant characteristics, R&amp;D organization, and technological
outcomes. This model is tested and revised by studying the Ansari X-Prize and
NGLLC competitions. The second stage applies the revised model to the ongoing
GLXP and prize entrants, which has exceptional significance due to its real-time
data access and possibility to explore real-time perceptions of prize entrants
in a competitive context characterized by technological
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project contributes to
innovation theory. In addition, it draws significant implications for policies
to advance technology, promote competitiveness, or achieve other societal goals
by using prizes. Moreover, insights gained from this research can be also
applied across fields like business, technology management, and engineering
systems design. More broadly, this project contributes a better understanding on
the potential of technology policies in times of economic crisis and the
incentives that may promote engagement of different social groups, including
underrepresented groups and students, for training within a competitive
environment.&lt;br/&gt;