* 0965843
* IGERT Nanomedicine Science and Technology
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Carlos Rinaldi-Ramos, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 09/30/2016
* USD 3,038,704.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the further development of the inter-disciplinary Nanomedicine Science and
Technology doctoral program at Northeastern University. The purpose of this
program is to train the next generation of scientists and technologists who are
skilled in research at the interface of nanotechnology, biology and medicine,
are aware of the path to translate fundamental knowledge to marketplace
products, are informed of the ethical and social issues relating to the
discipline, and have a strong sense of community involvement as well as a global
perspective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentored by a team of internationally
renowned scientists, technologists, and medical researchers, IGERT Nanomedicine
trainees will participate in a state-of-the-art interdisciplinary research
program that utilizes revolutionary developments in nanotechnology to develop
therapeutic and diagnostic agents of nanometer dimensions with multi-functional
capabilities for diagnostics, imaging and therapeutic benefit. The program will
create a unique partnership between Northeastern University, minority-serving
institutions University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez and Tuskegee University, and
Harvard Medical School member hospitals, and is committed to a target goal that
a majority of the IGERT Nanomedicine trainees will come from under-represented
populations. The interdisciplinary model of graduate education will serve as a
model to academic institutions world-wide. The vigorous outreach program will
impact a broad segment of K-12 schools in Massachusetts, Alabama and Puerto
Rico, and will encourage K-12 students from under-represented communities to
enter science, technology, engineering, and mathematics areas of higher
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.