* 0965801
* EAGER:  Novel Nitride-Based Exchange-Spring Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2013
* J Ping Liu, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 01/31/2013
* USD 160,000.00

Novel Nitride-Based Exchange-Spring Magnetic
Nanocomposites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: With escalating power demands,
there is an increased emphasis on producing high power density electrical
machines for use as motors, generators, actuators, etc. A promising new
technology to produce these power-dense machines employs exchange spring
permanent magnets (ESPM). ESPMs are magnetically ?hard? and ?soft? phases that
are exchange-coupled to give high energy products, (BH)max. High (BH)max values
have been reported for rapidly-solidified, melt-spun, and ball-milled rare-
earth-transition metal (RE-TM) intermetallic ESPMs. In addition nitride-based
ESPMs are promising candidates for permanent magnets whose performance could
exceed that of the NdFeB-Fe RE-TM ESPMs. In this research a novel low-
temperature synthesis technique is examined for fabricating nitride-based
nanocomposites with high (BH)max values and operating temperatures. This
synthesis technique is based on laminating hard magnetic phase nanopowders with
soft phases, catalytic nitrogenation of the hard and soft phases, and low
temperature densification using pulse plasma compaction. This approach should
provide greater grain size control and exchange-coupling between the hard and
soft phases, lower temperature synthesis of the nitride phases, lower
temperature compaction, and greater corrosion resistance. The PI intends to
explore the synthesis of these novel nitride-based nanocomposites, to understand
their properties and to optimize their compositions to obtain high energy
product permanent magnets. The high payoff of this work derives from the low
temperature catalytic nitrogenation of the soft iron phase in the
nanocomposites. If successful, this study will yield two important
breakthroughs, a new avenue for the synthesis of nitride-based composite
materials and specific guidance for developing more energy efficient, compact
devices using high energy product permanent magnets. NONTECHNICAL: This project
is a promising new technology for the production of nitride-based exchange-
coupled permanent magnets for power-dense machines. This approach moves away
from current, poorly-defined, nanoscale morphologies to spatially and
compositionally engineered nanostructures. This novel design approach offers
previously unattainable magnetic properties by exploiting magnetocrystalline and
shape anisotropy of materials. The research provides processing breakthroughs
and fundamental understanding that should facilitate future commercial
development of a new class of high performance permanent magnets. The research
effort is coupled to an educational initiative aimed at teaching research
methodology to graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;