* 0965531
* BREAD: Overcoming the Domestication Bottleneck for Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation in Legumes
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Douglas Cook, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,750,340.00

PI: Douglas R. Cook (University of California - Davis)

CoPI: Rajeev K. Varshney (International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-
Arid Tropics [ICRISAT], Patancheru, India)

Collaborator: Eric von Wettberg (Florida International University)

Senior Personnel: R. Varma Penmetsa (University of California - Davis)

Legumes are the third largest family of flowering plants, and second only to the
grasses in agricultural importance. On a global scale, legumes contribute 1/3 of
humankind's protein intake, a fact that is directly related to their unusual
capacity to access atmospheric nitrogen through symbiosis with nitrogen-fixing
bacteria. Provision of reduced ("fixed") nitrogen represents a key challenge in
all modern agriculture. In the developed world, intensive agriculture depends on
the input of industrially-produced nitrogen fertilizers, derived from the energy
of fossil fuels. In resource poor areas of the world, however, the cost of
nitrogen fertilizers is prohibitive to their use, and crop yields and soil
fertility suffer proportionally. Despite the important implications, little is
known about the mechanisms that underlie efficient symbiotic nitrogen fixation
in legumes, or how and to what extent domestication and breeding has impacted
the ancestral capacity for symbiotic nitrogen fixation. This project will
characterize the genetic mechanisms that underlie efficient symbiotic nitrogen
fixation in the agricultural context, and contribute knowledge and resources to
a new round of knowledge-driven legume crop improvement strategies that will
benefit developing-world and developed-world agriculture alike.

In agricultural systems crop rotation with legume species is an important means
to maintain soil fertility and crop productivity. Increasing the efficiency of
symbiotic nitrogen fixation in legume crops - overcoming the genetic bottleneck
of domestication - has great potential to improve the livelihoods of resource
poor farmers. The goal of this project is to simultaneously satisfy the
curiosity that drives basic science, while providing understanding that can lead
to new tools for applied agriculture. This project will enhance quality and
visibility of international agricultural research, and provide for the training
of young scientists as undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students.
Information about the project will be available through a project website
(http://www.icrisat.org/gt-bt/ICGGC/homepage.htm). All project data will be
available at www.comparative-legumes.org and the Legume Information System (LIS;
http://www.lis.org) long-term. All sequence data will also be available at the
relevant National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) databases. Seed
and bacterial strains will be available through ICRISAT and the University of
California - Davis, respectively, upon request.