* 0965949
* Collaborative Research: Recording Toponyms to Document the Endangered Hopi Language
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2013
* T Ferguson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 03/31/2013
* USD 117,360.00

With funding from the NSF Documenting Endangered Language Program, the
University of Arizona and the American Museum of Natural History are
collaborating with the Hopi Tribe to record toponyms (place names) as a means of
documenting the endangered Hopi language. While most Hopis over the age of fifty
learned Hopi as their first language, and remain fluent, today less that 5% of
Hopis younger than nineteen speak the language. As senior speakers pass away,
knowledge of toponyms and the cultural practices they encode is being lost. The
project will produce a lexicon of toponyms using digital audio and video files
to preserve the sounds of the names vocalized by native speakers of Hopi. These
place names will be transcribed using a standard orthography developed by the
Hopi Tribe. Cultural, social, historical, and geographical information about
each place name will be documented in a geographic information systems database.
The toponyms to be documented during this project constitute a potent and
understudied linguistic domain. In Hopi discourse, important ideas and processes
involving cultural and historical order are localized, commemorated in the
landscape, and indexed by place names. Events happened at particular places: an
understanding of events is embedded in place names, so knowledge of those places
and an understanding of place-names are needed to fully document Hopi language
and history. The working hypothesis for the project is that the Hopi have a
systematic theory of place and place-naming that has not received the scholarly
attention necessary for scholarly comprehension. This research project will
articulate a grounded theory of Hopi toponyms to create a body of knowledge can
be compared to systems of place-naming in other indigenous communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although Hopi has been the subject of substantial
ethnographic research over the last 125 years, there has been relatively little
work that documents the morphology, phonology, etymology, meaning, and use of
toponyms. The information documented by this project will provide significant
linguistic and anthropological information about Hopi cultural transmission,
moral instruction, and symbolic links between cultural landscapes and identity.
This information is important for understanding the development of the Uto-
Aztecan language family. Documenting place names will also provide important
information for future use in tribal language preservation programs and
reservation curriculum development, thus helping to disseminate Hopi linguistic
and cultural knowledge among Hopi youth. Preserving knowledge about Hopi place
names will increase public understanding of Hopi history as it relates to the
geography of the Southwest.