* 0965756
* PODS - Peers Organized by Discipline for Success
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Lee Seltzer, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2017
* USD 599,348.00

The Peers Organized by Discipline for Success (PODS) project is providing
scholarships and intensive mentoring for 90 academically talented, financially
needy science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) students in the
sciences, mathematics, and aerospace engineering technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The program is promoting academic
success, retention, and completion through an enhanced academic support and
peer-mentoring system called PODS in which small groups of 3-5 students,
supported by a faculty mentor and peer tutors, form a "triangle for success".
Recipients participate in "Ready, Set, STEM!" orientations, the College's STEM
Club, "how to study science" seminars, and receive assistance from science and
mathematics tutors. Activities include field experiences, site visits to STEM-
related businesses and institutions, transfer workshops, "Speaking of STEM"
lectures, career development activities, and scientific internships and
symposia. PODS is providing financially needy STEM students with additional
financial, academic, transfer and career assistance to increase their chances
for success. The College is well qualified to implement PODS because of past
success with NSF grants and a variety of programs to assist financially needy
students. The PODS team includes faculty with proven mentoring experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Information gained through PODS is help
improve academic success, graduation and job placement for students beginning
higher education at community colleges, institutions rapidly becoming one of the
pipelines for STEM majors.