* 0965784
* Aretyry Kari'nja (Carib): Training Speech Community Members in Documentation, Description, and Materials Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Spike Gildea, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 07/31/2013
* USD 89,164.00

This project allows Dr. Gildea and colleagues at the University of Oregon Eugene
to conduct new documentary work on under-documented varieties of Kari'nja, an
endangered language of Suriname. The researchers propose four activities: (i)
bring members of the Aretyry Kari'nja-speaking community (of Suriname) to Oregon
to receive training in language documentation and revitalization in the context
of an independently-organized linguistic institute, (ii) record speakers of the
language in Oregon where there is access to high-quality recording equipment not
otherwise accessible to the community, (iii) conduct new documentary work on an
under-documented varieties of Kari'nja in collaboration with Kari'nja speakers
who received training in Oregon, and (iii) conduct training workshops for
Kari'nja communities in Suriname to help them with their documentation efforts.
The information uncovered by this project will enhance the scientific
understanding of linguistic phenomena like typology of prosodic systems, work
classes, and ergativity. The project will also produce high quality
documentation of languages and dialects for which information is not easily
accessible, and serves as a model for future collaborative documentation
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond archived recordings, pedagogical
materials, and academic analyses of stress and grammar, this project builds the
capacity for future productivity. Those most affected by their language loss,
Kari'nja themselves, are already active participants in documentation,
description, and revitalizing their ancestral language. This project gives them
more tools and training, which they will continue using long after the grant
period. This project expands the documentation of Aretyry Kari'nja to other
communities within and beyond Suriname's borders, and will permit the
Konomerume, Cornelis Kondre, and Kalebas Kreek teams to design their own
documentation projects.