* 0965336
* BREAD:  Biochar Inoculants for Enabling Smallholder Agriculture
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2018
* Johannes Lehmann, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2018
* USD 2,725,115.00

PI: Johannes Lehmann (Crop and Soil Sciences, Cornell University) Co-PI: Janice
Thies (Crop and Soil Sciences, Cornell University) Co-PI: Rufus Edwards
(Department of Epidemiology, University of California Irvine) Co-PI: Henry
Neufeldt (World Agroforestry Center (ICRAF), Nairobi, Kenya) Collaborator: Betta
Fisher (Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Cornell University) Collaborator:
Fred Gouldin (Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Cornell University)
Collaborator: David Lee (Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University)
Collaborator: Stephen Joseph (University of New South Wales, Australia)

The major threat to agricultural productivity in Africa is the rapid increase in
soil degradation that is linked directly to food insecurity, hunger and poverty.
Integrating stable biochar into carbon-constrained agricultural systems in
developing countries may be able to address long term productivity constraints.
Despite its significant potential, it is less known whether biochar inoculants
can be developed that enhance crop growth by improving growth conditions for
nitrogen fixing bacteria, plant growth promoting rhizobacteria and arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi. The objective of this project is to provide fundamental
knowledge of how to best develop and use biochar inoculants within smallholder
agriculture systems in Kenya. Resource opportunities are mapped for entire
farms, and biochar cook stoves optimized to generate clean household energy as
well as agronomically valuable and environmentally safe, stable biochar
products. The ability of biochars to provide improved growth conditions for
beneficial microorganisms is determined using incubations under a range of soil
conditions where organisms are imaged using advanced microscopy. A mechanistic
understanding of the way certain biochar traits improve inoculant behavior are
obtained by relating microbial occurrence to physical and molecular properties
of biochars. The investigation of microbe-biochar interactions are novel and are
expected to provide fundamental knowledge at the frontier of soil health
science. For the broader community, project outcomes will inform about biomass
use and optimization in agricultural systems, cook stove optimization, and
mechanisms of microbial inoculant processes, which will significantly strengthen
our understanding of soil health management and improve small holder
agricultural systems in developing countries.

This project will generate innovative ways to sustainably enhance soil resources
in developing countries. It is the first of its kind to embrace a full life-
cycle approach to solving carbon constraints in small-holder agriculture that
can be locally implemented and managed. This project will build local capacity
in teaching, learning and research both in Kenya and the US. Students at the
undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate levels will be trained using a wide
array of new molecular technologies and approaches to system science. This
project will make use of our existing linkages to the United Nations and non-
governmental organizations, and communicate results directly to national
organizations in Africa involved in education, research and policy making. The
project is making results available through a project website, a permanently
archived database on Cornell University's D-space archive, and a CD-ROM which
will include cook stove designs, biochar-inoculant production and application
protocols. Information will also be disseminated through workshops on biochar-
inoculant methods, publications, project briefs, and presentations.