* 0965236
* RAPID: Investigation of Immediate Post-fire Hydro-geochemical Coupling and Contaminant Flux in an Urban-fringe Watershed in Southern California
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2011
* Terri Hogue, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 03/31/2011
* USD 59,961.00

The Station fire is currently noted as the largest fire in Los Angeles County
history as well as the 10th largest fire in California history. The burned
region is located immediately adjacent to dense urban areas on the east side of
the Los Angeles basin. These urban-wildland regions, located in the San Gabriel
Mountains, will now be impacted by increased flooding, debris and sediment-laden
flows, and significant water quality issues. The San Gabriel Mountains are known
to receive high loads of atmospheric pollutants (dry and wet)originating from
the Los Angeles metropolitan region. Runoff from these mountains normally
supplies significant runoff into downstream urban water ways, which is then
directed to infiltration ponds or zones for aquifer recharge, or into conveyance
channels that route water through dense urban areas to coastal bays. Postfire
runoff in these urban-fringe watersheds may now contribute significant, and
potentially toxic, chemical loads into downstream urban systems, affecting
regional water supplies, biota and ecosystem function. Funds from this RAPID
grant will allow an immediate and extensive investigation of storm-driven
contaminant flux (including nutrients, metals, PAHs, sediments, and other
ancillary parameters) in an urban fringe watershed affected by significant
atmospheric deposition and that was burned in its entirety. Previously collected
pre-fire data on the study watershed will allow a unique and comprehensive
comparison to pre-burn behavior,advance knowledge on post-burn hydro-geochemical
coupling and alterations in basin mass loading, and provide critical data to
improve geochemical and hydrologic modeling in post-burn systems. The
overarching goal of the proposed research is to better understand the mechanisms
controlling alterations in the chemical and physical response of urban fringe
watersheds after a catastrophic wildfire. Specifically, we propose to address
the following science questions: 1) How does post-fire hydro-geochemical
coupling (behavior) alter from pre-fire conditions? 2) How does storm
variability influence post-fire runoff behavior and coupled contaminant flux? 3)
What is the effect of burn on riparian nitrate soil storage and streamwater
export? and 4) What is the impact of a catastrophic burn on seasonal pollutant
loading to downstream urban systems?