* 0965812
* Electronic and Ionic Transport in Block Copolymers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Zhen-Gang Wang, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 05/31/2013
* USD 201,003.00

0965812&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This energy-and manufacturing related project is a
collaborative experimental and theoretical study of the effect of morphology on
electron and ion conduction in nanostructured polymer materials with clearly
defined independent channels for electronic and ionic transport. Regio-regular
poly(3-hexylthiophene)-block-polyethyleneoxide (PHT-PEO) will be synthesized by
coupling aldehyde terminated PHT chains with living styryl-PEO anions, and doped
with the appropriate salts to make the PHT domain electron-conducting and the
PEO domain ion-conducting. The morphology of the mixtures and charge carrier
distribution will be characterized by standard techniques such as electron
microscopy and X-ray scattering, as well as element-specific techniques such as
energy filtered EM and resonant soft X-ray scattering. A combination of DC- and
AC-impedance spectroscopy will be used to measure the ionic and electronic
conductance of the doped copolymer. Concurrently with the experimental efforts,
theoretical and simulation studies will be performed to understand the
underpinnings of the experimental observations regarding morphology and dopant
distribution, and to provide insight for designing second generation systems
with optimal properties. In particular, a ribbon-coil model will be developed to
predict the morphology of PHT-PEO systems. Theories that incorporate both ion
solvation and chain deformation will be used to predict dopant distribution.
Computer simulations used to predict ion transport will be validated using
experimental measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will be the first
study of the simultaneous electronic and ionic transport in nanostructured
polymer materials. The combined experimental and theoretical efforts will yield
rich insights into: how charge carries are distributed in nanostructured
materials, how the motion of charge carriers couples to the segmental dynamics
of the polymers, how the local nanostructure and large-scale grain structure
influences charge transport, and how doping agents alter the morphology of the
self-assembled polymeric structures. These insights may lead to entirely new
design strategies for electrode architectures in rechargeable batteries and fuel
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
in sync with the nationwide efforts at creating and ultimately manufacturing
clean and more efficient energy technologies. The systems studied have potential
to directly translate into new battery technologies. Furthermore, in both PIs?
home departments,there is an increasing need among the graduate students to work
in energy-related research areas; the projects fulfill that need by providing
them with the opportunity to do research in a technologically important area,
while receiving a multidisciplinary training in theory, simulation, modeling,
thermodynamics, synthesis and characterization of polymers, optics, scattering,
and electrochemistry. Equally important, the proposed research serves as a
platform for developing new educational packages for high school and
undergraduate students. In this respect, the PIs will develop and execute
lectures and demonstrations on electrochemistry and batteries as part of the
Math and Science Summer Academy program at Berkeley