* 0965834
* Scholarships in Math and Science (SIMS): Improving Recruitment and Retention in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Jane Flood, Muhlenberg College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 02/28/2015
* USD 539,650.00

The college is recruiting two cohorts of six students in the mathematical and
physical sciences from the disciplines of chemistry, computer science,
environmental science, mathematics, physical science and physics and offering
them full scholarships for four years. The goal is to support each of these
students through completion of a baccalaureate degree in a mathematical or
physical science discipline so they can enter the science, technology,
engineering, or mathematics (STEM) workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The program, based on the research literature on recruitment and
retention of students, includes six elements: financial, academic and psycho-
social support, mentoring, professional development for students, and faculty
development. These components build upon ongoing activities within the college.
Each element is being assessed through data regularly monitored by the college,
and through instruments developed by a faculty learning community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The college expects the program to lead to
better experiences and better retention among all science students at the
college. Since many institutions share the need to improve retention of students
in STEM disciplines, the program is having a broader impact through
dissemination of findings via publications and presentations.