* 0965015
* Stochastic Escape In and Out of Equilibrium: Methods and Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Daniel Stein, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2014
* USD 492,100.00

This award is for the study of a broad class of stochastic processes, both
classical and quantum, involving noise-induced escape from the basin of
attraction of a locally stable state. It also involves their application to a
variety of open problems in condensed matter (mostly at but not confined to the
nanoscale) associated with nucleation processes in systems both at and away from
equilibrium. There are three objectives: development of techniques that broaden
the variety of systems and situations accessible to theoretical analysis;
application of these techniques to the solution of open problems in physical
systems; and testing, both experimentally and numerically, of the resulting
predictions. The overall research program aims towards a significant advance in
our understanding of nonlinear dynamical systems perturbed by weak noise, a
class of systems that cuts across many scientific disciplines. Broader impacts:
Mathematical methods developed by the PI and collaborators will be applied to a
broad range of systems of fundamental scientific importance in a variety of
scientific fields, and have promising future technological applications. These
include magnetization reversal in nanomagnets, stability and lifetimes of
monovalent metallic nanowires, transitions between states of driven nonlinear
systems, incorporation of nonpotential effects in extended systems subject to
spatiotemporal noise, and electroconvective pattern formation in liquid
crystals. Training will be provided to graduate and undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds. Also planned are several outreach activities, including
science projects for NYC high school students participating in science
competitions for scholarships, and lectures to graduate students in other fields
at multidisciplinary summer schools.