* 0965022
* International Research Fellowship Program: Reproductive Morphology and Anatomy, and Molecular Phylogeny of the Aquifoliales
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Melanie Schori, Schori                  Melanie
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2011
* USD 72,933.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support an eleven-month research fellowship by Dr. Melanie Schori to
work with Dr. Paula Rudall at the Royal Botanic Gardens in Kew in the United
Kingdom. Reproductive morphology, anatomy, and development provide insights into
relationships among genera as well as among major lineages of plants. The order
Aquifoliales has recently been shown to be basal to Asterales, Apiales, and
Dipsacales. Aquifoliales contains five families, including the hollies, and
certain members exhibit unusual floral and fruiting diversity. Representatives
of each genus are being examined to assess differences in floral embryology,
development, and fruit anatomy. Reproductive characters are being mapped onto a
three-gene phylogeny so characters can be examined in a phylogenetic context to
determine character polarities and patterns of evolution within the
Aquifoliales. DNA data have significantly changed the current understanding of
plant relationships, but molecular data are not always sufficient to resolve
finer-scale relationships. Understanding relationships is crucial for
applications from species identification and conservation to plant breeding.
Structure and development, especially of reproductive features, tend to be
conserved and provide valuable information about patterns of evolution. However,
the reproductive anatomy and development of most plants have not been studied.
Researchers are returning to anatomical studies to answer questions about
relationships. The research funded by this project will answer questions about
relationships and unique flower and fruit types in the hollies and their
relatives. In addition, its valuable data will be used by researchers studying
flower and fruit diversity and evolution in related economically important
groups like the sunflower family (Asteraceae) and the carrot family (Apiaceae).