* 0965451
* Clusters, Heritage and the Microfoundations of Spillovers - Lessons from Semi-Conductors
* SBE,SBE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* Francisco Veloso, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 04/30/2013
* USD 384,247.00

Knowledge industries tend to cluster geographically, which has long been thought
to promote spillovers of knowledge through local employees of competing firms
exchanging know-how and changing employers. Employees of incumbent firms also
sometimes found their own spinoff firms, which can be a source of knowledge
spillovers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The main purpose of the
proposed work is to assess the strength of these alternative spillover
mechanisms and their effect on firm performance in the context of the
semiconductor industry, which famously clustered in Silicon Valley and
secondarily in Boston, New York, and Los Angeles. Sorting out the importance of
these alternative mechanisms is critical; if clusters promote knowledge exchange
and employee mobility then clustering is socially beneficial whereas if spinoffs
are the primary conduit for clustering then the benefits of clusters do not
extend beyond spinoffs and their 'parents'. Using an annual buyers' guide, data
are collected on the location and products of all semiconductor producers from
the inception of the industry through 1987. Firm sales data are collected to
identify the market leaders. The pre-entry experience of each producer is traced
using the annual buyers' guides to identify prior producers of other electronics
producers and trade journals and web sources are used to identify spinoffs and
their parents. The patents assigned to each semiconductor producer and the
inventors of the patents are collected to trace the mobility of the inventors
over time. An analysis is conducted of the influence of location and other
factors on whether semiconductor producers entered producing semiconductor
products at the technological frontier, and if not whether they later shifted to
produce frontier products. The determinants of the mobility of inventors are
analyzed, including whether mobility was greater for inventors in clusters.
Various new semiconductor products were developed in the sample period, and
analyses are conducted of the factors influencing whether firms adopted new
products, including the role of location. All of these decisions are in turn
related to the performance of firms, as reflected in their sales and
longevity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Understanding whether clusters
improve firm performance and the main mechanisms behind regional knowledge
diffusion can yield important broader impacts for both strategy and policy. If
direct knowledge sharing and inter-firm employee mobility are promoted by
clustering and in turn contribute to clustering, then clustering has clear
welfare benefits and would also benefit firms located in clusters.
Alternatively, if spinoffs are the primary conduit for clustering, then external
economies do not go beyond spinoffs and their 'parents' and clustering provides
no social benefits per se nor any private benefits to firms located in clusters.