* 0965879
* Developing Women Scholar-Leaders in Chemistry, Mathematics and Computing
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Adrienne Oxley, Columbia College
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 01/31/2016
* USD 595,510.00

The goal of the project is to increase the number of women and minorities
graduating with baccalaureate degrees in chemistry, mathematics, and computing
from Columbia College, a private women's college with 46% minority enrollment.
Scholarships are being awarded to 18 female students for up to four years. The
project objectives are &lt;br/&gt;1) to recruit academically talented but
financially needy women and minority students to major in chemistry,
mathematics, and computer and information science, &lt;br/&gt;2) to increase
retention rate to 75% by providing academic support, mentoring, and community
building opportunities, and &lt;br/&gt;3) to prepare participants for successful
entrance into the workplace or graduate school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A joint
venture of the chemistry, mathematics and computing programs, this project
builds upon a 2003 CSEMS grant and on the existing college support services but
targets a broader audience. A management team composed of faculty and industry
representatives administer the project. Admissions, financial aid and career
services personnel are also involved. The participants take a series of common
courses, are advised and mentored by faculty using Appreciate Advisement, and
participate in monthly lunchtime seminars, field trips, and group dinners.
Participation in peer-mentoring opportunities is also encouraged.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is based on activities
geared to recruit, retain, and prepare women for successful careers while
pursuing current and academically rigorous baccalaureate degree programs,
administered by dedicated and knowledgeable faculty. This project can contribute
to the knowledge of how to recruit, retain, and engage women to major in
chemistry, math and computing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
project can broaden the participation of women and minorities in chemistry,
mathematics and computing and lead to more of these underrepresented groups in
South Carolina entering careers in these fields in the 21stCentruy workforce.