* 0965524
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Science of Science and Innovation Policy: Scientific Knowledge Pproduction for Solving Common Environmental Problems in a Developing Country
* SBE,SBE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2012
* Javiera Barandiaran, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 04/30/2012
* USD 17,475.00

In industrialized societies, scientists often serve as experts to both
government and industry on issues ranging from natural resource management to
environmental protection. In contrast, in many developing countries, the
position of experts is informal, erratic or invisible. This dissertation asks
how scientific research groups differ in terms of their connections to
government and industry in a rapidly developing country, Chile, and what impact
this has on the nature, purpose and dissemination of their environmental
research activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Network analysis
is used to map the flow of environmental knowledge from four communities where
it is produced - physicists, ecologists, geologists, and forest scientists - to
two types of users - government and industry. These four successful scientific
communities occupy very different organizations, from traditional public
universities to loosely networked institutes. The interviews provide a better
understanding of how these science and non-science communities interact and
mutually shape each others' agendas. The PIs also undertake a statistical
analysis of submitted and approved research proposals to the Chilean equivalent
of the National Science Foundation to examine how political and scientific
priorities have shifted in the past 30 years, and how these shifts relate to
changing political conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Chile is
Latin America's economic success story, yet the country continues to rely on
natural resource extraction for economic growth and faces intractable levels of
inequality. There is little understanding of the role that can be played by the
scientific community in Latin America, despite the doubling of the science
budgets in response to science and innovation policies recommended by the World
Bank. This research provides empirical evidence on how Chilean scientists relate
to science-users in industry and government, whether these relationships favor
the production of environmental science in the public interest or impact the
forms of disseminating knowledge used, and how scientific interests respond to
changing political priorities.