* 0965074
* International Research Fellowship Program: Mechanisms Underlying Tactical Deception and Counterdeception in Capuchin Monkeys: Stress and Skepticism
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Brandon Wheeler, Wheeler                 Brandon        C
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 04/30/2012
* USD 161,277.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Brandon C.
Wheeler to work with Dr. Julia Fischer at the German Primate Center in
Gottingen, Germany with field work done at Iguazu National Park in Argentina.
The cognitive abilities of primates are argued to have evolved so that
individuals can outwit group-mates in competitive interactions by using, among
other tactics, deceptive and counterdeceptive behaviors. However, because such
behaviors are rare, the proximate mechanisms underlying these behaviors have not
been examined in wild primates and it is thus unknown if they are indeed driven
by cognitive mechanisms. Recent work by the PI with wild tufted capuchin monkeys
in northeastern Argentina has shown that these primates use alarm calls (i.e.,
vocalizations normally given in response to predators) during feeding but when
no predators are present. The calls often cause dominant individuals to run out
of the food patch and allow the more subordinate caller to gain access to the
food. However, listeners reduce the success of these deceptive alarms by
ignoring them more often than they do honest alarms. As the first systematic
evidence of deception and associated counter-deception in wild primates, this
presents an ideal study system to examine if cognitive abilities are necessary
to explain the observed behaviors. In the current study, the PI is investigating
the mechanisms underpinning the observed deceptive and counter-deceptive
behaviors in the same population of Argentine capuchin monkeys. Specifically,
this study addresses two questions. First, because previous studies have
indicated that alarm calling behaviors may be controlled by the production of
cortisol, a hormone associated with stress, is it possible that deceptive alarms
are driven proximately not by cognitive mechanisms, but by hormonal reactions to
competition-induced stress? Second, is counterdeception better explained as a
recognition of subtle acoustic differences between honest and deceptive alarm
calls, or as skepticism of calls given in competitive contexts? The first
question is addressed by experimentally manipulating food distribution and
measuring the levels of cortisol excreted in the feces of dominant and
subordinate individuals. The second question is addressed by analyzing audio
recordings of honest and deceptive alarm calls to determine if they differ
acoustically, and by playing audio recordings of deceptive alarm calls to the
subjects in noncompetitive contexts to determine if they respond with
antipredator reactions more often in the latter context than they do during
competitive feeding contexts. Hormonal and bioacoustic analyses are being
conducted at the German Primate Center in GÃ¶ttingen, Germany. The results will
elucidate the degree to which cognition underlies the deceptive and
counterdeceptive behaviors observed in this species and may provide insight into
the evolutionary origins these behaviors in humans. Beyond the project's
intellectual merit, this grant funds training for a young US researcher in
laboratory analyses which are increasingly being used to understand the
evolution of behavior in primates and other animals. Such knowledge will prove
critical as the PI moves forward in his teaching and research career, as will
the collaborative relationships developed between the PI and international
research institutions during the funding period.