* 0965552
* Collaborative Research/DUSEL CO2: A Deep Underground Laboratory for Geologic CO2 Sequestration Studies: Design of the Facility and Experiments
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Patrick Dobson, Department of Energy
* Interagency Agreement
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 12/31/2012
* USD 374,905.00

Princeton University and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory have forged a new
collaboration to examine the feasibility and risks of carbon sequestration, a
method of countering global warming by storing greenhouse gases deep
underground. To develop a sound understanding of carbon sequestration, we will
build a deep underground laboratory to study the processes of trapping and
storing CO2, including the risks of unintended leakage. It will be part of the
new DUSEL facility at the Homestake mine in South Dakota. The "DUSEL CO2"
facility will make the United States the only country with a deep underground
laboratory for controlled study of geologic carbon sequestration, providing a
unique opportunity for global leadership. The findings from these unique
experiments will advance carbon management technology worldwide and help reduce
global greenhouse gas emissions.

The features and capabilities of the planned facility are unprecedented. The
experimental design exploits the nearly half-kilometer vertical extent of
existing "sandline" borings at Homestake. Pipes will be installed within the
sandlines to serve as long flow columns. These columns will contain the CO2 and
allow experimentation at the same pressure and temperature conditions as in deep
subsurface reservoirs. Fill materials will mimic sedimentary layering, as well
as cements in plugged wells. Instrumentation will enable detailed monitoring of
flow, pressure, temperature, brine composition, geomechanics, and microbial
activity.

As part of the initial suite of experiments, we plan to simulate a leak in which
CO2 changes from a supercritical fluid to a subcritical gas as the pressure
drops during upflow over tens to hundreds of meters. We will test for possible
acceleration in CO2 flow due to increasing buoyancy. Also, we will examine the
interactions of CO2 with cap-rocks and well cements, and determine whether CO2
will enlarge flow pathways or cause self-sealing. Finally, we will investigate
the effects of anaerobic, thermophilic bacteria on CO2 conversion to methane and
carbonate.

This project is being led by researchers at Princeton and LBNL, and involves no-
cost collaboration with individuals at ORNL, Stanford University, Schlumberger
and the U.S. DOE NETL. During this three-year project, the team is working to
(i) prioritize future experiments that will be conducted at DUSEL CO2, (ii)
build models that simulate experimental conditions and predict process dynamics,
and (iii) develop a Work-Breakdown Structure (WBS) schedule for design,
procurement, construction, operation and deconstruction of the facility over the
facility lifetime. International awareness about DUSEL CO2 is being fostered
through international workshops and formation of an International Advisory
Committee. Also, we are collaborating with other DUSEL scientists on education
and outreach about "deep science," with particular focus on climate change and
energy solutions. DUSEL education and outreach activities are focused on Native
American communities in South Dakota and operation of the Visitor Center at the
Sanford Lab at Homestake. To inspire and educate the next generation of leaders,
we are involving undergraduate and graduate students in DUSEL CO2 research at
Princeton University.