* 0965702
* Collaborative Research: Successive Risk-Neutral Approximations of Dynamic Risk-Averse Optimization Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Darinka Dentcheva, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,988.00

The proposed research aims at developing methods for solving stochastic dynamic
optimization problems that involve risk-averse preferences. Mathematical models
of risk aversion capture entire distributions of random outcomes with increased
attention to events of small probability and high consequences. The project will
concentrate on multistage stochastic optimization problems and on Markov
decision processes incorporating dynamic risk measures and dynamic stochastic
ordering constraints. The proposed numerical approach integrates modern theories
of risk measures and stochastic orders with decomposition techniques for large-
scale optimization problems, methods of non-smooth optimization, and stochastic
control methods. The approach will be based on sequential risk-neutral
approximations of risk-averse problems. The approximations will be used to
devise primal and dual decomposition methods for multistage problems with
dynamic risk measures and dynamic stochastic ordering constraints. Special
attention will be paid to Markov decision problems. A theory of Markov risk
measures and risk-averse dynamic programming will be developed. Numerical
methods for risk-averse dynamic programming will also explore the idea of
sequential risk-neutral approximations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
provide qualitative advance in areas involving multi-stage decision-making in
stochastic systems under high uncertainty and risk. It will provide modeling and
algorithmic tools to formalize and solve long-term planning problems in which
risk is an important issue and average performance criteria are insufficient.
Problems of this nature arise in supply chain management, military planning
problems, energy production and distribution, telecommunication, insurance and
finance, medicine, and other areas. The project will benefit the graduate
education at Rutgers University and Stevens Institute of Technology.