* 0965933
* Mentoring Science Scholars: Creating a Learning Community in the Biological Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Sara Morris, Canisius College
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 02/29/2016
* USD 598,000.00

The goals of this S-STEM Science Scholars Program at Canisius College are 1) to
recruit additional students to the biology, environmental science, and animal
science, ecology and conservation majors; 2) to create a learning community for
the students during their course of study; and 3) to provide students with
skills and experiences to prepare them for science careers or continuing to
graduate school. The program is providing 2- or 3-year scholarships that allow 2
cohorts of nine sophomores or junior community college transfer students, at
critical juncture points for academic success, to join the Science Scholars
learning community. Scholars are being recruited at local high schools (in
economically depressed areas) and at local community colleges in conjunction
with the college admissions office, and through presentations and announcements
to freshmen students. Scholarship applications are selected on the basis of
criteria related to a combination of financial need, demonstrated academic
achievement, and quality of application materials. The program's goals are being
met in part through use of existing courses and co-curricular activities,
including enrollment in laboratory courses that incorporate multiple
opportunities for students to practice doing science and communicating about it,
mentored research experiences and internships, and seminar courses that feature
development of professional skills and exploration of career paths in addition
to research methods. New program components are also being designed to meet
project objectives, including 1) development of a learning community model that
includes course sections that accommodate the entire cohort of students, social
activities that foster both student cohesiveness and faculty-student
interactions outside of class, and academic and career advice; 2) expansion of
the college's supplemental instruction program; 3) establishment of a new
monthly journal club/lunch bunch to review student and faculty research as well
as read common scientific articles; 4) student-sponsored seminars in the Biology
Department's seminar series; and 5) student travel to scientific conferences,
either to present research results or to explore scientific fields of individual
interest. In addition to formative assessment of the program components, the
project's evaluation effort includes tracking of retention and placement of
students in discipline-specific jobs or graduate programs. Program outcomes are
being reported through presentations at discipline-specific conferences and in
publications in science and higher education journals.