* 0965380
* BREAD:  Improving Water Acquisition in Maize with Root Traits that Reduce the Metabolic Cost of Soil Exploration
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Kathleen Brown, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,637,140.00

PI: Jonathan Lynch (Pennsylvania State University)

Co-PIs: Kathleen Brown (Pennsylvania State University), Shawn Kaeppler
(University of Wisconsin-Madison), George Kanyama-Phiri (Bunda College of
Agriculture, Malawi)

Senior Personnel: Moses Maliro (Bunda College of Agriculture, Malawi)

Drought is a primary constraint to crop production in developing countries.
Development of drought tolerant maize varieties will be an important
contribution to food security in these regions. The overall goal of the project
is to identify and characterize maize varieties with expanded root cortical
aerenchyma (RCA) traits, which has been shown to enhance water and nutrient
acquisition from soil. The project will characterize the physiological
phenotypes of RCA traits from US and African maize germplasm, genetically map
the RCA traits, and evaluate selected maize varieties in southern Africa in
field stations and through on-farm trials. Such agroecological study in Africa
will assess potential RCA trait interactions with nutrient acquisition, radial
nutrient transport, mycorrhizal colonization, and susceptibility to root
pathogens. In addition to drought, RCA may also enhance acquisition of limiting
soil nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen. Defining and understanding
traits enhancing drought tolerance is of great importance to smallholder
agriculture in developing countries. This project will provide physiologically
validated phenotypic traits, germplasm sources, and molecular markers that can
be applied in maize breeding programs towards drought tolerance. The project
includes collaboration with plant breeders in Africa and Latin American to
ensure connection and transfer of outcomes to smallholder farmers. With respect
to training, case studies on African agriculture will be developed for
undergraduate courses at the Pennsylvania State University and the University of
Wisconsin.

Access to project outcomes Project outcomes will be accessible through the USDA-
ARS National Plant Germplasm System (http://www.ars-grin.gov/npgs), the Maize
Genetics and Genomics Database MaizeGDB (http://www.maizegdb.org), and an
outreach web site to breeders which is available in English, French, Portuguese,
and Spanish (http://roots.psu.edu/?q=en/methods).