* 0965272
* REU Site: Warm-water aquatic ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Alan Wilson, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 297,891.00

An award was made to Auburn University (AU) to provide research training in
warm-water aquatic ecology for 10 weeks for 10 students from diverse social and
educational backgrounds, including Historically Black Colleges and Universities,
for the summers of 2011-2013. This REU Site is a collaborative effort involving
ten AU faculty mentors specializing in diverse but complementary disciplines,
including ecology, fisheries management, limnology, evolution, molecular
biology, microbiology, invasive species, behavior, and conservation. Together
these disciplines provide the educational basis for undergraduate students to
learn about techniques and tools to study warm-water aquatic communities, such
as reservoirs, farm ponds, streams, and brackish estuaries, in the southeastern
U.S. The primary objectives of this project include exposing participants to
different scientific hypotheses, research techniques, and ecological habitats
and conditions in an engaging, interdisciplinary atmosphere that fosters a
strong interest in aquatic sciences by the next generation of aquatic ecologists
and water resource experts. During the REU program, students will explore many
disparate aquatic habitats, experience life and coursework at a Ph.D. granting
institution, engage in research projects inside the laboratory and out in the
field, and present their summer research project results to their peers. REU
participants will be trained in basic and applied aquatic ecology including
fundamentals of the scientific method and data analysis and interpretation,
development and critique of professional presentations, scientific ethics,
research safety, preparing for opportunities beyond their undergraduate
education, and professional networking during formal meetings and social
gatherings. An AU program evaluator will gauge the effectiveness of these
activities using independent and group assessment tools. Interactions and
training within the REU Site will aid in the development of high-quality
research projects executed by REU students, ultimately leading to publications
in the peer-reviewed literature and presentations at national scientific
conferences. Student support for stipends, travel, room and board, and research
activities is provided. For more information about the program, please contact
Dr. Alan Wilson (wilson@auburn.edu, 334-246-1120, http://wilsonlab.com/) or
visit the project website at http://wilsonlab.com/reu/.