* 0965429
* BREAD:  Inactivating Rust Resistance Suppressors to Unlock Multiple Defense Responses in Wheat
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2019
* Li Huang, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2019
* USD 2,287,015.00

PI: Li Huang (Montana State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Evans Lagudah
(CSIRO Plant Industry-Black Mountain,
Australia)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Linda Tabe (CSIRO Plant Industry-
Black Mountain, Australia), Junhua Peng (Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan
Botanical Garden/Institute, Wuhan, China) and Davinder Singh (CIMMYT, Village
Market, Nairobi, Kenya)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wheat is a staple cereal for most
of the world's population. It is estimated that approximately 50% of the world's
wheat is grown in developing countries, where it serves as a staple food for a
large proportion of subsistence farmers. Rusts are fungal pathogens that cause
some of the most damaging diseases of wheat. Leaf rust (caused by Puccinia
triticina), stem rust (caused by P. graminis f. sp. tritici) and stripe rust
(caused by P. striiformis f. sp. tritici) are the most widely distributed
diseases of wheat. These diseases reduce plant fitness and result in grain yield
losses from 5-95%, depending on the rust species and the development stage at
which it infects the crop. Historically, breeding durable resistance to rust
diseases relies largely on continually introgressing new resistance genes into
adapted varieties, often from wild relatives. This long genetic process is not
always completely successful in eliminating unfavorable characteristics brought
in by linkage drag. Furthermore, there is genetic evidence that the functions of
introgressed resistance genes are often suppressed in the hexaploid wheat
genetic background. However, little is known about the nature of these
"suppressors" or the mechanism by which they act. This project will investigate
two suppressors of rust resistance in wheat that preliminary studies have shown,
when inactivated, unmask robust resistance to the newly emerged virulent stem
rust strain, Ug99, which currently threatens food security in Africa and the
Middle East. The project will deploy a multi-national team to 1) characterize
these two suppressors and their mechanism of action(s); 2) transfer this new
resistance to wheat breeding programs in both Kenya and China; and, 3) screen
project germplasm for resistance against other emerging rust disease threats
across this broad region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has the potential to
unlock an extensive array of cryptic rust resistance genes in the hexaploid
wheat genome that are either currently unrecognized or have been poorly
utilized. Suppressors of rust resistance have not been characterized in any
experimental system, so project results will provide fundamental new information
about the nature and mode of action of a previously-unstudied class of negative
regulators of plant defense responses. This research will have direct benefits
for agriculture in the developing world by providing new, useful sources of rust
resistance, with associated molecular markers. With respect to training and
outreach, the project will provide an exchange program to introduce young
researchers from Kenya and China to cutting-edge technologies, and to create
opportunities for young researchers from the USA and Australia to learn from
local knowledge in Kenya and China. The exchange program will train four young
scientists who will work in the two labs in Kenya and China to deliver cultivars
and to educate smallholder farmers of their nations. In addition, the project
will generate three video protocols available on-line to reach a broader
audience, including students, biology teachers, and wheat breeders in both
developed and developing countries. All data and biological resources generated
by the project will be available to the public. Gene expression data will be
submitted to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO;
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). Mapping and marker data will be submitted to
GrainGenes (http://wheat.pw.usda.gov/GG2/index.shtml) and germplasm and breeding
line information will be available through the website for the USDA-National
Institute of Food and Agriculture supported Durable Rust Resistance in Wheat
(DRRW) project (http://maswheat.ucdavis.edu/). Wheat lines used and/or developed
by this project will be available through the USDA-ARS National Small Grain
Collection (NSGC).