* 0965772
* Towards Sustainable Hydrocarbon Biorefineries: Deoxygenation of Biomass Oxygenates to Hydrocarbons via Methane
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Sandun Fernando, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 03/31/2015
* USD 350,774.00

0965772&lt;br/&gt;Fernando&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most
important technical challenges in the realization of sustainable hydrocarbon
(HC) biorefineries is the removal of oxygen from the feedstock, which typically
constitutes up to 35 wt% of lignocellulosic biomass. The closest technologies
for deoxygenation, hydrodeoxygenation and hydrocracking, are estimated to use
approximately 66 kg of hydrogen per metric ton of biomass. This hydrogen gas
need affects the long-term sustainability of HC biorefineries. Consequently,
there is need for an effective and a sustainable mechanism to remove oxygen from
biorenewable feedstocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methane is a hydrogen-rich gas
which can be produced by sustainable processes. The overall objective of this
proposal is to understand the fundamental catalytic processes that occur when
methane contacts biomass-derived oxygenates on bi-functional catalysts under
pyrolysis conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The possibility of kinetically coupling a hydrogen-
consuming reaction with a concurrent hydrogen-producing reaction is the basis
for oxygen-rich biomass feedstock deoxygenation. Specifically, aromatization of
biomass-derived oxygenates is the hydrogen consuming reaction. During this
process, benzene, toluene and xylene (BTX) are typically formed by dehydration
reactions, which produce water as byproduct. The hydrogen producing reactions
are methane steam reforming and methane aromatization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is hypothesized that methane can be directly coupled with biomass-derived
pyrolytic vapors (oxygenates) and deoxygenated into hydrocarbons over an
appropriate metal supported ZSM-5 bi-functional catalyst via two pathways: (1)
methane steam reforming and oxygenate aromatization, or (2) methane
aromatization and oxygenate aromatization. In the first coupling reaction,
hydrogen gas formed during methane steam reforming is used for the aromatization
of oxygenates. Water formed during oxygenate aromatization via dehydration is
used for methane steam reforming. The ultimate products of this coupling
reaction are hydrocarbons and carbon dioxide. In the second coupling reaction,
methane is aromatized to produce BTX (benzene, toluene, xylene) and hydrogen
gas. Oxygenates utilize the hydrogen formed and aromatize by dehydration,
removing oxygen as water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed research, the
reactions that occur between methane and the model oxygenate glucose in the
presence of selected bi-functional catalysts that contain metals (Sn, Ni, Ce, Ru
or Mo2C) on ZSM-5 catalysts will be elucidated. Candidate bi-functional
catalysts identified by this model study will then be used to explore the
spectrum of hydrocarbon products generated when when biomass constituents
(cellulose, lignin, solid biomass and bio-oil) are catalytically pyrolyzed in
the presence of methane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide
fundamental understanding on the chemistry that occurs at a catalyst surface
when an oxygen-rich substrate and methane - an oxygen-deficient, hydrogen-rich
substrate that is historically difficult to activate - are brought together. The
research is potentially transformative because it suggests a new route to
produce hydrocarbons from biomass that does not require hydrogen. The research
has practical implications, because existing petroleum refinery infrastructure
could be used to formulate commercially valuable hydrocarbons from
biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to the training of graduate students, the education and outreach plan focuses on
undergraduate student teaching and learning in a hands-on research environment.
Specifically, the proposed education activities feature the development of the
REACH program (Research Experiences for the Academically Challenged). In the
proposed REACH program, students from under-represented groups who are
academically at risk (&lt;2.5 GPA) are paired with students who are not at risk.
This team is provided with hands-on research experiences early in their
undergraduate program. The academic progress of these students will be tracked
during the course of their undergraduate career to evaluate whether or not
exposing them early on to hand-on research in this team environment helps
stimulate their excitement towards learning and promotes their retention in
engineering programs.