* 0965511
* BREAD:  Investigation of Attenuation Strategies to Enable Development of a Live Fowl Typhoid Vaccine
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Roy Curtiss, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2014
* USD 640,381.00

PI: Kenneth Roland (Arizona State University) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
Anatole Krattiger (Arizona State University); Roy Curtiss III (Arizona State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chickens are a primary and the fastest growing
source of protein in much of the developing world. Unfortunately, one organism,
Salmonella gallinarum, which is widely prevalent in developing countries, causes
fowl typhoid disease with devastating consequences in poultry. Vaccination
against fowl typhoid is an effective approach in preventing this disease. This
basic research project utilizes innovative mutational strategies and techniques
for developing a live attenuated Salmonella gallinarum vaccine. Such a vaccine
could have the added benefit of protecting against Salmonella pullorum, another
poultry pathogen and against the human diarrheal pathogen Salmonella
enteriditis, which colonizes chickens and can be transmitted to humans via
contaminated eggs and meat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A long-term
result of this basic science project will be the availability of a vaccine that
will distributed locally to villages where it can be easily applied to small,
backyard flocks. It is the hope that this will lead to a more plentiful and
reliable food supply, thus combating malnutrition, particularly in the poorer
rural and urban areas of the developing world. Because increased egg and poultry
productivity also results in surplus that can be sold, the project could
directly contribute to poverty alleviation. The results will also lead to a
safer food supply by reducing the transmission of diarrheal bacterial pathogens
via food. This project involves international collaborators in developing
countries and local outreach activities in the US. Scientific demonstrations
will be given in the Arizona community (including local high schools), and at
the local science center where a large cross section of the population is
exposed to the research at the Biodesign Institute on the ASU campus. This
project will also support an active program of undergraduate research and all
data will deposited in and shared via public databases.