* 0965081
* Computational Study of Microstructure Formation and Magnetic Domain Evolution in FePt Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/17/2009,08/31/2012
* Yongmei Jin, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 190,954.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This award supports computational materials theory and education focused on
microstructure evolution in ferromagnetic materials. As promising candidates for
ultra-high density magnetic and magneto-optical recording media and for high
energy product hard magnets in micro-electromechanical systems, iron-platinum
films are attracting extensive experimental research. Microstructure engineering
of iron-platinum films faces scientific and technological challenges to further
improve their magnetic properties and meet the increasing requirements for high
technology applications. The PI aims to establish microstructure property-
mechanism relationships and find processing routes to produce the desired
microstructures in iron-platinum films. The PI will develop phase field
micromagnetic and microelastic models of iron-platinum films in combination with
the models of ordering, decomposition, and grain growth to perform simulation
studies of crystallographic microstructure formation and ferromagnetic domain
evolution. The modeling will treat multiple physical processes during film
annealing, including ordering transition, decomposition, grain growth, and
simulate the formation of crystallographic microstructures. The magnetic
properties of iron-platinum films with the obtained underlying microstructures
will be further investigated by modeling and simulation of ferromagnetic domain
evolution in the films. The objectives of this project are to (1) develop
computational tools for simulating microstructure formation and magnetic domain
evolution in iron-platinum films, (2) correlate processing, microstructures, and
magnetic properties, (3) provide quantitative explanation of experimental
findings, and (4) identify novel microstructures for improved magnetic
properties and design appropriate processing to produce such microstructures.
The PI also aims to provide insight into the microstructure engineering of other
thin film ferromagnetic materials. The supported research and education will
train a graduate student in computational materials science, and provide
opportunities for undergraduate students to participate and gain experience in
simulation-based materials research. Educational modules will be developed for
classroom demonstration and hands-on virtual experiments for students.
Educational materials will also be developed with an aim to engage high school
students and teachers and to foster interest in Simulation-Based Science and
Engineering. The PI commits herself to create opportunities for talented women
and underrepresented minorities to participate in computational materials
research.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This award supports computational materials theory and education focused on the
magnetic properties of thin films. The research will focus on thin films
composed of iron and platinum. Recent experiments suggest this material would be
a promising candidate for data storage technologies. The PI aims to use computer
simulation to model the structure of the material on length scales larger than
an atom but much smaller than a thumb. Structure on this scale controls the
magnetic properties of the material that make it suitable for recording
technology applications. The PI will develop computational tools that will
enable her to establish connections between the structure and properties of the
material. Once these are understood, the research will focus on addressing how
to actually make films with the right structure. The computational tools
developed in this research project will advance computational materials science.
The research focuses on a technologically important material and how to process
it, further contributing to keeping America competitive. The supported research
and education will train a graduate student in computational materials science,
and provide opportunities for undergraduate students to participate and gain
experience in simulation-based materials research. Educational modules will be
developed for classroom demonstration and hands-on virtual experiments for
students. Educational materials will also be developed with an aim to engage
high school students and teachers and to foster interest in Simulation-Based
Science and Engineering. The PI commits herself to create opportunities for
talented women and underrepresented minorities to participate in computational
materials research.



