* 0965444
* RDE-FRI Collaborative Research: Students with Learning Disabilities:  STEM Pathways in the Social Context
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2009,03/31/2012
* Rebecca Callahan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 03/31/2012
* USD 95,907.00

The "RDE-FRI Collaborative Research: Students with Learning Disabilities: STEM
Pathways in the Social Context" is designed to explore the effects of high
school context, social and academic processes, as well as variations by
demographic subgroup (racial, ethnic and linguistic minority, gender, class)
among the population of students with learning disabilities, on college
preparatory STEM achievement outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data analyses will
be conducted using information from the 2002-2006 National Center for Education
Statistics's Education Longitudinal Study, a dataset that follows a nationally
representative sample of students as they transition from high school into
adulthood and post-secondary settings. This research will address the following
four primary question sets:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I. Students with Learning
Disabilities and Their Schools: &lt;br/&gt;The first line of investigation is to
systematically describe the students identified with learning disabilities and
the schools they attend. Are identification of a learning disability and the
type of school associated with a student's socio-demographic characteristics -
specifically, gender, race/ethnicity, social class, and/or language minority
status and Limited English Proficiency (LEP)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;II. Academic
Experiences: &lt;br/&gt;The second line of inquiry concentrates on
systematically describing students' academic experiences through the courses
that they take. We concentrate on the degree of mainstreaming, the specific
coursework, and the pedagogy in their math classes. What types of organizational
models of course-taking do students with learning disabilities experience? To
what extent do they take courses that prepare them for postsecondary study and
for advanced STEM coursework in high school and college? What pedagogical
approaches do their teachers use? And, finally, do these patterns differ on the
basis of students' socio-demographic characteristics?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;III.
Social Processes: Social Integration, Behavior, and Psychosocial Attitudes and
Well-being: &lt;br/&gt;The third line of study will explore the social world of
adolescents in their schools and then consider the social processes in relation
to their academic experiences. To what extent are students with learning
disabilities integrated into the social fabric of the school through
relationships with peers, teachers, and adult mentors? In what academic and
social behaviors do they engage in comparison with their peers without learning
disabilities? How do students with learning disabilities perceive themselves,
and do they have academic self-confidence, and STEM specific interest and
confidence? To what extent are their social worlds a function of their academic
experiences? And, finally, do these informal social processes and their
relationships to academic experiences differ depending on the student's
background (gender, race/ethnicity, social class, and/or language minority
status and LEP)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IV. STEM Pipeline and Academic Outcomes:
&lt;br/&gt;The final line of inquiry will consider how schools, academic
experiences, and informal social processes influence academic outcomes
(graduation, college preparation, college enrollment, and STEM achievement) for
high school students with learning disabilities. The impact of each set of
factors will be examined separately and in combination. What types of schools
and academic experiences facilitate students? college preparatory and, in
particular, STEM success, and do these effects differ depending on students'
socio-demographic characteristics?