* 0965442
* Learning Across Product, Workgroup, and Geographic Boundaries
* SBE,SBE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Erica Fuchs, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 05/31/2014
* USD 707,810.00

Learning Across Product, Workgroup, and Geographic
Boundaries&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organizational learning is critical to the
performance and long-run success of firms and nations. Organi-zations that are
able to learn from their experience and transfer the knowledge they acquire
throughout their establishments are more successful than their counterparts that
are less adept at organizational learning. Yet organizations vary significantly
in their ability to learn with some organizations demonstrat-ing dramatic
improvements and other organizations evidencing little or no learning.
Leveraging extensive data collected over several years from a high technology,
offshore product development and manufacturing facility of a U.S. firm, this
project conducts three studies to shed light into learning across 1) product, 2)
workgroup, and 3) geographic boundaries within the firm.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The first study focuses on
organizational learning in a multi-product production envi-ronment with high
turnover. Ninety percent of U.S. output comes from multi-product facilities. Yet
past studies of organizational learning have focused primarily on production
sites with a single product or a product with minor variations. This first study
investigates how product mix and employee turnover affect performance, whether
turnover is more harmful for certain products and processes than others, and
whether turnover of individuals with certain skills and experiences is more
harmful than turnover of other individuals. The second study examines knowledge
transfer across workgroups. The third study sheds insights into whether moving
product development closer to manufacturing helps performance, which product
development activities may be important to co-locate, and the impact on
performance of moving more product development activities offshore. As more
manufacturing has moved overseas, there have been concerns that knowledge work,
such as R&amp;D, will follow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: These three
studies provide empirical evidence about knowledge accumulation and transfer in
an offshore environment, and thereby inform corporate decisions about offshoring
as well as U.S. industrial and manufacturing policy.&lt;br/&gt;