* 0965346
* BREAD:   A Modern Approach Towards Developing Vaccines for Critical Bovine Diseases Impacting Smallholder Farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Soren Buus, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2015
* USD 1,980,782.00

PI: John Barlow (University of Vermont)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Soren Buus
(University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark); William Golde (USDA/Plum Island
Animal Disease Center); Vish Nene, (International Livestock Research Institute
[ILRI], Nairobi, Kenya)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Morten Nielsen
(Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark); Philip Toye (International
Livestock Research Institute [ILRI], Nairobi, Kenya)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cattle, and especially dairy cattle, are an important
agricultural resource to smallholder farmers in sub-Saharan Africa, providing a
source of animal protein to farm families, as well as income through increased
market opportunities. East Coast fever (ECF) and Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD)
are two high priority diseases impacting cattle health and productivity and are
a major constraint on cattle productivity and create vulnerabilities for
smallholder farmers in developing countries. The objective of this international
project is to characterize the bovine immune response at the molecular level in
an effort to aid and accelerate the development of vaccine technology for ECF
and FMC, which significantly impact smallholder farmers in sub-Saharan Africa.
This project will develop an important new technology - MHC tetramers - for
evaluation of cattle T-cell immune response to these two critical diseases. This
novel strategy will provide important basic information on the molecular
recognition events in the mmune response of cattle to these two diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The molecular immunological
information gained in this project will aid in accelerating the evaluation of
the immune response to natural infections and vaccination and will provide a
foundation of knowledge and tools for vaccine development in general. In the
long term, this project will enhance global cattle health through the
dissemination of improved infection and vaccine assessment technologies. The
long-term impacts of these efforts on developing countries are anticipated to
include reduced vulnerability of smallholder farmers to agricultural resource
losses due to animal disease, i.e. negative impacts on cattle productivity,
morbidity and mortality. Additional impacts include establishing international
research collaborations between faculty and students at an undergraduate and
EPSCoR institution (The University of Vermont) with both governmental and non-
governmental partners. An important component of this includes the transfer of
cutting-edge technologies via North-South collaborations and capacity building.
This research collaboration also integrates a broader goal to enhance young
scientist research training and pre- and post-veterinary education opportunities
by strengthening partnerships between academic, federal, and international
scientists to address global animal health issues of national importance for the
United States and developing countries including those of sub-Saharan Africa.
Data generated in this project will be made available on public access
scientific databases including: Immuno Polymorphism Database (IPD) MHC database
for cattle (BoLA) sequences (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/mhc/); Epitope Database
(IEDB) website (http://www.immuneepitope.org/); and /Theileria parva/database
(TparvaDB) website (http://tparvadb.ilri.cgiar.org/).