* 0965242
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Recovery Targets, Historical Baselines, and Ecosystem Degradation
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Loren McClenachan, McClenachan             Loren
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 153,872.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Loren
McClenachan to work with Dr. Nicholas K. Dulvy at Simon Fraser University in
Canada. Analyses of historical data for marine vertebrates around the world have
found population declines for many species exceeding 90%. Recent interest in the
conservation of these charismatic megafauna has resulted in international,
regional, and national level legislation to protect remnant populations.
However, policy frameworks designed for population recovery typically lack
clearly defined recovery targets. Therefore, there is an emerging need to
determine the relationship between recovery targets for endangered and protected
species and past population sizes, particularly when carrying capacities of
historically exploited species have changed due to fishing of prey species or
habitat alteration. The objective of this research is to improve the process of
recovery planning for large marine vertebrates through analysis of historical
population and ecological baselines, limits to carrying capacity, and the goals
of protective legislation. Specifically, the goals of this project are to (1)
estimate past biomass densities of predators and their prey, (2) determine
modern carrying capacity for these large marine vertebrates and the potential to
modify it by changing exploitation pressure on prey species, and (3) analyze the
relationship between historical baselines and recovery targets in the context of
management objectives in order to develop options for incorporating historical
data into recovery plans. Establishing a relationship between past and target
population sizes is important from both an ecological and management
perspective. This research provides ecosystem-based reconstructions of past
abundances for a number of species of large marine vertebrates, as well as a
broader framework for incorporating historical data into management and
conservation. The results will contribute to a broad understanding of past,
present and future productivity of marine ecosystems under varying degrees of
human impact and improve the process of setting recovery targets for
historically exploited species. Specifically, it will provide guidance for
understanding the types of historical data that can be included in analysis of
population trends, how these long-term data fit into existing management goals,
and how long-term ecological changes and modern fisheries interactions affect
recovery potential. Historical population abundances are not necessarily
appropriate restoration targets, but they are essential to (i) avoid the
shifting baseline syndrome by setting recovery targets too low, (ii) better
understand the degree to which animal biomass and higher order productivity has
changed over time and (iii) establish ecosystem-based approaches for recovering
populations of protected marine vertebrates.