* 0965009
* CAREER:  Seeking Half-Metallic Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,11/30/2013
* Shane Stadler, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 11/30/2013
* USD 308,614.00

Technical&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project addresses fundamental materials science
research on the synthesis, processing and characterization of half-metallic
alloys. Through theoretical predictions, some full-Heusler alloys have been
predicted to be half-metallic. Two such systems are Co2MnSi and Co2MnGe, neither
of which exhibits half-metallic character, which may be related to the presence
of antisite disorder, a condition, e.g., where Co atoms are substituted in the
Mn sublattice in the full-Heusler L21 structure. Co antisite occupancy results
in unwanted states appearing in the minority band gap, and therefore in the
consequential reduction of the spin polarization, precluding the use of Heusler
alloys in spintronic devices. A fundamental goal of this project is to reduce or
avoid the adverse effects of Co antisite disorder in highly spin polarized full-
Heusler alloy systems. In the near-stoichiometric Heusler alloys Co2MnZ, the
effects of pulsed laser deposition growth parameters on the antisite disorder
and spin-polarization will be determined. In particular, the effects of an
applied magnetic field at the substrate during the growth of thin films will be
explored. It is suggested that this will increase the magnetic ordering of the
system and may directly reduce the degree of Co antisite occupancy.
&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to have a broader
impact on science and education. As an integral part of research and education,
a unique undergraduate course is proposed which essentially comprises an
introduction to "real" research methods. It is a two-semester course that is
focused on magnetism and magnetic materials. In the first semester, the
fundamentals of magnetism are covered in order to provide a theoretical
background. The second semester focuses on the principle measurement techniques
and is lab-intensive. A sequence of six labs is designed to mimic a real
research project from conception to communicating the results in both verbal and
written forms. They start with bulk fabrication (making pulsed laser deposition
targets), bulk characterization, thin film growth, thin film characterization,
data analysis, and writing and presenting results. Scientific results that are
obtained may open vistas for new research. For instance, new spin-polarized
nonstoichiometric variants of Heusler alloys, if they were discovered, would
immediately be the subject of many new studies. The discovery of an industrially
functional highly spin-polarized material, or an ideal half-metal, would greatly
influence the design of existing magnetoelectronic devices and, more
importantly, ignite the pursuit of new ones. The project could have a profound
impact on society. A real half-metal could be exploited in devices that range
from sensors to magnetic random access memory. These devices could be employed
to improve many aspects of our lives, from medical systems to computers.
&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, a new doctoral program in applied physics has recently
been approved in the Department of Physics at Southern Illinois University,
admitting students in 2005. Over the five-year duration, this project is
expected to fund nine graduate students who will be among the first to receive
Ph. D. degrees in this department. This proposal will also fund about 8-10
undergraduate students, giving them the opportunity to experience many facets of
magnetic materials research in a scientifically and socially diverse
environment. The educational activities are designed to actively recruit
students, including those from underrepresented groups, into the field of
magnetic materials research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;