* 0965872
* The Austin Community College District S-STEM Program:  Increasing Academic Opportunities for Community College Students in Biotechnology and Environmental Science
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Patricia Phelps, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 03/31/2015
* USD 599,756.00

S-STEM scholarships are being awarded to a cohort of 24 full-time students in
biotechnology or environmental science associate degree programs. Students are
recruited from high schools, nonprofit organizations, and the college's student
population; selected based on financial need and academic talent, and; assisted
by support infrastructures including a learning community, ongoing monitoring,
added counseling, problem-based learning projects, industry contact, and
internships (an existing degree component).

Objectives 1. Enhance and increase student support services via curricular and
extracurricular activities; 2. Improve academic support through Problem Based
Learning (PBL) and Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL); 3. Increase the number of
educated and skilled employees in biotechnology and environmental science; 4.
Provide an internship in local industry and academic and governmental labs; 5.
Provide assistance with job placement or career advancement; 6. Increase student
networking through a learning community between the two degree programs.

Intellectual Merit Academic Models: In Problem Based Learning (PBL), students
work in small groups to solve a structured curriculum-related problem. Students
systematically define what information is needed and what resources are
available to solve a problem. As proficiency increases, PBL activities become
more complex to reflect realistic situations with few clues. In Peer-Led Team
Learning (PLTL), a learning model where students work in teams to solve
structured problems under a trained peer leader, large numbers of students are
engaged through both course material and interaction among study groups.
Evaluation of a 10-year study in 12 institutions shows that the PLTL approach
improved performance and retention, communication, course satisfaction, and
interest in pursuing further study in science.

Broader Impact Communication across two related disciplines, biotechnology and
environmental science, and the implementation of PBL activities, can serve as a
general model for supporting engagement and success in other academic and
workforce preparation fields. Also, by eliminating economic barriers for
financially needy, talented students, diversity in the sciences is improved.