* 0965441
* BREAD:   Sustainable Solutions for Preserving Pollinator Health in East Africa
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* James Frazier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2014
* USD 599,598.00

PI: James H. Tumlinson (Pennsylvania State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-
PIs: James L. Frazier, Maryann Frazier, Christina M. Grozinger, and Harland M.
Patch (Pennsylvania State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Daniel
Masiga (African Insect Science for Food and Health, Kenya), Elliud Muli (African
Insect Science for Food and Health, Kenya)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insect
pollination is an essential component of both ecosystems and agricultural
production systems worldwide. The honeybee species Apis mellifera is considered
the most important generalist pollinator of agricultural systems and, although
poorly documented, is also known to be an important pollinator of natural
ecosystems. In Africa, native honey bees (Apis mellifera) of several different
races are reportedly responsible for pollinating 40-70% of indigenous plants,
some of which are important commercial crops. Dramatic declines in honey bee
populations have been documented around the world and the recently named Colony
Collapse Disorder (CCD) has been identified as an important player responsible
for these dramatic loses. Despite intensive research efforts, the causes of CCD
have not been identified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Factors identified as the most
likely contributors to CCD and the decline of honey bee populations include
Varroa mites (Varroa destructor), diseases, particularly viruses vectored by
Varroa, pesticide exposure, and stresses associated with modern beekeeping
practices like the movement of hives and poor nutrition. CCD has not been
reported in Africa, yet recently the existence of Varroa mites in honey bee
colonies in Kenya was discovered. Bee keepers in East Africa had not noticed the
mites, and their effect on the East African bees is not clear. This project will
provide a detailed survey of geographically distributed subspecies of native
honey bees in Kenya, and characterize the distribution of Varroa, as well as
other pathogens which have important impacts on colony health. Additionally the
project will determine if Varroa loads are associated with reduced colony
productivity and variation in specific behavioral traits in bees. The factors
that mediate the interactions of Varroa mites with honey bees are very poorly
understood and little is known about the mechanisms that allow bees to resist or
tolerate the mites. The results of this pilot project will lay the groundwork
for years of future studies to elucidate the factors and mechanisms that will
allow sustainable management of honey bees and protection from mites and other
diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Along with the potential for
enhanced income to beekeepers and smallholder farmers through active
participation in regional cooperatives, the successes in Kenya may well serve as
a model approach for similar efforts in neighboring countries in both East and
West equatorial Africa. The outcomes of this research project may offer new
approaches for bee breeding, potentially including transgenics, for use in
agriculture in the developed world. With a permanent collaborative program on
pollinator health at ICIPE and PSU, longer term consequences will undoubtedly
involve further understanding of other honey bee diseases and mechanisms of
resistance, and eventually pollinator community level interactions and their
roles in stabilizing ecosystems. The results and methodology from this project
will be broadly disseminated to the public and honey bee community in the US and
East Africa through public repositories (such as GenBank for subspecies sequence
information) and the websites for both ICIPE (http://www.icipe.org/) and the
Center for Pollinator Research at Penn State (http://ento.psu.edu/pollinators).
This project will be used in the future as a platform for undergraduate and
graduate training of both African and US students, including active exchanges
between institutions.