* 0965316
* Collaborative Research: Cross Species Analysis of Biological Systems Using Expression Data
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Ziv Bar-Joseph, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 737,114.00

Cross species analysis of biological systems using expression
data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Mellon University and the University of
Pittsburgh are awarded a grant to develop and implement algorithms and software
tools for the analysis of gene expression experiments that study the same
biological system in multiple species. Biological systems, including the cell
division process which plays a major role in development and cancer, immune
response and circadian rhythm (which governs our behavior over the course of a
day) are similarly activated across many different species. Indeed, much of the
progress in understanding these systems was achieved by studying their behavior
in model organisms. When using expression experiments, which measure the level
of genes at different time points and in different conditions, to study these
systems, researchers often identify hundreds, or even thousands, of genes as
being expressed in each of the species. This makes it hard to analyze the
resulting sets and to accurately identify genes that control key aspects of the
system. In addition, our ability to correctly detect interactions among these
genes is greatly reduced since many potential interactions can be used to
explain the observed expression values. This joint computational-experimental
project will allow us to identify a core set of genes; genes which are conserved
in both sequence and expression across multiple species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These genes represent key components of the biological
system, are essential to its proper maintenance and function and would be used
for further studies and for initial modeling. Predictions made by our method for
these systems will be validated by new biological experiments which will in turn
be used to further refine the computational model leading to a computational-
experimental loop. As part of the proposal we will also develop an open source
software package for cross species expression analysis. We will also develop and
offer a new class on the analysis and use of cross species genomics data.