* 0965754
* Achievement through Student Support and Experiential Training in Science (ASSETS) Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2017
* Ray Barber, Abraham Baldwin Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

This project is designed to provide scholarships to students enrolled in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) majors over a five-year
period. Students receiving these scholarships are majoring in biology,
chemistry, mathematics, physics, engineering, or computer science. Intellectual
Merit: The objectives are to recruit more students into the STEM disciplines, to
provide elevated levels of support and opportunities for these students, to
guide them towards graduation with an associate degree and into transfer
programs allowing them the opportunity to receive their baccalaureate degrees,
and to expand the support structures and enrichment activities developed by this
project to be accessible to all STEM students. While the scholarship recipients
are being selected by a committee from candidates identified from a state-wide
recruitment plan, the primary focus is on applicants from the local region who
have demonstrated academic potential and financial need. Recipients of the
scholarships are each paired with a faculty mentor who works closely with them.
Students are placed in cohort groups, taking as many classes as possible
together. Enrichment opportunities include research experiences, department
seminars, field trips, assisting in K-12 science/math classrooms, and social
activities with departmental faculty.

The broader impact are threefold: 1) additional STEM professionals are
graduating and accepting positions in the scientific community, 2) the
enrichment programs developed by the project are being made available to other
students, and 3) faculty collaborations across departments, institutions,
government, and industrial/scientific partners are increasing.