* 0965121
* BREAD:  Towards Biological Control of Insect Oil Palm Pests
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Thomas Miller, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2014
* USD 525,681.00

PI: Raymond St. Leger (University of Maryland)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI:
Thomas A. Miller (University of California,
Riverside)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: Charles Dewhurst (Papua New Guinea
Oil Palm Research Association, Papua New Guinea)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arthropod
pests destroy about 25% of the world's annual crop production. Since the
introduction of chemical insecticides in the 1940s, arthropod pest control has
relied heavily upon chemical insecticides. However, the development of insect
resistance, and the environmental and health impacts of these chemicals has
stimulated the search for alternative pest control methods. More than 80% of the
reports of pest problems in Papua New Guinea (PNG) each year derive from a group
of long-horn grasshoppers collectively known as Sexava, which defoliate oil
palms in large outbreaks. Through proof-of-concept basic research, this project
will focus on understanding and testing an alternative pest control approach
towards mitigation of long-horn grasshopper insect pest. The fungus Metarhizium
anisopliae strain 443 is specific to long-horns and could be mass produced at
low cost, but adequate crop protection requires that the fungus be more potent.
First, the infectivity of M. anisopliae will be used as a delivery system for
insecticidal proteins to improve virulence of the fungus. M. anisopliae will be
engineered to express insecticidal peptides from scorpion or spider, to increase
the efficacy of the biocontrol agent with a reduced spore dose and time of
treatment. Second, molecular strategies will be tested to block production of
fungal spores in order to prevent the potential spread of transgenes when the
fungus passed through the insect host. The overall goal of the project is to
carry out initial work towards a biological pest control agent with genetic
containment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research is
expected to extend beyond M. anisopliae in providing a model for host-pathogen
interactions. The project will provide basic insight for the development of
biological pest control agents. Project progress and outcomes will be accessible
on a project web site at the University of Maryland (http://TEGR.umd.edu) and
through publication in open access journals. Finally, this project supports a
postdoctoral scholar and emphasizes the inclusion of underrepresented minorities
in research that integrates genetic, molecular, physiological and observational
approaches.