* 0965533
* BREAD:   An Alternate Dwarfing Gene System to Improve Abiotic Stress Tolerance in Cereals
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Kulvinder Gill, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2015
* USD 1,564,486.00

PI: Kulvinder S. Gill (Washington State University)

CoPIs: Johar Singh (Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, India) and
Devinder Sandhu (University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point)

Key Collaborators: Kanwarpal S. Dhugga (Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc.),
Gurmukh S. Johal (Purdue University), Mustafa Shafqat (COMSATS University,
Abbottabad, Pakistan), Harindra S. Balyan and Pushpendra K. Gupta (Meerut
University, India), and Madhu Meeta Jindal (Punjab Agricultural University,
Ludhiana, India)

Genes influencing plant height have revolutionized agriculture by doubling the
wheat and rice production. Under conditions of environmental stress, the most
predominantly used wheat semi-dwarf mutants rht1 and rht2 exhibit adverse
effects on agronomic traits including coleoptile and first leaf length, root
length and biomass, as well as drought tolerance. These adverse effects limit
wheat yields under abiotic stress conditions that regularly affect more than 85%
of the US and about 50% of the world wheat production area. The main goal of the
project is to identify and characterize an alternative dwarfing gene system for
wheat and other cereals in order to alleviate adverse effects of the currently
used dwarfing genes. Currently used dwarfing gene systems in wheat reduce plant
height by interrupting production or signaling of plant growth hormone
gibberellins that are particularly important for plants to deal with stressful
conditions. Previous studies have shown that mutations in the maize brachytic2
(br2) and the sorghum dwarf3 (dw3) genes that encode P-glycoproteins (PGPs)
involved in polar transport of auxin, result in a reduction in plant height
without any of the adverse phenotypic effects usually associated with the
currently used wheat dwarfing mutants. Based on these observations, this project
will test whether the wheat ortholog (TaBr2) of the maize Br2 gene can be used
as an alternative dwarfing gene system in wheat. Specific objectives are to
clone TaBr2 and to study its expression and function in wheat using various
reverse genetics tools including virus-induced gene silencing and RNAi. In
addition, mutations in TaBr2 will be isolated using phenotypic as well as by
TILLING screens in order to identify the ideal dwarfing mutant.

The benefit of the project, especially to farmers with small land holdings, will
come from the introgression of value-added genes, including stripe rust
resistance genes as well as newly-developed dwarfing gene mutants, into popular
varieties of India, Pakistan, and the US. In addition, the project will provide
new insight into the process of auxin signaling and transport in crop plants.

The project will provide highly interdisciplinary and international research
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as for
research associates/visiting scientists. The PIs are actively involved in
outreach activities including farmers' Field Days, talking to grower groups and
organizing lab demonstrations and displays to grower groups and the public at
large. The project information and findings will be communicated with the public
via these efforts as well as through electronic means. A project website will be
developed that will serve as a "one-stop" location for access to all resources
generated in this project. Links will be provided to this project webpage from
each of the investigator's web pages as well. Expression and sequence data will
be immediately submitted to GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), according to
the currently accepted community standard (e.g. Bermuda/Ft. Lauderdale
agreement). Real-time expression data of selected genes on various wheat lines
will be made freely available first via publications and then by hosting on the
project webpage and on Gramene (http://www.gramene.org/). Mapping data will be
available at GrainGenes database (http://wheat.pw.usda.gov/GG2/index.shtml). All
VIGS and RNAi constructs and germplasm generated in this project will be
maintained in the PIs' lab and will be available to the public. Gene
introgression lines developed in India and Pakistan will be released as public
varieties after going through variety testing programs of the respective
countries. Introgression lines developed in the US will be released as public
varieties, possibly through the USDA-ARS National Center for Genetic Resources
Preservation and the Plant Variety Protection Office.