* 0965310
* Technology Disruptions in Industries: Assessing Their Frequency, Processes, and Impact
* SBE,SBE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Kenneth Simons, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 05/31/2014
* USD 382,041.00

A central, yet little-researched, contributor to technology's advance and
economic growth is "disruptive" technological change, which replaces older
technologies and products with newer ones. Examples include electronic
calculators replacing mechanical calculators, smaller hard disk drives replacing
larger drives, or new generations of photolithographic aligners for
semiconductor manufacture. Such technology disruption is considered a crucial
influence on industries, has been shown to endanger businesses, and is central
to the manner in which many new technologies contribute to societal welfare and
economic growth.

Intellectual Merit: This research measures, for the first time, the frequency of
disruptive technological change across a broad group of industries. It also
assesses specific processes and impacts of disruption in a sample of industries.
The research analyzes 47 narrowly defined, product-level industries,
representative of various types of U.S. manufacturing, from approximately 1900
to 2010. Jointly analyzed are related industries that fulfilled similar purposes
for buyers. Intensive data collection is necessary to develop longitudinal
measures of, in part, business entry and exit, market share, and patented and
non-patented technologies. Data are being collected with the aid of two teams of
summer research assistants, painstakingly assembling evidence primarily from
library and archival sources. The frequency of disruptive technological change
is being assessed using alternative definitions of disruption, ranging from the
replacement of incumbent producers by new entrants to the internal development
of new technologies and products by leading incumbent producers. Specific
theories of disruptive technological change are simultaneously being probed in
many industries, through in-depth analysis of sources including historical,
technological, and trade literatures.

Broader Impact: Knowing the frequency of disruptive technological change is
essential to properly understand how technology is advancing the economy, and
this frequency is being determined for the first time across many U.S.
industries. Fruitful policy insights may result, since the research improves
fundamental understanding of entrepreneurship, corporate policy, and
technological change. Understanding the interactions of entrepreneurs,
businesses entering from other industries, and incumbent producers during
technological disruptions is key to understanding how policies might enhance
economic growth.