* 0965900
* Factors Affecting Geographic Variation in Orangutan Diet
* SBE,BCS
* 08/25/2009,03/31/2011
* Erin Vogel, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 03/31/2011
* USD 18,356.00

The notion of orangutan culture is provocative, as it suggests that human
culture evolved in the context of immense environmental complexity. Yet such
complexity obscures the potential effect of environmental variation on the
origin of innovative foraging behaviors. The objective of this study is to
understand the mechanisms that contribute to geographic variation in orangutan
diet, and to establish the degree to which food choice in orangutans has a
cultural basis. The question to be answered may be phrased, "To what extent does
geographic variation in the abundance and quality of food resources affect
orangutan foraging behavior and diet selection?" Three main hypotheses are
tested. The first and second hypotheses will determine if orangutans select food
items based on nutritional quality and availability in the habitat. If food
selection cannot be explained by ecological principles, a further analysis will
examine if these foods are harder to process and require longer periods of
social learning during the juvenile dependency period, which can last up to nine
years in orangutans. The third hypothesis will determine if orangutans develop
innovative foraging behaviors in response to variations in food availability.
Are innovative foraging behaviors more likely to evolve out of necessity when
food is scarce or due to increases in leisure time when food is
abundant?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic methodology to be used is geographical.
A series of protocols integrate standardized observations of behavior, food
nutritional analyses, and food mechanical properties across five field sites in
Indonesia: four study populations in Borneo, and one in Sumatra. This project
involves close collaboration between scientists from the United States, England,
Switzerland, and Indonesia. Technological and intellectual exchange between
foreign and Indonesian scientists is critical to the establishment and
conservation of research partnerships and their associated habitats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on population models and the current rate of
deforestation, orangutans across Sumatra and Borneo may disappear within the
next 25-100 years. Detailed investigations on orangutans and documenting the
types of resources that promote innovative behaviors in this close human
relative are critical because we may not have the opportunity in the future.
Understanding the importance of culture in feeding behavior is also important
for orangutan conservation. If socially-transmitted feeding skills are important
for the maintenance of energy budgets in an area, then a decline in orangutan
density, due to anthropogenic disturbances, may result in fewer opportunities
for transmission of essential skills. Potentially, this could lead to these
skills being lost from the population. The results will inform documentaries
aimed at public education and conservation, which is critical for the
persistence of this highly endangered species. The research will increase
knowledge regarding which kinds of foods prompt cultural innovation and will
help model the environmental milieu in which ape culture originated. The results
will be critical for assessing the size of the culture gap between apes and
humans and for evaluating why humans evolved such cultural complexity.
&lt;br/&gt;