* 0965174
* 2010 Catalysis Gordon Research Conference, June 27 - July 2, 2010 in New London, NH
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Abhaya Datye, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 02/28/2011
* USD 15,000.00

0965174&lt;br/&gt;Datye&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalysis is a key technology for
improving the quality of life while simultaneously reducing the adverse impact
of human activities on the environment. The discovery of new catalytic processes
and the improvement of existing ones have a major economic impact and it is
estimated that 80%&lt;br/&gt;of the products of modern society go through a
catalytic process at some point in their manufacture. Catalysis is also
critically important for securing the national energy supply.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support for the 2010 Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) on Catalysis to be held at Colby-Sawyer College in New
London, New Hampshire,&lt;br/&gt;from June 27 to July 2, 2010. This conference
is traditionally held every 2 years and will bring together leading researchers
from around the world to discuss their latest, most exciting work in catalysis.
The 2010 conference &lt;br/&gt;is organized into session topics with a
discussion leader who is a specialist in the particular field of catalysis. The
topics for the 2010&lt;br/&gt;conference are listed below:&lt;br/&gt;.
Alternative Feedstock For Chemicals And Fuels&lt;br/&gt;. Novel Catalytic
Materials&lt;br/&gt;. 3D Imaging Of Catalysts&lt;br/&gt;. The Science Of
Catalyst Synthesis&lt;br/&gt;. Engineering Of Catalysts For Exceptional
Stability&lt;br/&gt;. Molecular Insights Through Theory&lt;br/&gt;.
Spectroscopy, With Special Emphasis On Heterogeneous Catalysis In The Liquid
Phase&lt;br/&gt;. Surface Science&lt;br/&gt;. Future Perspectives On
Catalysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference seeks to gather leading people in
the field and to bring them into contact with each other and with younger
graduate students, post-docs and&lt;br/&gt;junior faculty to seed new thoughts
across catalysis. The secluded setting for the conference keeps the participants
on site and maximizes interactions and intellectual discourse and networking.
The primary product is the summary and dispersal of ideas across the catalysis
community.