* 0965820
* IGERT Linking Individuals, Families and Environments in An Aging Society
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Ronald Metoyer, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2016
* USD 2,874,254.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the development of an interdisciplinary, cellular to societal, graduate training
program in Aging Sciences at Oregon State University (OSU). The program
capitalizes on synergies among scientists at OSU's Center for Healthy Aging
Research in the following multidisciplinary research cores: 1) Diet, Genes, and
Aging; 2) Musculoskeletal Aging; 3) Psychosocial Aging, and 4) Gerontechnology.

Intellectual Merit: Dramatic increases in longevity have altered the nature of
work, family relationships, retirement, health care, and the economy.
Maintenance of independence and physical, cognitive, and psychological health in
later life depends on understanding and advances in nutrition, exercise,
sociocultural factors, assistive technology, and the built environment. Broader
Impacts: The IGERT in Aging Sciences trains a new generation of U.S. researchers
in cross disciplinary work using state-of-the-art equipment and methods to
discover mechanisms that moderate the rate of aging and affect quality of life.
Student recruitment from underrepresented groups, attention to diversity, and
global education enhance all training aspects. The newly developed Aging
Sciences minor will produce effective communicators who can leverage their
comprehensive knowledge of aging and foster interdisciplinary collaborations.
Structured activities include: participation in research apprenticeships with
faculty from two research cores; weekly forums addressing professional
development issues and a problem-based yearlong project; participation in the
annual LIFE (Linking Individuals, Families, and Environments) Academy, external
internships, and opportunities to build mentoring and teaching skills. These
programmatic activities position students to make contributions to knowledge of
optimal aging through research and to develop innovative products, services, and
policies for an aging society.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.