* 0965948
* Increasing Women in Technology (IWIT):  Attract, Mentor, Engage, and Retain
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Jennifer Rosato, College of Saint Scholastica
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 02/28/2015
* USD 595,423.00

This S-STEM project supports students pursuing a Bachelor of Arts in Computer
Science/Computer Information Systems (CS/CIS) at The College of St. Scholastica
(CSS). The number of scholarships provided coincides with the development of
enhanced recruitment efforts - 12 scholarships in Year 1, 16 in Year 2, 20 in
Year 3, and 24 in Year 4 (with an average scholarship award of $7,200). The
scholarship program is being designed to aid in recruitment and retention,
particularly of women, an underrepresented group in the computer science field.
It also complements The College of St. Scholastica's current interdisciplinary
S-STEM program, which has served over 82 students to date, and has allowed for
retention and graduation of 100% of the scholarship students. The objectives of
this computer science-focused S-STEM program are to: 1) enhance relationships
with area high schools and community colleges as a means to more effectively
recruit potential scholars; 2) establish a process by which undecided majors at
the College can explore the CS/CIS program in a way that actively engages them
in the technology field; 3) create strong, sustainable mentoring programs for
women in computing at CSS (that will also work well for any CSS S-STEM scholar);
and 4) effectively prepare the scholars for the workforce or for graduate
school. The College admissions office assists in recruiting students from area
high schools and community colleges by hosting open houses on campus,
distributing program materials, and other various methods; recruiting efforts
are also targeted at undecided majors at the College. Additionally, a consultant
from the National Center for Women and Information Technology is helping to
develop a strong recruiting program to engage women in CS/CIS; to assist in this
recruitment effort, an online exploratory course is offered to introduce women
to the computer science field. This project builds upon student support services
already in place, including career exploration, job fairs, and interview and
résumé preparation. Beyond that, this project is instituting a number of
mentorship opportunities, including an online mentoring course. Scholars also
are participating in workshops designed to help them find employment within the
field or attend graduate school, made possible through extensive collaboration
with the College's Career Services center. This project is advancing knowledge
and understanding in the computer science field by helping to develop models for
ensuring that women will be well-prepared for completing an undergraduate degree
and subsequently entering the workforce or graduate school, thus helping to
decrease gender disparities within the field of computer science. The
combination of activities and services constitute a comprehensive program that
is necessary to meet the needs of this target population of female S-STEM
scholars, while still meeting the needs of the male scholars.