* 0965110
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Awake Membrane Potential Dynamics and the Control of Visual Cortical Responsiveness
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Bilal Haider, Haider                  Bilal
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 05/31/2012
* USD 168,480.00

0965110 Haider

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Bilal
Haider to work with Dr. Matteo Carandini at University College London in the
United Kingdom.

This project tests the idea that activity patterns in the cerebral cortex play a
strong if not decisive role in when and how cortical neurons respond to sensory
stimulation. The host and PI first characterize, then quantitatively predict,
and finally causally manipulate patterns of cortical neural population activity
during visual stimulation. These investigations utilize advanced
electrophysiological and optical techniques, respectively, to monitor and
manipulate excitatory and inhibitory cortical activity. Further, these
investigations are performed in the mouse visual system, a preparation which is
uniquely amenable to combined electrical and optical techniques, and which is
emerging as a model of choice for advanced neurophysiological recording during
behavior. Their investigations extend the study of visual processing to the most
utilized model organism for mammalian neuroscience, and provide significant
potential for development and implementation of advanced electrical and optical
technologies in the intact brain.

More generally, how do external stimuli and internal activity states interact at
the neuronal level to serve sensory processing? While some insight has been
gained into the responses of cortical neurons to sensory stimulation, and also
gained insights into the interactions of cortical neurons with each other, full
understanding of the dynamic interaction between sensory inputs and ongoing
cortical activity remains elusive. It has often been suggested that the response
properties of cortical neurons are largely inherited from incoming sensory
inputs, rather than by the surrounding assembly of cortical neurons. By directly
manipulating activity patterns in the cortex while also manipulating aspects of
visual stimulation, they can assess the contributions of internally generated
versus externally elicited activity that underlies sensation.