* 0965779
* US-Mexican Workshop in Biological Chemistry: Protein Folding, Misfolding and Design; Mexico City, October 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Marina Ramirez-Alvarado, Mayo Clinic Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/2011
* USD 40,484.00

This award supports a research workshop organized jointly by Marina Ramirez-
Alvarado (Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN USA) and Alejandro
Fernandez Velasco (Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
(UNAM), Mexico City, Mexico). The main objectives of this symposium are: to
provide a forum for a multidisciplinary discussion on protein folding,
misfolding and design; to use this forum to introduce graduate students and
young researchers to these research topics; to promote interactions between
senior and young researchers in these fields from the two countries; and to
identify potential collaborations among the participants. The workshop will be
held at UNAM, Mexico City, March 18-21, 2011. The Mexican science agency CONACYT
will support the Mexican participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
include research presentations and workshop discussions on the following topics:
theoretical models of protein folding, experimental advances in protein folding,
molecular mechanisms of protein misfolding, and recent advances and limitations
of protein design. Better understanding of protein folding and misfolding is
crucial to the study of the physiological activity of proteins. This workshop
will provide an opportunity for closer interactions among senior researchers
from the US, including Latin American researchers that have established their
academic careers in the US, and investigators from Latin America and Mexico.
Collaborations arising from this meeting will help to consolidate research
networks throughout the continent. Moreover, this award provides fellowships for
US students to participate in this educational opportunity. The interactions
between students and the more senior researchers will certainly be fruitful, and
the experience will encourage students to continue graduate and postdoctoral
studies in the field. In the selection of invited speakers, proper attention has
been paid to the inclusion of women and minority faculty members. Similar
efforts are being made in the selection of student participants.