* 0965445
* BREAD:  Development of Automated Systems to Increase Crop Yield by Reducing Group Foraging Intensity by Crop Pests
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Bruce Schulte, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* carlos vallejos
* 03/31/2016
* USD 455,856.00

PI: Michael Stokes (Western Kentucky University)

Co-PI: Bruce Schulte (Western Kentucky University)

Senior Personnel: Mark Chambron (Western Kentucky University)

Human-wildlife conflict (HWC) is a broad term encompassing all negative
interactions between humans and wildlife; it stems from expanding human
populations and competition for resources. In sub-Saharan Africa, crop-raiding
is a widespread and economically damaging form of HWC. A single elephant or herd
of bush pigs or buffalo can completely destroy a small farm in a day; in many
areas, greater than 90% of farmers experience crop losses from wild life. This
innovative project aims to test various aspects of behavioral ecology and the
influence of modifying animal behavior on instances of HWC in Africa where
wildlife raiding on rural farmsteads occurs.

This research project will target wildlife species that are of particular
importance to crop damage (elephants, wild pigs, monkeys, and various hoofstock)
and will attempt to use the evolved, adaptive behavioral responses of those
species to a broad suite of sensory stimuli (especially sound and odor) to
reduce crop loss. Adaptive behavioral responses are those that are inherent in a
species and help individuals to survive and/or reproduce. Behavioral responses
to various stimuli will be assessed for each target species to develop a set of
effective stimuli that elicit responses that are disruptive to foraging or crop
raiding. In addition, stimuli will be delivered in ways to reduce habituation by
the target species. If/when such stimuli are identified, deterrent devices,
including standalone, high-tech scarecrows and training collars will be field
tested to determine whether the devices are capable of reducing visits to
feeding sites by individuals or if they can modify group feeding behaviors in
such a way as to reduce feeding intensity and therefore crop damage.

Broader Impacts: HWC can lead to the decimation of wildlife populations as
farmers react to crop damage by killing wildlife or converting wildlife habitat
to agriculture. This project will contribute to our fundamental understanding of
wildlife biology that is essential for mitigating HWC and for conserving
wildlife and functional ecosystems. However, the results from this research
project may have the broadest impact on the small shareholder farmer. The
intention of this research project is not to prevent all HWC, but to determine
if changes in animal behavior can be characterized that may reduce specific,
common types of crop damage during growing seasons, that in the long term will
increase the yield of small shareholder farmers. Reducing HWC by even a few
percentage points by disrupting foraging behaviors of animals at the
agricultural-wildlife interface could improve food security in areas of Africa
where the spectacular wealth of the wildlife resource contrasts with the often
desperate poverty of the subsistence farmers. In addition, this project will
train young scientists and community volunteers in the USA and Africa. The
project will include both Kenyan and American university students working in
partnerships in both cultural and scientific networks and will provide
opportunities for American student researchers to work with local African
communities. School groups, NGOs, and other interested parties will be able to
access products from this project, including a digital library of sounds,
behavioral data and engineering schematics of deterrent devices from a public
website developed and maintained at the Department of Biology at Western
Kentucky University (http://bioweb.wku.edu).