* 0965185
* Improving STEM Retention through Instruction: Leveraging Faculty Expertise
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2012
* David Feldon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2012
* USD 496,126.00

The purpose of this STEP Type 2 project is to improve undergraduate retention in
the biological sciences through the reformulation of instruction in the core
course sequences. Prior research using a national sample indicates 90% of
undergraduates who leave STEM majors cite poor instruction as a primary cause.
Further, 74% of students successfully graduating from their STEM programs
identify poor instruction as a major obstacle (Seymour and Hewitt, 1997). Using
a double-blind design, the proposed study is testing the hypothesis that the
lack of explicit instructions in scientific problem solving is a major factor in
low STEM retention. Typically, experts in a field (e.g., professors in
biological sciences) have automated their procedural knowledge during years of
training and professional practice (Anderson, 2005; Bereiter and Scardamalia,
1993; Feldon, in press). As such, when they provide instruction through lectures
or mentoring conversations, they frequently omit many of the steps necessary to
complete a problem without necessarily realizing that they are doing so (Chao
and Salvendy, 1994; Feldon, 2006). However, cognitive task analysis (CTA) is
emerging as a viable means to elicit accurate and complete information from
experts to serve as the basis for highly effective instruction (Feldon, in
press).&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of the project is its application of
robust findings in cognitive science research to STEM instruction. For several
decades, cognitive psychologists have called for greater consideration of skill
automaticity in the design of complex instruction (e.g., Schneider, 1985; Clark
and Estes, 1996; Rogers, Maurer, Salas, and Fisk, 1997). Those training systems
that have explicitly accommodated the tacit nature of their subject matter
experts' knowledge have proven to be significantly more effective than those
that have not (e.g., Merrill, 2002; Schaafstal, Schraagen, and van Berlo, 2000;
Velmahos et al., 2004). However, university based STEM instruction has not
reflected any consideration of these advances in instructional design (van
Merrienboer, 1997). The resulting gaps in instructional content induce a much
higher level of cognitive load in learners that typically results in less
effective learning and significant drops in motivation for challenging material
(Britt, 2005; Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark, 2006; Paas, Tuovinen, van
Merrienboer, and Darabi, 2005). Because this study encompasses the instructional
design process and implementation for core laboratory courses in genetics,
molecular, and cell biology, it is well-positioned to (1) document the knowledge
gaps typically included in skill-based STEM instruction, (2) systematically
eliminate those gaps in the treatment group, and (3) longitudinally track the
impact of each instructional condition over the course of students'
undergraduate coursework in biology. It is expected that students in the CTA
treatment condition will be more likely to perform better in lab-based
coursework and remain in the biological sciences major to a greater degree than
their counterparts in the control condition.&lt;br/&gt;The Broad Impacts of this
project exist at two levels. First, it is determining the extent to which
explicit, comprehensive problem solving instruction contributes to STEM
retention. Previous descriptive studies provide strong evidence of a
correlation, but few experimental studies have examined the direct causal
relationship (Seymour, 2001). Second, this project is validating a general model
of instructional design for STEM disciplines that can be easily transferred and
adapted across fields and institutions. Instructional design methods that
utilize cognitive task analysis methods to identify and generate curriculum have
had a major impact on the effectiveness and efficiency of complex skills
training in many non-academic arenas (Clark et al., in press). This study can
validate and leverage its strengths to enhance the preparation of future
scientists and provide stronger scientific reasoning skills for college
graduates who enter the workforce in science-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;