* 0965587
* Packings and contractions of graphs and hypergraphs
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Alexandr Kostochka, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2013
* USD 270,000.00

Alexandr V. Kostochka

Packings and contractions of graphs and hypergraphs

The notions of packings and minors are basic in graph theory. An important
instance of combinatorial packing problems is that of graph packing. Graphs of
order n pack, if there exists an edge disjoint placement of all these graphs
into the complete graph with n vertices. In terms of graph packing, one can
generalize or make more natural some graph theory problems or concepts.
Important examples of packing problems are problems on existence of a given
subgraph, coloring problems, Turan-type problems, and Ramsey-type problems.
Another basic notion is that of a minor. A graph H is a minor of a graph G if H
can be obtained from G by a sequence of contractions of edges and deletions of
edges and vertices. A number of problems and results in graph theory relate
impossibility to pack some graphs with the existence of some minors in these
graphs. Maybe, the most famous example is Hadwiger's Conjecture that every non-
k-colorable graph has the complete graph with k+1 vertices as a minor. The
examples above (and many more) show that it is helpful and potentially fruitful
to study in terms of graph packings and contractions a number of rather general
problems that are rich enough models for many important applications. Areas of
application include scheduling, database access, assignment of computer
registers, data clustering, computer-aided design of printed circuits,
positional games, DNA sequencing, etc.

The goal of this project is to explore a series of extremal problems on packings
and minors of graphs and hypergraphs, with restrictions on degrees of their
vertices. It is expected that the results will make an essential step in
understanding of these problems. Some proofs can lead to efficient packing and
contraction algorithms; negative results will impose limits on what can be
accomplished. The particular packing problem of equitable coloring has many
applications in scheduling, partitioning, and load balancing problems. A fair
amount of the work will be done jointly with graduate students and recent
graduates of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.