* 0965840
* IRES: Behavioral Ecology and Conservation of African Carnivores
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Kay Holekamp, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

0965840 Holekamp Michigan State University IRES: U.S.-Kenya Behavioral Ecology
and Conservation of African Carnivores

Michigan State University (MSU) Distinguished Professor Kay Holekamp will launch
a 3-year International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project that
builds on a strong, well-established scientific program of carnivore research in
Kenya. Each year, four top US undergraduates will be selected from a nation-wide
pool of applicants to conduct field research on spotted hyenas and other African
carnivores. There is no other comparable field research-training program
available that offers US undergraduate students the chance to study the biology
of free-living African carnivores in one of the world's most magnificent game
parks.

The IRES students will help expand the current research focus from single-
species to a much richer comparative analysis of multiple sympatric species that
inhabit the Mara-Serengeti ecosystem; IRES will also foster a training
partnership with three highly experienced Kenyan scientists at the Kenya
Wildlife Service (KWS), Nairobi, all of whom will mentor the US students. Aided
by the mentoring team, the students will address a broad array of hypothesis-
driven research questions about the behavior, conservation and physiology of
African carnivores, ranging from the evolution of their cognitive abilities to
anthropogenic effects on their stress physiology.

Before departure, students will participate in a rigorous web-based research and
cultural orientation, and Swahili language training. In-country, they will train
initially at the Kenya Wildlife Service HQ, and then transit to the tented
research camp in the Masai Mara National Reserve where they will spend seven
weeks developing and executing the research. Before leaving Kenya, the students
will present their work at the Carnivore Researchers Conference held each year
at the KWS HQ.

The research opportunities offered here are unparalleled, not only to
investigate the biology of several carnivore species that remain poorly
understood, but also to make important contributions in the intellectual domains
of behavioral ecology, stress physiology, and conservation biology. It is
expected that IRES student research will shed considerable new light on the
basic mechanisms by which African carnivores interact with their environments
and with one another. This newly acquired knowledge will be widely disseminated
via conference presentations and publication in professional journals, and will
be applied directly to carnivore management and conservation efforts in Kenya.
For reference: http://www.naturalscience.msu.edu/students/undergraduate/enhance_
your_experience/undergraduate_research/index.html

Additionally, participants in IRES will learn a great deal about African life
and culture, and about the complexities associated with carnivore conservation
in a developing country. By fostering long-lasting friendships and
collaborations between Kenyans and Americans, this experience will contribute
significantly to the development of a new generation of global scientists who
are united in their desire to understand and protect the natural world.