* 0965364
* Collaborative Research: New Methods to Enhance Our Understanding of the Diversity of Science
* SBE,SBE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Fiona Murray, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 04/30/2014
* USD 248,256.00

This project focuses on the development and implementation of new quantitative
methods to provide a deeper understanding of science policy interventions. By
building analytic tools that capture the diversity of science, this project
moves beyond existing methods that typically analyze the rate of scientific
innovation. This move is an important next step in the "science of science
policy" agenda:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Although understanding
of institutional changes on the rate of inventive activity has improved markedly
in recent years, effective science policy interventions must also be grounded in
an understanding of their impact on diversity as well as productivity, construed
both in terms of idea diversity -- the array of different ideas derived from
novel scientific insights -- and individual diversity -- the variety of people
and organizations in social space engaged in scientific progress. To move
forward with this crucial agenda requires a rich new set of tools. In developing
such tools, this project extends prior work that focuses on "citation-counting,"
combining novel approaches from social and computer sciences to represent and
analyze publication, patent and grant data in idea and social space.
Specifically, the tools integrate two powerful methods: (a) statistical topic
modeling and (b) social network analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
These methods can also be extended to examine diversity across national, social
and topic boundaries, thus providing quantitative tools to characterize issues
of key significance in debates over national competitiveness. While these
science policy questions could be addressed in a wide variety of settings, this
project focuses on the varied data associated with the human genome and human
genetics.&lt;br/&gt;