* 0965023
* RUI:Conducting, Semiconducting and Ferroelectric Polymer Nanofibers for Electronic Device Fabrication: Motivating Undergraduate Students to pursue Higher Education
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Nicholas Pinto, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2014
* USD 249,009.00

TECHNICAL SUMMMARY:

This grant will expand research on conducting and semiconducting polymers and to
include ferroelectric polymers and ceramic metal oxides. A simple technique
called electrospinning will be used to prepare nanofibers of
conducting/semiconducting/ferroelectric polymers and metal oxides and to use
them as the active material in the fabrication of devices and sensors. Due to
their small dimensions, nanofibers have a large surface to volume ratio and
hence they have the potential to be used in the fabrication of low power
consumption devices and supersensitive and rapid response sensors. Individual
nanofibers that possess both semiconducting and ferroelectric properties are
inherently multifunctional and will be used in non-volatile memory field effect
transistors. The intellectual merit of this proposal also includes finding new
ways of combining these materials that possess very different electronic,
mechanical and optical properties, then using them in the form of nanofibers
that have a large aspect ratio and even larger surface to volume ratio to
fabricate and test devices and sensors. A range of experiments has been proposed
using electrospun polymer and metal oxide nanofibers, and thin films and to
study charge transport in crossed polymer nanofibers. The approach presented to
making polymer nanofibers via electrospinning is unique and differs from the
research of others who typically use templates or other complex methods. The
proposed research includes polymer science, ceramics, physics, nanoscience and
electronics and is multidisciplinary, giving students a sound and direct
research experience that will help them in graduate school and in job searches.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This research will expose undergraduate students to various branches of science
and engineering. The proposed experiments are within the intellectual grasp of
undergraduate students. All of the students will be trained in the scientific
method and will be motivated to pursue graduate studies in science and
engineering by providing them with real opportunities to participate in
scientific research. Modified experiments based on the proposed research are
planned to be included into the Intermediate Laboratory course that the PI has
taught for the last eight years, thereby integrating research and education. The
instruments requested in this proposal will strengthen the institutional
infrastructure, increase faculty collaboration and also have a broader impact of
improving the research facilities in the southeastern region of the Island. New
results will be published in a timely manner and an up-to-date web page will be
maintained, thereby broadening the dissemination of results from this proposal.
The University of Puerto Rico at Humacao is a minority serving institution. This
proposal will therefore increase the number of undergraduate students that
participate in scientific research and who are underrepresented in the fields of
science and engineering.