* 0965984
* Integrated Electrodialysis (ED) and Catalytic Electrochemical Reduction (CER) Process for the Removal of Perchlorate from Dilute Aqueous Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Chin-Pao Huang, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 05/31/2014
* USD 367,000.00

Huang, Chin-Pao&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0965984&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposed research is to study the catalytic electrochemical reduction of
perchlorate at low concentrations, i.e., &lt; 1 ppm, in water under ambient
conditions. Perchlorate, an emerging contaminant, can interfere with the
metabolism of the thyroid gland in humans. Although the US EPA has yet to
establish a drinking water standard for perchlorate, the agency has issued a
Drinking Water Equivalence (DWE) of 24.5 ppb. Several states have reported the
presence of perchlorate at alarming concentrations in their source waters and
subsequently established precautionary drinking water standards for perchlorate
in the range of 4 to 18 ppb. Recent advances in analytical chemistry of
perchlorate have enabled detection of the emerging contaminant at ultra-low
levels, i.e., ppb. Although adsorption processes such as ion exchange can
separate perchlorate from water, chemical reduction (i.e., transformation)
provides the ultimate solution to perchlorate contamination. To date,
perchlorate reduction has been attempted only with biological processes.
However, biological methods generally have limited public acceptance and are
difficulty to apply to small to medium scale systems. There is a need for
innovative technology for the treatment of drinking water that is easy to
operate and affordable and has wide public acceptance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is to study the removal of perchlorate from dilute aqueous
solutions by the electrodialytically assisted (EDA) catalytic electrochemical
reduction (CER) process. Newly synthesized perchlorate selective membranes will
be used to enhance the accumulation of perchlorate at the vicinity of the
negatively charged catalytic electrode (i.e., cathode). The catalytic electrode
is prepared by the deposition of nano-sized non-precious metallic catalysts that
have exhibited a high perchlorate reduction rate. The proposed research is to
achieve the following objectives: 1) to synthesize, characterize and test pe-
chlorate selective membranes; 2) to prepare, characterize, and test nano-
metallic catalysts for electrochemical reduction of perchlorate; 3) To identify
important factors controlling the electrodialytically assisted (EDA) catalytic
electrochemical reduction (CER) of perchlorate; and 4) To study the short-term
performance of the total electrodialytically assisted (EDA) catalytic
electrochemical reduction (CER) process. Perchlorate selective membranes will be
synthesized from PVC, plasticizers, additives, and ionophores (i.e., perchlorate
complexes). Metallic catalysts will be made from Cd, Cr and Ti in mono-, bi- or
tri-metallic forms. The best perchlorate selective membranes and the best
metallic catalysts will be selected for fabricating the EDA-CER reactor.
Pertinent factors that control the overall perchlorate reduction and performance
of the EDA-CER reactor will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research involves the study of two technologies: synthesis of a perchlorate
selective membrane and catalytic electrochemical reduction. In addition to water
treatment applications, the perchlorate selective membranes can be used to
separate perchlorate from biological fluids and as a sensor for perchlorate ions
in medical applications. The CER process can also be used to remove several
contaminants in water, specifically nitrate, heavy metals, and volatile
halogenated organic carbons (VHOCs). The integrated EAD-CER process represents a
new approach to water purification for the removal of perchlorate in addition to
other contaminants at dilute concentrations. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
project will have an impact in outreach/education and public health awareness.
The University of Delaware has a long history of working with minority and
underprivileged communities through its well-established undergraduate programs
on campus, e.g., RISE and NU-CLEUS. They will take advantage of these avenues to
recruit undergraduate students from under-represented and minority groups
throughout the country to participate in their research projects. They will work
with regional high school science teachers to develop teaching materials in
water technology. They have been active participants in many undergraduate
research programs such as NSF-REU for under-graduates and NSF-RET for high
school science teachers. In order to increase public awareness of safe drinking
water, they will work with the Delaware 4-H program and the Philadelphia Science
Museum to develop science education modules on emerging contaminants in drinking
water. Additionally, they will establish an interactive web-based program on
environmental safety for the general public as well as school children. The PI
will host the 6th International Conference on Sustainable Water Environment at
the University of Delaware in July of 2010. It is expected that this
international event will strengthen global collaboration on water research.