* 0965793
* RUI: Electron Impact Ionization of Argon and Krypton and Excitation of Resonance Transitions in Neon, Xenon and Molecular Hydrogen.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Murtadha Khakoo, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2014
* USD 311,999.00

The program of the experimental low energy electron collisions group at
California State University Fullerton is currently focused on the study of
electron collisions with inert rare gases (neon, argon, krypton and xenon) and
molecular hydrogen (also a closed shell molecule). The dynamics of electron
impact ionization of the rare gas target (specifically neon and xenon) revealed
some very interesting results last year. These showed for neon that in the near-
threshold ionization region in specific scattering cases (forward scattering and
where the energy of either of the two outgoing electrons was very low), the
process seems to be inhibited by the electron being sucked into the polarized
ion-core. The group has proposed an interesting hypothesis for this effect.
Presently it is delving deeper into such mechanisms, with similar experiments
with argon and krypton, A second series of experiments in the future hopes to
provide detailed information regarding the imparting of angular momentum by the
scattering electron to the rare gas target or molecular hydrogen in coincidence
with the scattered electron, especially to test state-of-art theories for large
angle scattering near backward scattering angles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
experimental low energy electron collisions group at California State University
Fullerton is a very active group, where almost half of the physics department's
majors participate in research. The group also has a strong publication record
with undergraduate student authors on papers in top peer-reviewed journals. The
program generates by far more PhD-bound students than any other program in the
department. Broader impacts also involve education of a significant number of
high school students as well as under-represented women and minority students
(California State Fullerton is a nationally recognized Hispanic serving
college).