* 0965153
* NSF/CONACyT:  Gripping and Assembly of Micro Devices
* ENG,IIP
* 03/01/2009,12/31/2011
* J. Cecil, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Senich
* 12/31/2011
* USD 44,682.00

This NSF/CONACyT research project seeks to address issues in the area of micro
assembly, which will benefit American manufacturing organizations in a variety
of domains. Micro devices, which possess different materials, or complex
geometries, cannot utilize the widely available monolithic MEMS fabrication
techniques. In such situations, assembly of micro devices becomes inevitable.
The overall objective of this research is to investigate the modeling of
gripping forces for micro assembly applications. In addition, the role of
interactive forces coming into play during nano manipulation will also be
studied. Educational modules targeting under graduate and graduate engineering
students will also be created as part of this project. Specifically, the
objectives are to: (a) Develop a taxonomy for gripper system configuration and
design (b) Investigate the modeling of gripping forces and their effects on the
geometry of components (b) Support educational activities through development of
educational modules (targeting engineering students) as well as facilitate
outreach efforts to school students in New Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational activities proposed will introduce the next generation of industrial
and manufacturing engineering students to cutting edge concepts addressed in
this project. Sandia National Laboratories will be the industrial collaborator
in this project; they will provide real world case studies and necessary
knowledge, as well as play a role in validating the project
findings.&lt;br/&gt;A focus in this project is the education of minority
students at New Mexico State University (NMSU). Outreach activities involving
school students and teachers will be conducted as part of the Soaring Eagle
initiative at NMSU. This project will enhance the existing infrastructure at
NMSU as well as highlight the usefulness of Internet2 for learning activities.
Dissemination activities will include publishing papers in leading journals,
through a project web site, as well as through paper presentations at
conferences such as the annual American Society of Engineering Education (ASEE),
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) and Institute of Industrial
Engineers (IIE) conferences.&lt;br/&gt;