* 0965877
* Ivy Adhesive Nanoparticles for Biomedical Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Neal Stewart, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 328,792.00

0965877 Zhang

The goal of this research is to study properties of organic nanoparticles
secreted from English ivy (Hedera helix), and develop a nature-based organic
nanoparticle for biomedical applications. It was recently discovered by the PI
that ivy secretes nanoparticles for surface affixing. The adhesive force from
the combination of the ivy nanoparticles and the mucopolysaccharide secreted
from ivy has been demonstrated in the literature to be one of the largest forces
per area in natural surface adhesion. By characterizing the role and discovering
the chemical structure of the ivy adhesive nanoparticles, we will develop a
nature-based nanoparticle for medical adhesive. Previous research undertaken by
the PI regarding ivy nanopartciles has led to a prototype method to isolate the
ivy nanoparticles, and to determine the adhesive strength of the nanoparticles
using atomic force microscopy. These studies indicated that the adhesive had
properties that could be translated into a nature-based nanoparticle for medical
adhesive. This proposal aims to advance the preliminary studies, to completely
characterize the nanoparticles, to understand toxicity of the nanoparticles and
to investigate a prototype approach for synthesizing the ivy nanoparticles. The
specific aims of this research are to 1) isolate nanoparticles from aerial
rootlets of English ivy, 2) characterize the adhesive properties and toxicity of
the ivy nanoparticles for medical applications, and 3) investigate a prototype
approach for synthesizing the ivy nanoparticles.

Intellectual Merit: A great amount of research is currently being undertaken on
the use of nanoparticles for a variety of biomedical applications including
targeted drug delivery, molecular imaging and high strength biomaterials. By
biomimicking the role of ivy nanoparticles for adhesive, this research
introduces the first nature-based organic nanoparticle that can be used for a
variety of biomedical applications including medical adhesive, sunscreen cancer
prevention and targeted drug delivery. At present, nearly all nanoparticles
synthesized are metal nanoparticles that have inherent toxicity in mammalian
systems. A biological nanoparticle will be able to avoid much of the toxicity
associated with metal-based nanoparticles and expand the application of
nanoparticles to medicine. In addition, this research will provide a protocol
approach for isolating nanoparticles from a variety of biological species
including ivy, sundew and marine mussels. Finally, this research will contribute
to the development of nanoparticle enhanced polymers for high strength
nanocomposites, and provide useful information on a biological method for
creating nanocomposite for strong adhesives.

Broader Impacts: This research has broad impacts on biomaterial design through
biomimetics, naturebased organic nanoparticle manufacturing and biomedical
applications of nanoparticles for skin cancer prevention as well as drug
delivery. Pharmaceutical fields have long recognized the importance of observing
natural processes, to find the simplest and the most efficient way to develop
drugs. Biomedical engineering is turning to biomimetics for finding ways to
synthesize and develop complex nanostructure and devices for medicine. The
fields benefitted by this research include material sciences, molecular biology,
plant biology, bioengineering and nanomedicine. The results of this research
will be used to extend our departmental curricula into nanomedicine and
biomimetics for biomedical engineering innovation, and to be integrated into one
of the core biomedical engineering graduate courses entitled nano bio-systems
and biomimetics. This project will also be used as a foundation for local
educational outreach in middle and high schools, and to draw interest into
interdisciplinary sciences at early ages. Already these studies have encouraged
both graduate students and undergraduates working in the labs to take
interdisciplinary courses. We expect to develop an interdisciplinary curriculum
across the university with the goal of training an interdisciplinary core of
researchers. The PI's lab commits strongly to minority student training.