* 0965057
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Zinc Oxide/Low Band gap Polymer Hybrid Photovoltaic Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Jason Amsden, Amsden                  Jason          J
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 06/30/2012
* USD 166,930.00

0965057 Amsden

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Jason J.
Amsden to work with Dr. ChangHee Lee at Seoul National University in Seoul,
South Korea.

Organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices offer an intriguing alternative to silicon
based devices due to their ease of processing, mechanical flexibility, and low
cost. However, at present the power conversion efficiency of OPV is still too
low to compete with silicon based devices. Two possibilities for improving the
power conversion efficiency in OPV include use of new low band gap high mobility
polymers and use of hybrid materials incorporating semiconducting polymers and
semiconductor nanocrystals. Polymers with a low band gap more efficiently
collect solar radiation and semiconductor nanocrystals such as zinc oxide are
advantageous because of their high electron mobility compared to organic
molecules, solution processing, and tunable band gap. This research studies for
the first time the morphology and charge transport properties of zinc oxide
nanocrystal and low band gap polymer hybrid photovoltaic devices. The project
will include two main components: The first objective is characterization of the
interaction and charge transport properties between low band gap polymers and
zinc oxide nanocrystals in various morphologies using various types of
spectroscopy and microscopy. The second parallel objective is to investigate the
photovoltaic performance of hybrid devices using the insights gained from
spectroscopy and microscopy.

In addition to the obvious benefit of increased knowledge about organic
photovoltaic materials for solar energy conversion, this research will help
develop new international collaboration between the PI and research groups at
Seoul National University in Seoul, South Korea (Prof. ChangHee Lee and Prof. Do
Yeung Yoon), at the Max Plank Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz, Germany
(Prof. Klaus MÃ¼llen), and at Boston University in Boston, USA (Prof. Kenneth J.
Rothschild).