* 0965183
* International Research Fellowship Program:  K3 Surfaces, Normal Forms and the Kuga-Satake Hodge Conjecture
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2011
* Jacob Lewis, Lewis                   Jacob          M
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2011
* USD 81,280.00

0965183 Lewis

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Jacob M.
Lewis to work with Dr. Ludmil Katzarkov at the University of Vienna in Austria.

The Kuga-Satake Hodge conjecture posits an algebraic correspondence between two
very different geometric objects?a K3 surface and an abelian variety. This
conjecture?a special case of the Hodge conjecture, one of the Clay Mathematical
Institute?s famous Millenium Problems?is widely believed to be true, but
remarkably few examples are known. This project uses Mirror Symmetry for K3
surfaces to shed new light on the classification of Fano varieties and on the
Kuga-Satake Hodge conjecture. Mirror symmetry, a surprising mathematical duality
first predicted by string theorists, often relates complicated algebraic
geometry of one space to a much simpler construction involving the Kähler
geometry of the ?mirror? space. Recent work in progress by the PI with
collaborators suggests that most of the known cases of the Kuga-Satake Hodge
conjecture admit a re-interpretation in terms of mirror symmetry. As part of
this project, in addition to reinterpreting the known cases of the conjecture,
new examples are being developed, with the ultimate goal of providing a general
framework for the problem. This work requires deep knowledge of homological
mirror symmetry, in which Dr. Katzarkov and members of his research group are
experts. It also requires facility with toric varieties, mirror maps, and
hypergeometric functions, which are objects of study in the PI's research. The
project also deals with other questions related to mirror symmetry for K3
surfaces, including the use of certain families of K3 surfaces in the
classification of Fano threefolds with Picard number one.

The Hodge conjecture is one of the great open problems in algebraic geometry,
and indeed in all of mathematics. While the Kuga-Satake Hodge conjecture is a
strict sub-problem of the full Hodge conjecture, it is nevertheless of great
interest. Similarly, mirror symmetry is developing importance in algebraic
geometry; it needs further study but is already leading to fascinating
discoveries. Finding a role for mirror symmetry within the Hodge conjecture and
classification problems provides a fresh perspective to these imposing areas of
research.