* 0965728
* Study of Electrons in Superfluid Helium
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Humphrey Maris, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 12/31/2015
* USD 675,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****

Bubbles form in liquid as a result of a number of different processes. They can
be produced when the pressure on a liquid that contains gas is reduced, when a
can of Coca Cola is opened, for example. Bubbles also form in the turbulence
around the propeller of a ship or when a liquid is heated above its boiling
point. In some situations, bubble production has undesirable effects. For
example, over the course of time the bubbles produced near the propeller of a
ship, damage the propeller. On the other hand, bubble generation can also be
very useful, as in an ultrasonic cleaner. The long-range goal of this research
is the study of how bubbles are formed and how to control the formation for
technological advantage. Experiments will be performed to investigate bubble
production in liquid helium under a number of different conditions. Liquid
helium is chosen for these experiments because it can be produced with
exceptional purity, and so effects that might arise from impurities in the
liquid can be controlled or eliminated. The research project will contribute to
the national need for scientists trained in the technically important fields of
optics, cryogenics, fluid mechanics and computer simulation.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****

An electron injected into liquid helium forces open a small cavity, producing an
"electron bubble" of radius 2 nm. This individual investigator award supports
research that includes several projects to study these bubbles and to use them
to investigate the properties of quantized vortices. The first project will be
to investigate the "exotic ions", electron bubbles of unknown structure that are
smaller than normal bubbles. In a second project a study will be made of
electron bubbles in which the electron has been optically excited to the 1D
quantum state. The third project is to attach electron bubbles to quantized
vortices and by imaging these electrons, study the motion of the vortices. This
work is exciting because electron bubbles are unique quantum systems with a size
and shape of the bubble determined by the quantum state of the electron. Their
study can answer fundamental questions concerning the nature of the measurement
process in quantum mechanics. The research is a combination of experiment and
theory, and includes collaboration with groups in Paris and Barcelona. With the
combination of these components, the research is an excellent means for the
training of graduate students and undergraduates.