* 0965698
* Studies of Supersolid Phenomena in Solid Helium
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2012
* John Reppy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 09/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****

One of the most exciting recent discoveries in condensed matter physics has been
the observation of the so-called "supersolid" state at temperatures only a few
tenths of a degree above absolute zero. This supersolid state has the remarkable
property that a fraction of a helium solid can actually pass through itself as a
frictionless flow provide the temperature is low enough. This property of the
supersolid is counterintuitive and is at odds with our instinctive concept of a
solid. The supersolid may be another example of a superfluid system to take its
place beside the previously know superfluids; superfluid 4He and superfluid 3He,
superconducting electrons, and the superfluids observed in low density trapped
atomic gases. One of the most important questions that must be addressed is
whether the supersolid phenomena thus far observed is actual evidence for a true
superfluid state in solid helium. This research project will address this
question on two fronts. The approach asks the question, does the superfluid obey
superfluid hydrodynamics? The second approach will examine the nature of the
phase transition to the supersolid state by an ultra sensitive heat capacity
measurement utilizing state-of-the-art superconducting technology. These
projects will involve several undergraduate students and will give them a head
start in scientific research.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****

The recent discovery of a "Supersolid" phase in solid 4He at temperatures below
200 mK by the Eunsong Kim and Moses Chan provides the realization of a
prediction made more than a quarter of a century ago. The initial suggestion for
a supersolid state in crystalline 4He is based on the possibility that Bose-
Einstein condensation might occur in solid helium at sufficiently low
temperatures. It is crucial to establish whether or not the supersolid state
represents a new type of superfluid. This individual investigator award supports
an attempt to clarify this issue using several approaches. First, the
hydrodynamics of the supersolid will be examined in non-circular geometries
where the predicted behavior based on ordinary superfluid hydrodynamics is
clear. Second, the question of an actual phase transition to the supersolid
state will be addressed through measurement of the possible heat capacity
anomaly associated with the transition utilizing ultra sensitive SQUID
technology. This project is expected to involve two undergraduate students who
should profit greatly from working in a fast evolving area at the current
forefront of condensed matter research.