* 0965341
* Collaborative Research : DAT: Fromgrant to commercialization: an integrated demonstration database which permits tracing, assessing, and measuring the impact of scientific funding
* SBE,SBE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Vetle Torvik, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 04/30/2014
* USD 445,164.00

It has long been received wisdom that investment in science greatly facilitates
the technological progress that ultimately improves economic productivity and
living standards. Unfortunately, the systematic and quantitative evidence to
support these arguments remains thin and expensive to produce. Name ambiguity
makes this difficult: different scientists may share the same names, and
conversely, the same scientist may have their name listed differently within or
across publication and patent databases. As a consequence, the collaborative
networks of scientists remain unidentified, and the gatekeepers between science
and technology have not been systematically identified.

Intellectual Merit: This project develops a large-scale database that links
Medline papers and U.S. patents, through identification of individuals who
authored both papers and patents using state-of-the-art name disambiguation
algorithms. These patent-paper-author links in turns enable identification of
similar organizations and in some cases, science/technology fields and
geography. The resulting database is used in three exemplary analyses that aim
to: 1) study the impact of grants upon science and technical productivity, 2)
identify the gatekeepers between science and technology and study how knowledge
flows between these two realms, and 3) understand how collaborative,
institutional, organizational, and regional factors influence these processes.

Broader Impact: The resulting database is publicly available. This both enables
science policy scholars to develop systematic and convincing evidence for
investment recommendations and enables person-centered research of the science-
technology interface of numerous other kinds.