* 0965856
* International Research Fellowship Program: Evolutionary History of SE Asian Shrews
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Jacob Esselstyn, Esselstyn               Jacob
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 213,577.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Jacob
Esselstyn to work with Dr. Jatna Supriatna at the University of Indonesia in
Indonesia and with Dr. Ben Evans at McMaster University in Canada. This project
focuses on the history of diversification in Southeast Asian shrews
(Soricomorpha: Crocidura), with a goal of identifying the forces that have
shaped current patterns of diversity. Targeted fieldwork on the major islands of
Indonesia is supplementing an existing phylogenetic data set with new specimens,
allowing for improved estimation of inter-specific relationships and more
accurate estimates of regional biodiversity. Bioinformatic techniques and an in-
progress shrew genome are being used to identify rapidly evolving nuclear genes
appropriate for phylogenetic and phylogeographic inference in Southeast Asian
shrews. Phylogenetic estimates derived from the resulting multi-locus data set
are being integrated with ecomorphological and climate data to explore the
significance of ecological forces such as competition and specialization in
shaping the processes of diversification and community assembly. This project
supports one post-doctoral researcher and builds collaborative relationships
among U.S., Indonesian, and Canadian scientists. The post-doctoral researcher is
being trained in bioinformatics and molecular biology. Anticipated results
include improved estimates of biodiversity in a region undergoing severe
degradation of biological resources and a greater understanding of evolutionary
and ecological processes in island archipelagos.