* 0965979
* Geometry and Physics - Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Ping Xu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2014
* USD 48,750.00

This award provides partial support for two editions of a series of summer
schools on Geometry and Physics (GAP). GAP VIII (2010) will concentrate on
differential geometric aspects of noncommutative geometry, while GAP IX (2011)
will be devoted to algebraic geometric aspects of noncommutative geometry and
mathematical physics. Noncommutative geometry aims to study geometric properties
of a new class of "spaces" whose algebras of functions are no longer
commutative. The central idea goes back to quantum mechanics, in which
observables such as position and momentum do not commute. The subject has
undergone tremendous exploration recently due to its close connection to a
number of areas of mathematics and mathematical physics, including foliation
theory, index theory, representation theory, algebraic geometry, quantum field
theory, quantization theory, and string theory.

The project consists in a pair of summer schools (GAP VIII and GAP XI) aimed at
gathering different streams and instances of noncommutative geometry, as well as
identifying new emerging directions. The main purposes of the proposed
activities are to bring together leading experts and young researchers working
in rapidly developing subjects, and to promote interaction between
mathematicians and physicists, and groups working on different aspects of
related areas so as to foster interaction, encourage cross-fertilization between
different fields, and promote the dissemination of the most recent results of
current research. There are many talented young people working in this area. GAP
VIII and GAP XI will provide them with excellent opportunities to disseminate
their ideas and to broaden their perspective. The PIs anticipate inviting a
substantial number of mathematicians at the postdoctoral and graduate student
level (from Europe, the United States, and developing countries), and holding
poster or short-talk sessions through which young researchers will be given the
chance to present their work. The schools will provide an excellent opportunity
for young American scientists to exchange ideas with their European peers and
initiate collaborations.

This project is jointly funded by the Geometric Analysis Program, the Algebra
and Number Theory Program, and the Analysis Program.