* 0965799
* Archive of Annotated Burushaski Texts (Ethnologue Code: BSK)
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2010,02/28/2017
* Sadaf Munshi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 02/28/2017
* USD 173,860.00

Abstract Dr. Sadaf Munshi will coordinate the collection of data in Pakistan and
India to create a linguistically analysed and searchable archive of annotated
texts in Burushaski. Burushaki is not known to be related to any other language
in the world and is thus considered a linguistic "isolate". The database will
consist of about 15-20 hours of high quality digitized audio and video
recordings of Burushaski oral literature in different, significantly threatened,
regional varieties, viz., Hunza, Nagar, and Yasin in Pakistan and Srinagar in
India. The genres to be included are: traditional folktales and legends,
historical accounts, personal narratives, formal speeches, conversations, poems,
speaker-to-speaker discussions of data, and metadata. A selection of the
materials will be provided with time-aligned transcriptions, multi-tier
annotations, morpheme-to-morpheme and free translations into English. Keeping in
view the level of literacy and second language proficiency among Burushaski
speakers, a version of smaller edited texts will be independently transliterated
into Burushaski and translated into Urdu. Transliteration in Burushaski will be
done using a modified Perso-Arabic (Nastâliq) script - a popular writing system
for many of the languages spoken in the region. The materials will be archived
in the following formats: audio in PCM wav, video in MPEG-2, texts downloadable
in TXT, Word, and PDF format, ELAN files with translations and sound alignment,
and XML (with XSL). Morphosyntactic analyses and lexical files will be
maintained using FLEx - Fieldworks Language Explorer.

Since Burushaski is primarily preserved orally and literacy in the first
language is practically non-existent, Dr. Munshi intends the text collection to
be the springboard for pedagogical materials that will facilitate native
language literacy. The pedagogical materials to be included in the Archive are:
introduction to alphabet, wordlists, parts of speech, and basic grammar. The
documentation materials will be archived at the University of North Texas
Digital Collections Library.