* 0965945
* IGERT: Stem Cell BIomanufacturing
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2017
* Robert Nerem, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2017
* USD 3,599,664.00

The transformation of stem cell biology discoveries into technologies for a
range of applications has enormous promise to impact a broad spectrum of
society; however, achieving this aim will only occur if individuals are trained
with the necessary interdisciplinary expertise to facilitate growth of the
field. This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
to the Georgia Institute of Technology provides such training for Ph.D. graduate
students by creating a comprehensive educational program that brings together
technological innovation, commercialization, and public policy aspects of stem
cell research. The specific research projects conducted as part of this training
focus on developing standardized and quantitative methods necessary for stem
cell isolation, characterization, propagation, and differentiation. Scalable
biomanufacturing practices will be developed to efficiently produce sufficient
numbers of stem cells and derivatives in readily accessible formats in order to
meet the need for novel therapeutic and diagnostic applications of stem cells.

In addition to the research and educational activities to train Ph.D. students
to be leaders in the field of stem cell biomanufacturing, one of the broader
impacts of this program will be to provide students with a global scientific
perspective based upon the established relationships with our international
partners. Graduates will contribute to the burgeoning stem cell industry,
catalyzing new biomedical and biotechnological opportunities for stem cells to
impact society. A key broader impact and long-term objective of the program will
be to foster the participation of members of underrepresented groups in stem
cell engineering.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.