* 0965624
* A Priori Analysis of Subgrid Molecular Transport Effects on High Pressure Turbulent Combustion Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Richard Miller, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 220,694.00

Miller 0965624

This proposal addresses subgrid statistics of turbulent flames under realistic
high pressure thermodynamic conditions relevant to modern diesel engines, gas
turbines, and rocket engines. The research will utilize massively parallel
direct numerical simulations (DNS), in which all length and time scales of the
turbulent flame are fully resolved using high order accurate techniques and
without the use of turbulence or subgrid models, to analyze several high
pressure flames. The particular focus is on analyzing terms relevant to modern
combustion models with emphasis on large eddy simulation (LES) and filtered
density function (FDF) approaches. High pressure experiments are difficult and
existing DNS validations of these approaches have thus far not addressed four
coupled phenomena that can be highly important in real flames: large pressure,
realistic chemistry, real property models, and generalized heat and mass
diffusion.

Intellectual Merit:

It is hypothesized that localized subgrid molecular mixing effects, which are
often assumed to be negligible relative to turbulent stirring, can have a
substantial impact on high pressure flame dynamics. This is due to the fact that
ultimately many flames are controlled locally by the diffusion of species and
temperature. Extinction and re-ignition events are highly sensitive to local
flame conditions and Soret cross-diffusion is also highly amplified at high
pressures. DNS will therefore be conducted for hydrogen-oxygen, hydrogen-air,
heptane-air, and methane-air reacting shear layers. Both detailed and reduced
chemical kinetics, a real gas state equation, real property evaluations, and a
complete generalized diffusion model will be incorporated. Massively parallel
simulations will produce a database for each flame at various pressures and
Reynolds numbers. The database will then be explored in an a priori manner to
analyze subgrid terms and statistics related to LES and FDF of high pressure
turbulent combustion. Terms requiring modeling will be identified and modeled as
appropriate.

Broader Impact:

The research is expected to enhance society's ability to predictively model
turbulent combustion at elevated pressures. This is imperative due to the ever
increasing combustion chamber pressures encountered in hydrocarbon combustion
devices utilized in society (including diesel engines, gas turbines, rocket
engines, and other potential hydrogen technologies). Both graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved. In addition, a multidisciplinary
portion of the education plan involves bringing together the graduate students
involved with this research with a group of computer engineers at UNC Charlotte.
The DNS code will be shared and run on the UNCC parallel FPGA cluster. The
purposes of this exercise are: knowledge sharing between two typically non-
intersecting groups, and code optimization for both typical and advanced
parallel architectures.