* 0965623
* AGEP Tracking System and Registry (AGEP TSR)
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Courtney Tanenbaum, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2011
* USD 290,473.00

The project will collect student and faculty-level data from individual campuses
and aggregate information at the campus, alliances and program wide levels. The
AGEP Tracking System and Registry (AGEP TSR) will be a new approach to obtaining
and analyzing key data on AGEP program effects and the systematic approach could
serve as model for other NSF programs. Currently, the American Institutes for
Research (AIR) serves as the evaluator of the national AGEP program and this
project expands the role of AIR to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Assist up to three
AGEP grantees in learning how to input data into the system and on how to use
AGEP-TSR in ways that strengthen the individual Alliances? data collection
efforts;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Design survey instruments that can be attached
to AGEP-TSR and used for data collection at the national and local
levels;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Monitor the quality of the data collection system
and the reports generated ;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Make presentations to NSF and
to the AGEP community based on data collected through AGEP-
TSR;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The features of the tracking system will focus on
participant tracking, participation tracking, and data collection, report
generating, and building a registry of AGEP graduates. The project will provide
insight on whether participation in AGEP sponsored activities generates positive
or negative outcomes.