* 0965342
* BREAD:  Platform, Pipeline, and Analytical Tools for Next Generation Genotyping to Serve Breeding Efforts in Africa
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Stephen Kresovich, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,697,331.00

PI: Edward Buckler (Cornell University/USDA-ARS, USA)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-
PIs: C. Thomas Hash (ICRISAT-Patancheru, Hyderabad, India), Stephen Kresovich
(University of South Carolina, USA), Sharon Mitchell (Cornell University, USA),
and Kassa Semagn (CIMMYT-Nairobi, Kenya)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior Personnel:
Theresa Fulton (Cornell University, USA)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced
strategies of plant breeding are rapidly evolving from molecular breeding
methods that manipulate a few major genes or genomic regions to complex,
coordinated methods that incorporate simultaneous selection across many genomic
regions (genome-wide or genomic selection). The future of plant molecular
breeding (from conservation of key landraces to targeted hybrid deployment) must
integrate and mine huge data sets and employ mathematical models that can
predict which genotypes will perform well in specific environments. This
information will then be used to help breeders and farmers identify the optimal
parental combinations and select progeny genotypes (for a particular target
environment) that most efficiently maximize agricultural output (yield and
quality) with minimal use of constrained resources. This unique opportunity is
founded on the pillars of inexpensive high marker density genotyping, high
quality phenotyping, and appropriate mathematical models for prediction and
experimental design. This research effort is planned to solve the technical
problems associated with applying high-throughput high density genotyping and
developing an operational "model" for a wide range of crops. The project will
exploit and optimize next generation sequencing technologies as high-throughput
genotyping assays for maize and sorghum varieties important to farmers in sub-
Saharan Africa (SSA) and other semi-arid, tropical regions of the world. Using
next generation sequencing technologies combined with high levels of
multiplexing and very inexpensive sample preparation methods, the project will
establish a platform to provide 100,000-1 million markers per individual for a
cost substantially below current field and laboratory costs. This platform will
produce robust protocols for the entire pipeline, from DNA preparation to
bioinformatic analyses, which are essential for genomic selection. Moreover,
these approaches will be generalized so in the future any large number of
individuals of any species can be genotyped with equal ease. Reducing the
genotyping costs and increasing its applicability to all crops will enable plant
breeders to employ genomic selection to facilitate crop
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomic selection has the potential to
significantly increase the rate of gain in agricultural productivity per year in
the developing world. In this coordinated project, efforts focus on solving key
technology components necessary to give half the world's population access to
advanced approaches for making better crop varieties specifically tailored to
challenging environments and production systems. This project will make
protocols available through the project website, sequencing reads through NCBI
Short Read Archive, and diversity data through the Panzea and Gramene websites.
Additionally, the project will provide training to researchers at Cornell and
through two symposia and training modules held in Kenya and India.