* 0965328
* Personal Credit, New Firm Formation and Entrepreneurial Firm Growth
* SBE,SBE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2016
* Gordon Phillips, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 05/31/2016
* USD 491,606.00

This project examines the relationship between individual personal credit,
entrepreneurship and business formation. An important part of innovation policy
targets small firms, but little is known about the links between individual
finances and firm startups. The contribution of this research is to create a new
dataset that combines data on individual credit reports with new firm startups.
The research assesses the role of individual credit in influencing new firm
start-up and longer term success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
contribution of the research is to advance understanding of the role of credit
access and personal credit scores on individual decisions regarding personal and
small business finance. This research provides new insights into the importance
of personal credit and human capital in understanding: a) individual decisions
at the personal level such as delinquency, personal default and bankruptcy b)
the formation, success and failure of small businesses that are partially funded
by personal finance with personal guarantees, c) the link between human capital
accumulation and the availability of credit from banks and other sources, and d)
the effect of job churn on individual bankruptcy and new firm formation. This
project also deepens understanding about the ways in which an important policy
lever, Small Business Administration (SBA) loans, affects the subsequent growth
of small entrepreneurial firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The results
of the research should inform innovation policies regarding access to credit by
small firms and new firm formation. The research also creates an important new
dataset for many researchers to study the links between access to credit and
firm dynamics.