* 0965096
* International Research Fellowship Program: Population Sex Ratio Bias: Influences of Climate and Consequences for Extinction Risk
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Kristine Grayson, Grayson                 Kristine       L
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 06/30/2012
* USD 145,416.00

0965096 Grayson

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a sixteen-month research fellowship by Dr. Kristine L.
Grayson to work with Dr. Nicola J. Nelson at Victoria University in New Zealand.

Understanding the ecological impacts of climate change is an urgent research
priority. The ability of temperature to dramatically impact population dynamics
is particularly apparent in species with temperature-dependent sex determination
(TSD). Even small shifts in climate have the potential to alter nest
temperatures and bias the sex ratio of an entire population. This research
project measures the influence of climate on population structure in a reptile
species with TSD, the tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus), and determines if a biased
sex ratio amplifies the risk of extinction. First, they are using small island
populations of tuatara across northern New Zealand to measure current population
sex ratios across a natural latitudinal gradient. The variation in population
structure across islands is being examined in relation to 1) past temperature
regimes, 2) available thermal nesting microhabitats, and 3) female condition and
fecundity. Second, they are using an experimental approach to determine the
interactions and behavior altered by a male-biased sex ratio over the short-term
and the impact on female morphology and condition over the long-term. Finally,
they are combining their data with long-term population data from the tuatara
research group to inform a projection matrix model. This model will allow them
to explore theoretical questions about the links between a biased sex ratio and
population processes, as well as generate realistic estimations of tuatara
population viability.

Their research tests hypotheses about the influence of rising air temperatures
and available thermal nesting habitats on the degree of adult sex ratio bias
across natural populations. They use a species with Type Ib TSD, where warmer
nests produce male offspring, to test theoretical predictions about the role of
population sex ratio in linking individual interactions and the social system to
the growth, decline, or extinction of a population. In addition, their
population data will provide much needed information to guide the conservation
of important remnant populations of tuatara, a threatened species of
evolutionary, cultural, and international significance. This fellowship also
includes opportunities to support local primary science education through the
Spinyback Trust and work with the northern island tribes of the MÃ¢ori.