* 0965465
* Developing a Social-Cognitive, Multilevel, Empirically-Based Model of Public Engagement for the Shaping of Science and Innovation Policy
* SBE,SBE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Alan Tomkins, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 499,134.00

In the U.S. as elsewhere, public engagement activities are increasingly common,
and sometimes even mandated, for informing science and innovation policy.
However, social science has not kept up with public engagement practices: There
is little guidance regarding which forms, features, and contexts of public
engagements are 'effective' for what purposes and why.

Intellectual Merit: This project advances scientific understanding of and
provides guidance for the design of successful public engagements in science and
innovation policy. It accomplishes this via rigorous studies of the effects of
varying public engagement features and purposes. The present research applies
social-cognitive and learning theories to identify potential mechanisms and
explanatory variables by which variations in public engagement activities result
in different impacts. Studies are conducted in undergraduate biology courses in
which students consider ethical, legal, and social issues relating to
nanotechnology. In that context, this research (1) creates and tests measures of
the potential explanatory variables and of outcomes relevant to varied
definitions of 'effectiveness' of public engagements (e.g., for increasing the
quality of input, participant knowledge gains, attitude changes); (2)
experimentally investigates the impacts of varying two common dimensions of
public engagement; and (3) develops a testable model of public engagement based
on those results.

Broader Impacts: The outcomes of this research, including the creation of a
testable model of public engagement and the provision of proven tools for
continued study of public engagements, are designed to help researchers to
further advance the scientific study of public engagement activities. In
addition, the present research is designed to provide scientific confirmation
that can be used by practitioners to guide their efforts in planning public
engagement activities. Finally, by involving biology majors as both research
participants and as research assistants, this research benefits science
undergraduates, providing them opportunities to learn first-hand about social
science research and enhancing their understanding of the value and roles of
citizens? contributions to science policy.