* 0965741
* ABI: Novel Tools for the Analysis &amp; Interpretation of Gene Signaling Pathways
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Lawrence Grossman, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,539,055.00

Wayne State University is awarded a grant to develop new algorithms and methods
for the analysis of gene signaling pathways. Using a systems biology approach,
the project will perform an impact analysis that includes classic performance
statistics but also considers other crucial factors that have been previously
neglected, such as the magnitude of each gene's expression change, their
significance, their position in the given pathways, their interactions, and the
full topology of the pathway. Preliminary work shows that the classical analysis
can produce both false positives and false negatives while the proposed impact
analysis can provide biologically meaningful results. The methods will be tested
and validated in terms of the distribution of the p-values under the null
hypothesis, as well as in a number of real biological problems. The validation
will be done both in-house, as well as through a number of external
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Members of under-represented groups will be
involved in many aspects of this project through collaborations established with
Douglass College and Renaissance High School. Douglass College is a
undergraduate women's college at Rutgers University. Two annual visits to
Douglass will present this research to their undergraduates with a view towards
attracting some of them to graduate careers in this area, addressing the need
for more women in computer science. Renaissance High School is a minority high-
school in Detroit, MI. This project will include a series of lectures for the
Renaissance students, as well as competitive summer internships that will
involve these high-school students in hands-on research with the goal of
enticing them to pursue careers in science. This project is expected to enhance
the national education and research infrastructure by providing web-based
software implementations of the new algorithms and methods developed as well as
by contributing to the establishment of a national repository of bioinformatics
education materials. The results of this project will be broadly disseminated by
providing: i) a web interface to all tools developed during this project, and
ii) by regular scientific communications in journals and conferences. More
information about this project will be available through the PI's lab website at
http://vortex.cs.wayne.edu/index.html .