* 0965038
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Modeling Alpine Population Histories with Approximate Bayesian Computation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Sean Schoville, Schoville               Sean           D
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 03/31/2013
* USD 130,704.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Sean D.
Schoville to work with Dr. Olivier Francois at Grenoble Institute of Technology
in France. Glacial cycles have caused rapid, regional reorganization of alpine
ecosystems at repeated intervals in the last 2.7 million years. These ecosystems
provide a naturally replicated model system to study how recent spatial and
temporal environmental change can influence processes of species formation and
community assembly. At present, the utilization of genetic data to make
inferences about the spatial and temporal history of populations is largely
restricted to a limited set of analytical models. Approximate Bayesian
computation (ABC) is a methodological approach that can be used to expand the
set of population models considered and provide quantitative criteria to
statistically discriminate between these alternative models. This research
project utilizes ABC methodology to examine patterns of demographic change and
the timing of divergence in alpine populations, across many co-occurring species
in three geographically independent alpine ecosystems. This comparison examines
whether spatial, temporal and demographic change in alpine species follows
predicable patterns across the Northern Hemisphere. Training objectives of this
research include statistical analysis of population genetic data,
bioinformatics, and computational biology. On the applied side, this research
provides an important advance in the field of biogeography by implementing
objective, statistical criteria when discriminating between alternative
evolutionary hypotheses and allowing broad scale comparisons to be built on
quantitative methods. Climate change and landscape modification are the primary
environmental agents that are shared in the evolutionary history of alpine
species. Demonstrating the importance of these environmental factors in shaping
the evolution of co-distributed species will have implications for the effects
of ongoing climate changes and the strategies needed to manage threatened alpine
species both for short-term ecological viability and long-term evolutionary
potential. This research develops international collaborative projects on alpine
biodiversity across the Northern Hemisphere, focusing on evolutionary history,
ecosystem organization and conservation.