* 0965248
* International  Research Fellowship Program: Aeroacoustic Model for an Elastic Lifting Surface with a Soft, Sound Absorbant Coating: The Silent Flight of Owls
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Justin Jaworski, Jaworski                Justin
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 04/30/2013
* USD 139,664.00

0965248 Jaworski

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Justin
Jaworski to work with Drs. Nigel Peake and Timothy J. Pedley at the University
of Cambridge in the UK.

Owls employ multiple noise suppression features to reduce their acoustic
signature within the hearing sensitivity of their prey, much of which is shared
by human audition. Two of these noise suppression features, a soft, fibrous
velvet material located at certain areas of a wing and an elastic, serrated
trailing edge, are thought to work in concert to reduce the effect of background
turbulence on noise scattering and to dissipate sound within a large frequency
bandwidth. Despite recent efforts to quantify the aeroacoustic effect of a soft
coating experimentally, a viable theoretical model does not currently exist.

The present research systematically addresses the aeroacoustic impact of these
noise suppression mechanisms and isolates the impact of porous media acoustics
from the aerodynamic influence of the velvet coating on the flow field. In this
manner, the results from the proposed research can be compared directly against
experiment and state-of-the-art aeroacoustic computations. Each of the owl noise
suppression mechanisms is reduced to physically consistent models that extend
analytical aeroacoustics results in the research literature, culminating in a
generalized and unified aerodynamic and aeroacoustic framework for a novel
computational design tool. The design tool and principles developed from this
work will enable quieter future designs for fixed and flapping wing micro air
vehicles (MAVs) that operate in flow regimes similar to owls. Lessons learned
from this research may also inform sound reduction techniques for lifting
surfaces at higher Reynolds and Mach numbers including functionally-silent air
vehicles.