* 0965125
* International  Research Fellowship Program:  Effects of Ambient Noise on Song-learning and Mate Choice in Zebra Finches
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Caitlin Kight, Kight                   Caitlin        R
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 176,104.00

0965125 Kight

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Caitlin
Kight to work with Dr. Sasha Dall at the University of Exeter in the United
Kingdom.

Anthropogenic noise has recently been associated with changes in several song
characteristics of wild bird species. Unfortunately, nearly all of the current
studies on this topic focus on adult males; it is not yet known whether, or how,
anthropogenic noise might impact juvenile or female birds. Further, while birds
have been observed to sing different songs in noisy environments, it is not
clear whether this is because they learn different vocalizations in these
environments or because they possess vocal plasticity allowing them to make
spontaneous adjustments to their songs in response to their current
environments. Because birds use song to attract mates and defend territories,
changes in these vocal signals could reduce their ability to communicate
effectively, thus reducing breeding success. However, this possibility has yet
to be explored. This study focuses on a captive population of zebra finches
(Taeniopygia guttata) in order to explore three questions related to song
learning and ambient noise. First, does the presence of ambient noise increase
errors in song learning by male zebra finches? Second, do adult birds display
vocal plasticity in response to variable ambient noise conditions? Third, does
ambient noise impact female mate preference? To investigate this, juvenile zebra
finches are raised across an ambient noise gradient, such that some birds are
better able to hear tutor song. Males? final, crystallized songs are compared to
those of their tutors, in order to measure whether the interfering ambient noise
reduced the birds? ability to accurately copy vocalizations. The birds are then
?migrated? to a new noise habitat, and their songs are recorded under the new
ambient noise conditions. This will facilitate an exploration of whether
individual singers display vocal plasticity under differing acoustic
environments (indicating that all males should be equally ?prepared? for the
noise conditions on their adult territories), or whether they will maintain the
same song characteristics throughout their adult lives (indicating that noise
conditions in natal habitats could ?prime? some males for vocal success or
failure in their adult territories). Finally, recordings are collected from
males raised across the ambient noise spectrum, and used in mate preference
trials involving females who have also been raised across the ambient noise
gradient. These trials are designed to test whether female preference, like male
song learning, is influenced by ambient noise conditions?a possibility that
could impact breeding success and therefore have widespread population
consequences.

Given the steady increases in human land use, this project provides a timely
elucidation of how the mechanisms that shape animal behavior could interact with
changes in anthropogenic land use to impact population dynamics in wild birds.
We are only beginning to understand the impacts of anthropogenic noise
pollution, both in an evolutionary and a management sense. These future studies
will further our understanding of the ways in which current noise pollution
impacts avian communication, which may also elucidate the environmental
pressures that shaped avian vocal signals in the past. This research will also
indicate whether changes in acoustic conditions will have secondary impacts on
population size and persistence. These data are essential for making management
decisions that minimize the impacts of human disturbance. This may include the
erection of sound barriers or the creation of buffer zones during breeding
seasons.