* 0965577
* Topics in Strategic Communication
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Navin Kartik, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 76,005.00

Intellectual Merit The strategic communication of private information is of
fundamental interest in economic theory and various applications, including in
political economy, bargaining, finance, and law and economics. This research
consists of three projects in strategic communication, each of which employs the
methodology of game theory.

The first project develops new models of communication that span the
literature's standard analysis of "cheap talk" and "verifiable disclosure". Much
of what economists know about strategic information transmission is based on
models of these polar settings, where evidentiary private information is either
perfectly manipulable or entirely non-manipulable, respectively. However,
reality often lies in between: manipulation is possible, but may incur a cost.
The research studies the structure of strategic communication in such cases,
developing theoretical frameworks and results.

The second project studies why biased experts may be appointed to advise a
decision-maker, often by the decision-maker herself. Most extant analysis
typically takes as given that there is a conflict of interest between experts
and decision-makers, but does not address why such a conflict exists. The
project develops a model that combines strategic communication with endogenous
information acquisition, showing that soliciting advice from an expert with a
difference of opinion can be an optimal arrangement when the expert must be
motivated to both acquire information and then reveal it.

The third project tackles information transmission in politics. There is a long-
standing view that even if voters are uninformed about economic or political
variables, electoral institutions encourage well-informed candidates for office
to reveal their information to the public. The current research examines the
validity of this notion through formal models of electoral competition, where
privately informed candidates propose policy with the objective of winning
office. The question is whether competition between candidates results in voters
being able to extract the socially valuable information possessed by the
candidates.

Broader Impacts The first project makes a novel contribution to understanding
the nature of strategic information transmission as a function of the technology
of communication. As a consequence of the research, both cheap talk and
verifiable disclosure can be viewed conceptually as extremes of a unified model,
and likewise for their predictions. Moreover, the results may be useful for
applied work in not only economics, but also fields such as political science,
where partially manipulable information is strategically communicated. Project 2
provides a rationale for the existence of conflicts of interest and divergence
of opinion between experts and decision-makers. It may be a first step towards a
theory of rational diversity in organizations. The third project informs our
understanding of the incentives for politicians and parties to disseminate
socially valuable information during elections. It may have implications for
which electoral institutions promote information revelation.