* 0965289
* Specific, General, and Target Sharing of Information Among Academic Researchers
* SBE,SBE
* 05/15/2010,10/31/2014
* Jerry Thursby, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 10/31/2014
* USD 290,046.00

Information sharing is essential to scientific progress. In principle,
unconditional sharing of knowledge among academics is enforced by the priority-
based scientific reward system in which the first person to discover a result
gets credit for the discovery. There is, however, a tension between communal
sharing and the competitive incentives for researchers during the research
process itself. A scientist who shares results provides stepping stones for
discovery by others who may not acknowledge the contribution. This tension, as
well as commercial potential for academic work has led to concerns over
misappropriation of scientific research and increased reluctance to share
information ad materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project
involves theory and a survey to support empirical research on what drives
academic researchers to share information. The theory considers three contexts
in which researchers share: one-on-one situations in which one researcher is
asked by another to share specific data or materials; public sharing, such as
conference participation where researchers present work that is neither
published nor patented at the time of presentation; and target sharing in which
they share certain types of information with trusted colleagues prior to public
dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results suggest that
information sharing depends on the conditions in which the research process is
embedded, and these conditions themselves depend upon dimensions of scientific
policy (e.g., journal and federal funding agency policies). The models also
provide hypotheses about the extent to which researchers share (and with whom)
as a function of individual characteristics including type of research, age, and
rank as well as other environmental factors. The theory provides the context for
a survey of academics across a wide array of fields to include engineering,
social sciences, biological and medical sciences, mathematics, physics and
statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Combined with econometric
analysis, the research provides a new framework for understanding of the ways in
which open science operates or not across a broad spectrum of academia.