* 0965952
* Undergraduate/Graduate Student Immersion in Computer Science, Technology and Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Richard Alo, University of Houston - Downtown
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2016
* USD 598,088.00

Scholarships are being provided for academically talented/ financially needy
students to enter the workforce following completion of a baccalaureate or
graduate degree in computer science, technology, engineering or mathematics
(CSTEM). Affinity Groups are created to assist recipients in completing project
oriented degree requirements. Recipients are being recruited from partnering
high schools, community colleges, and current students at the university. At
least 12 undergraduate and 4 graduate students per semester are being
supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: All college scholarship
recipients are required to participate in the award winning Scholars Academy
(SA) at the university and an Affinity Group (AG), which consists of a faculty
member paired with three undergraduates and one graduate student. Integrating
community college transfers into an AG helps prepares these students to succeed
in programs at the university. As members of the Scholars Academy, students
participate in programs that provide instructional enrichment opportunities such
as research projects during summer / academic year; peer tutoring; a
Collaborative Learning Community Center, a college culture not usually found in
urban commuter colleges; special advisement /mentoring; GRE preparation; and
career guidance and placement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Activities
broaden participation in STEM fields for traditionally underrepresented
minorities, women, and persons with disabilities as discovery and understanding
are advanced while emphasizing teaching, training and learning. The program
provides integrated research and education activities, serving as national model
for replication. &lt;br/&gt;