* 0965899
* Engineering Leadership Pathway Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Thalia Anagnos, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 04/30/2016
* USD 599,745.00

The project is awarding annual renewable scholarships to academically talented,
financially needy undergraduate engineering students. The first cohort consists
of 15 scholarship students. The second year, the program is funding 25
Engineering Leadership Pathway Scholars (ELPS) consisting of new and continuing
scholarship recipients. The program size grows each year to a maximum of 35
scholarships. Scholars are recruited from sophomore and junior courses as well
as community colleges and have completed the first two semesters of calculus.
Scholarship recipients form a group of students engaged in personal leadership
development activities in parallel with their academic development. Students
develop their own visions of leadership and emerge with personal and
professional goals, which help them make the best of their own talents as well
as be prepared to tackle the challenges that face the nation's technical
leaders. Eligible engineering disciplines include aerospace, chemical, civil,
computer/software, electrical, materials, mechanical, industrial, and general.
&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The project provides the support services and
activities to motivate and prepare students to complete the B.S. degree with
attitudes, knowledge and skills to be leaders in the 21st century workforce and
to pursue graduate degrees. The four-year program is generating 55 to 60 future
leaders who can serve as role models for other students. An additional outcome
is a better understanding of the characteristics that define leadership and
effective programs to develop those characteristics. The ELPS program is housed
in the Engineering Student Success Center, which provides meeting space, study
carrels, computer facilities, advising, and professional development guidance.
ELP Scholars also benefit from tutoring, workshops, field trips, as well as
interaction with faculty, graduate students participating in research, and
practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The ELPS program is recruiting a
diverse applicant pool (many of whom are underrepresented in STEM or who are
first generation in college), and providing U.S. industry with engineers who
have practiced leadership skills. The ELPS program is meant to serve as a model
for leadership development throughout the College of Engineering. Development of
activities with three feeder community colleges involves community college
students in leadership development. Lessons learned are being disseminated
through conferences, presentations, and archived articles, and used to expand
the ELPS program to all interested engineering students.