* 0965966
* Maximizing Recruitment, Persistence and Success of Undergraduate Women in Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Janna Levin, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 595,338.00

Barnard College is providing scholarships to 25 women majoring in biology,
chemistry, physics and mathematics. Five cohorts of students are developing into
a supportive team by attending 6 community-building workshops designed to
address student concerns that develop at specific times during the academic year
and by attending a mandatory seminar each year. Scholars' success is being
maximized by the educational advantages of a small liberal arts college --
Barnard is a college for women affiliated with Columbia University -- with
access to the advantages of a major university. Targeted mentoring and workshops
encourage students to flourish in the classroom and beyond. Broader impacts are
both immediate and long-term. In the short term, students are gaining valuable
time to pursue the course-heavy science majors during which an added burden of
work-study drives attrition. Further, students graduate without the heavy burden
of debt that can derail a commitment to their chosen scientific discipline. In
the long term, the student-support structures at Barnard foster the students'
innate curiosity in the sciences and encourage a responsibility for mentoring
future cohorts themselves. The Barnard College Scholars Program is contributing
to national efforts to build the science and research infrastructure, especially
for women. With an excellent grounding in the liberal arts, scholars graduate
with a broad worldview as well as an intense background in STEM disciplines.