* 0965227
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Acoustic Perceptual Properties of Suprasegmental Contrast Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Jennifer Alexander, Alexander               Jennifer       A
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/2014
* USD 142,300.00

0965227 Alexander

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Jennifer
Alexander to work with Dr. Yue Wang at Simon Fraser University in Canada.

The overarching goal of this study is to increase our understanding of cognitive
processing of speech sounds. Lexical-tone systems use pitch to signal word
meaning; they exist in 70% of languages but are under-studied compared to
segment (consonant/vowel) systems. The PI and host extend a well-studied model
of second-language sound-structure perception (the Perceptual Assimilation
Model, cf. Best and Tyler, 2007), which has traditionally focused on segments,
to lexical tones. In doing so, they aim to determine the effect of native-
language tone experience on perception of novel tone. Their first aim to
evaluate whether and how experience with a tone language affects the
organization of non-native tones in acoustic-perceptual space. In experiments 1
and 2, listeners use a free classification paradigm (Clopper, 2008) to classify
native- and non-native lexical tones. Multidimensional scaling and cluster
analyses are used to map and compare native- and non-native tone perceptual
spaces. Second, they utilize the non-native tone perceptual spaces to examine
how perceptual proximity affects identification of non-native tone categories;
experiment 3 tests listeners? abilities to identify non-native tones that differ
in perceptual proximity. Listeners are expected to more quickly and accurately
identify tones belonging to contrastive categories present in their native
inventories. Finally, they investigate how perceptual proximity affects
discrimination of non-native tones. Using behavioral and EEG methods,
experiments 4 and 5 test our prediction that listeners more quickly and
accurately discriminate ? and are more sensitive to differences between ? tones
judged to be highly dissimilar, relative to tones judged to be highly similar.

Complete understanding of the organization of linguistic systems, and of how
these systems interact, is possible only through thorough investigation of all
aspects of language. This study is among the first to extend cross-language
speech processing theories to tones. Notably, this study involves listeners from
a variety of L1s, toward a thorough view of non-native tone perception. In
addition, it is one of the first studies to compare level vs. contour tone
processing, and is the first to use EEG to investigate the effect of tonal L1 on
the rapidity with which the auditory system detects acoustic differences between
tones. A complete understanding of tone systems would aid our ability to expand,
test, and modify theories of the world?s linguistic sound systems in general.
Their data will be widely disseminated via scientific conference presentations
and publications; the stimuli will be disseminated via a web-based speech
archive. Thus, this study will inform and motivate future studies on tone
systems. In turn, the knowledge gained from these academic pursuits should
benefit various practical pursuits. It should inform approaches for teaching,
learning, and communicating in a variety of tone languages, which might then
lead to stronger ties with those whose primary language(s) are tonal. For
instance, as the global marketplace grows stronger, corporations competing for
international business may increase their demand for domestic employees who can
easily communicate with tone speakers. Finally, this study will involve
comparatively underrepresented subject populations (speakers of Igbo and Yoruba,
from Nigeria).