* 0965983
* IGERT: Returning the Radio to Chemistry: Integrating Radiochemistry into a Chemistry Ph.D. Program
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2018
* Silvia Jurisson, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2018
* USD 2,999,800.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) program
supports the development of an interdisciplinary, multi-institutional graduate
training program in radiochemistry. Interdisciplinary fields such as molecular
imaging, environmental remediation, nuclear energy, and national security rely
increasingly on specialized radiochemical knowledge. But few chemistry graduate
programs exist with the capabilities to train radiochemists and few students
engage in radiochemical research. The goal of this program is to stimulate a
resurgence of interest in radiochemistry among Ph.D. students, producing
scientists who can fill this critical need.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Hunter College
of CUNY, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, University of Missouri at
Columbia, University of Nevada Las Vegas, and several other leading
radiochemistry institutions (including national laboratories and industry) will
together train future scientists across multiple scientific disciplines to
innovate, understand and employ radiochemistry effectively. This model will
include a venue for the development of effective communication skills to foster
a better-informed public who are more accepting and knowledgeable about the use,
benefits and safety of radiochemistry. By drawing upon the collaborative efforts
of the partnering institutes as well as Hunter's experience in recruiting and
training women and minorities, this IGERT aims to increase the number and
diversity of Ph.D. scientists with strong radiochemistry
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.