* 0965733
* IREE: Developing Globally Competent Engineering Researchers
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2010,03/31/2011
* Brent Jesiek, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 03/31/2011
* USD 959,736.00

Purdue University is proposing to establish a robust pilot program that will
help identify the critical balance between program cost and quality
collaboration. The objective is to pilot and assess selected pathways for a
scalable, research-intensive successor to the NSF IREE program that preserves
and augments the goals of the inaugural offerings. This project will begin by
focusing upon providing recruitment, placement and orientation for a target
cohort of approximately 60 NSF grantees who will be traveling for an engineering
research experience in the Shanghai region of China. Grantees will be invited to
participate in three types of orientations: U.S.-based, China-based and cyber-
based. Pre- and post-surveys will be conducted as part of the orientation to
assess the economic and professional impact of each. After orientation,
participants will conduct research in the Shanghai region as part of one of
three placement models: (i) IREE grantees whose international placement was
facilitated by the PI; (ii) IREE grantees who conduct research at a group
location; and (iii) Other NSF (non-IREE) grantees whose international placement
was facilitated by the PI. Once the grantees return, Purdue will host a re-entry
conference for participants to gain feedback about their international
experience. Through this approach, the Purdue team will pursue the answers to
two research questions: (i) Are face-to-face orientations better than online
orientations and, if so, are these face-to-face orientations most effective when
offered in the U.S. or in the host country? And (ii) How can NSF strike a
balance between affordably increasing the scale of its international
education/research programs while retaining the quality of each grantee's
research/education experience?

Potentially Transformative Research: This project treats global engineering
competency as an imperative, and uniquely integrates a substantial international
research experience with emerging research in engineering education to maximize
effectiveness. By defining, offering, and assessing a deliberate portfolio of
pathways to prepare for global research experiences, we will provide research-
based recommendations for effective programs that will ultimately advance our
future science and engineering workforce. The proposed orientation curriculum
will also challenge participants to reimagine the boundaries of engineering as
they engage the social, cultural, and global dimensions of their work.

Intellectual Merit: As global engineering becomes increasingly recognized as
integral to professional development, research is needed to determine how to
affordably expand these programs without sacrificing research quality. Purdue's
Global Professional Practice Programs and the School of Engineering Education
will merge their respective expertise to address this "economies of scale"
problem. By helping to optimize the number of globally competent engineers, this
research will enable productive collaboration on international grand challenges.

Broader Impacts: The driving motivation for this project is to ensure global
engineering programs such as IREE can have both the broadest and most effective
impact possible. Since 2006, three of the PIs have facilitated global
engineering experiences for 615 undergraduate and graduate students and
established the NSF-funded engineering virtual organization Globalhub.org by
leading efforts in the Global Engineering Program (GEP) the Office of
Professional Practice (OPP). The unique combination of site-based and cyber-
based collaboration will enable our team to explore relevant pathways for
providing the highest quality global engineering experience to a large number of
participants.