* 0965137
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Hyperpolarized Solid State NMR Spectra of Materials and Catalysis Using Dynamic Nuclear Polarization
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Leah Casabianca, Casabianca              Leah           B
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 08/31/2012
* USD 122,900.00

0965137 Casabianca

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Leah B.
Casabianca to work with Dr. Lucio Frydman at the Weizman Institute in Israel.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is undoubtedly one of the most
versatile and useful tools for the determination of structure and dynamics in
chemical systems and materials. No other technique compares in the wealth of
atomistic detail that can become available from this kind of spectroscopy. The
greatest disadvantage of NMR spectroscopy, however, is its low sensitivity. NMR
would be ideally suited for structural studies of catalytic organic systems,
functionalized surfaces, or inorganic nanotubes ? should only its sensitivity
problems be surmounted. This goal of this work is the development of new NMR
techniques exploiting cryogenic dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) to
characterize hyperpolarized nuclei in static solids. The application of DNP to
metal nuclei in solids will be validated, optimized and understood through the
development of pulse sequences, optimal hyperpolarization conditions for
polarization transfer specifically to metal nuclei, and hardware for use in
cryogenic environments. These approaches will then be used to examine metal
nuclei in catalysts and inorganic nanotubes. A concomitant goal of this project
is to examine the feasibility of using endogenous paramagnetic impurities
present in single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) and nanodiamonds as polarizing
agents for DNP, enhancing the signal of 13C nuclei in these carbon
nanomaterials. Catalysts are ubiquitous in synthetic and industrial chemistry as
well as in everyday life, inorganic nanotubes have unique potential applications
due to their non-toxic nature, and carbon nanomaterials have applications
ranging from membranes and sensors to batteries and nanoelectronics. Whereas
structural characterization in these fields has traditionally been dominated by
low-resolution techniques, sensitivity-enhanced NMR has the potential to allow
atomic-level characterization of these and other emerging advanced materials.

The proposed work will lead to advances in the field of hyperpolarized solid-
state NMR, and will also have a positive impact on other fields including
catalysis and materials science. The techniques being developed will allow the
characterization of systems that have traditionally been difficult to study by
NMR due to the inherent sensitivity limitations of this method, thus advancing
the field of NMR by increasing the applicability of this technique. In addition,
this project will contribute to the understanding of hyperpolarization processes
in general. This work will benefit society through the potential applications of
metal-containing catalysts, inorganic nanotubes, SWNTs, and other carbon-based
nanomaterials. Atomic-level structural characterization of these materials will
allow applications of these systems in the biomedical, electronics, automotive,
and aerospace industries to be realized.