* 0965286
* Management and Organizational Practices Across the US
* SBE,SBE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2015
* Erik Brynjolfsson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 07/31/2015
* USD 794,878.00

Some of the key determinants of productivity, economic growth, innovation, and
income inequality are the management practices of firms. Unfortunately, in
contrast to labor, capital and resource inputs, consistent and comprehensive
data do not exist on management and organizational practices. This project
collaborates with the Census Bureau to survey establishments about the nature
and extent of these practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This is
the first large-scale cross-sector panel dataset that can be matched by the US
research community to numerous existing datasets on productivity, innovation,
employment, technology, energy and indicators of worker well-being (such as
health) within the Census Research Data Centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because
of the importance of the topic, the Census Bureau believes this can be added as
a repeated supplement to the Annual Survey of Manufacturing (ASM) in order to
construct a panel of data on about 45,000 establishments. This survey is
initially targeted at manufacturing because of the availability of a range of
other manufacturing data and the relative ease of measuring productivity, but
the plan is to rapidly extend this to other sectors, in particular retail and
health care to build on our existing firm-level management surveys in these
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses these data to address a number of
important research, policy and managerial questions. For
example:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What is the relationship between management,
organization, productivity and growth, and what policies can promote these
practices to support the growth of US firms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What are the
extent of regional, industrial and firm-size variations in management and
organizational practices; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What are the dynamics of
organizational practices over time and firms? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What types
of management practices are associated with changes in inequality over time?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: These questions are central to US policy-
makers who seek to promote the success of US firms, and to make decisions based
on a sound understanding of the economy. The data analysis should yield
important academic and policy results.