* 0965138
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Morphological Instability in Freezing Colloidal  Suspensions
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Anthony Anderson, Anderson                Anthony        M
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 06/30/2012
* USD 161,064.00

0965138 Anderson

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Anthony
Anderson to work with Dr. Grae Worster at the University of Cambridge (DAMTP) in
the United Kingdom.

Colloidal suspensions do not freeze uniformly. Instead, the frozen phase (e.g.
ice) becomes segregated, trapping bulk regions of the colloid within, and a
fascinating variety of patterns in the structure of the segregated ice emerge.
These patterns depend on the freezing condition, particle concentration, and
other properties of the colloidal suspension. Recent efforts by Prof. Worster
and his collaborators to model the freezing of hard-sphere colloidal suspensions
demonstrate that a planar ice interface can become thermodynamically unstable
and break down spatially during solidification. The central aim of the current
investigation is to identify the extent to which this thermodynamic mechanism
for morphological instability underlies pattern formation in colloidal systems
in general.

The investigation relies on a combination of theory and experiments. The
Directional Solidification facility housed in DAMTP at the University of
Cambridge is being used to perform the necessary experimental tests of the
theoretical predictions of morphological transitions. This combination of
mathematical analysis and experimentation has proven to be a very powerful
approach in the development of the theory of alloy solidification, which shares
several analogous features with the solidification of colloidal suspensions.

Many natural and technological processes involve the solidification of particle
suspensions. In particular, ?freeze-casting? technology relies on the patterns
of segregated ice as templates for engineering advanced composite materials. The
phenomenon of ice segregation also underlies frost heave, whereby saturated
soils expand as they freeze, which can lead to beautifully patterned ground, but
cause damage to engineering structures. Other examples of interest include the
preservation of cells, tissues, and perishable foods. The development of a
theory to predict the conditions under which various patterns occur will
consequently impact several applications.