* 0965147
* Firm IQ: A Universal, Uniform and Reliable Measure of R&D Effectiveness
* SBE,SBE
* 06/15/2010,09/30/2011
* Anne Marie Knott, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 09/30/2011
* USD 149,509.00

Despite the dramatic impact of R&D on firm and economic growth, there currently
are no good measures of R&D effectiveness at the firm level. The most prevalent
measure, patent counts, suffers from problems of universality (less than 50% of
firms conducting R&D have any patents), uniformity (10% of U.S patents account
for 81-85% of the economic value of all US patents) and reliability (patents are
a poor predictor of firm market value).

Without a good measure of effectiveness, it is difficult to characterize the
impact of R&D investment, to understand the mechanisms through which R&D
investments generate economic outcomes, or to generate tools guiding future
investment. What firms, policy makers and academics need is a universal, uniform
and reliable measure of R&D effectiveness. That measure should match constructs
in economic theory (so academics can test them) and should provide guidance to
firms and policy-makers about the choice of investment levels.

Intellectual Merit: Recent empirical methods have facilitated a new measure of
R&D effectiveness using firm accounting data that is based in economic theory.
This measure has the potential of predicting both firms' behavior and their
market value. The measure is called IQ because it captures firms' technical
problem solving capability in much the same way individual IQ captures
analytical problem solving capability: those with higher IQ solve more problems
per unit of input (dollars for firms, minutes for individuals) than those with
lower IQ. Perhaps most importantly, firm IQ (unlike individual IQ) appears to be
mutable over long periods of time. Accordingly, understanding the organizational
structures and processes driving differences in IQ offers the potential for
firms to improve their R&D effectiveness.

Work to date has estimated the IQ for publicly-traded US firms, characterized
variation of IQ across industries, and identified high and low IQ firms within
each industry.

This pilot study represents the first stage in an effort to characterize the
organizational configurations and processes driving IQ. The pilot comprises in-
depth interviews with paired firms (one high IQ, one low IQ) in two industries.
These interviews form the basis of rich case studies of the four firms, as well
as identify candidate factors/organizational configurations to examine in a
future quantitative study across the full spectrum of firms engaged in R&D.

Broader Impact: There are both immediate and long term benefits from this study.
The immediate benefits of the IQ measure are 1) academics' use of the measure to
resolve empirical anomalies in prior studies, 2) firms' use of the measure to
compute their optimal R&D investment, and 3) policymakers' use of the measure to
allocate funds based on firmer evidence. The longer term benefit from the full
study (to be disseminated via conference presentations, journal articles and
ultimately a book for practitioners) is advancing understanding about the
effectiveness of R&D investments.