* 0965604
* Collaborative Research: Kokama-Kokamilla and Omagua: Documentation, Description and (Non-)Genetic Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Rosa Vallejos, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 08/31/2014
* USD 106,130.00

This collaborative project will complete the documentation and description of
two highly endangered and closely-related Amazonian languages, Omagua and
Kokama-Kokamilla, and seek to determine the origin of these two historically
important languages. When Europeans arrived in the Americas, Omagua was one the
largest languages of the Amazon basin. The Omaguas suffered tremendously during
the European invasion, however, and Omagua now has fewer than ten speakers, the
youngest being 80 years old. Despite the historical importance of the language,
there are no grammatical descriptions of Omagua, nor any lexical resources
beyond colonial era wordlists. The area and situation is similar for Kokama-
Kokamilla. The researchers will work closely with the remaining speakers of
these endangered languages to develop dictionaries, a collection of oral and
written texts, and grammatical descriptions of the languages. Dr. Michael will
focus on the documentation of Omagua and Dr. Vallejos on the documentation of
Kokama-Kokamilla to create a permanent record of the languages for use by the
ethnic communities, linguists, anthropologists, and historians.

Beyond the basic scientific task of language documentation, this project aims at
determining the relationship of Omagua and Kokama-Kokamilla to other Amazonian
languages, and in doing so, gain insights into Pre-Columbian cultural history.
Although long thought to be members of the continent-spanning Tupí-Guaraní
family, recent work has demonstrated that Omagua and Kokama-Kokamilla arose
through contact between speakers of a Tupí-Guaraní language and speakers of
another unknown language. The result was a language that mixes aspects of the
Tupí-Guaraní lexicon and grammar with those from the unknown contact language.
By systematically comparing the lexicon and grammatical features of Omagua and
Kokama-Kokamilla with those of other language families across Amazonia, and with
specific languages in the area in which these two languages are spoken, Dr.
Michael and Dr. Vallejos will clarify the linguistic processes involved in their
genesis, thereby gaining insights into the cultural circumstances in which they
arose.