* 0965245
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Light-Emitting Organic Memory of (LE-OMEM) Based on Photochromic Hole Transport Materials in Organic Light-Emitting Diodes (OLEDs)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2012
* Richard Shallcross, Shallcross              Richard        C
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 07/31/2012
* USD 132,950.00

0965245 Shallcross

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. R.
Clayton Shallcross to work with Dr. Klaus Meerholz at the University of Cologne
in Germany.

The scientific objective of this twenty-four month research fellowship is to
develop solution-processable non-volatile organic memory (OMEM), image
processing and display devices that may be optically switched via photochromic
dithyenylethene (DTE) compounds in the active layer. The project focuses on both
light-emitting and non-emitting devices based on organic light-emitting diodes
(OLEDs) and ?hole-only? devices, respectively. The overall goal of this research
fellowship is to design solution-processable (i.e. crosslinkable) photochromic
DTE-based molecules that are specifically sensitive to blue, green, red and IR
radiation and incorporate them into working devices, which will ultimately lead
to full color image processing and complementary display capabilities that
exhibit high contrast between their ON and OFF states (i.e. high ON/OFF ratios),
low power consumption, and high fatigue resistance (cyclability).

The broader significance of this project lies in the ability to utilize basic
solution processing methods (e.g. spin coating) to easily and inexpensively
process thin film non-volatile memory devices. In contrast to conventional
device processing conditions utilized for conventional inorganic semiconductors,
low-temperature solution processing will be employed to afford high-quality
large area multi-layered thin films composed of pure or doped organic
semiconductors on a variety of both rigid and plastic substrates. Some of the
existing non-volatile memory technologies based predominately on organic
compounds in metal-insulator-metal (MIM) and thin film transistor (TFT) formats
do show reasonable voltage-induced ON/OFF ratios for current, but are not
simultaneously optimized with respect to fatigue resistance (cyclability), power
consumption (operating voltage) and ease of processing. Furthermore, light-
emitting organic memory (LE-OMEM) devices offer the possibility of not only
current read out for conventional memory and image processing applications, but
also optical readout due to OLED emission modulation, which may find additional
applications in ?smart? display technologies. Rational design of OMEM devices,
incorporating a diverse catalog of structurally unique photochromic compounds,
offers the prospect of utilizing low-temperature, low-cost and facile solution
processing methods for optimizing full color image processing and complementary
display devices.