* 0965996
* Michigan Tech SSEED: Sustained Support to Ensure Engineering Degrees
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Jacqueline Huntoon, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Lee
* 08/31/2016
* USD 599,496.00

The first objective of the project is to improve the upper-division retention
rates of academically talented engineering students who show the highest risk of
not completing their degrees. The highest risk students in engineering are the
underrepresented women and minorities. The second objective is to improve the
recruitment of women and minorities to graduate school in engineering. Each year
thirty-five junior and senior engineering students who are at-risk for attrition
and five first-year graduate engineering students are receiving scholarship
support. Financially needy, academically talented women and minorities are
targeted for recruitment. Undergraduate student scholars are selected based on a
combination of academic merit and attrition risk factors (financial need,
minority status, first generation college student, pre-college preparation, off-
campus work, and campus connectivity). Graduate student scholars will be
selected based on academic merit, financial need, and underrepresentation in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Student support services include a number of specially
designed activities, several of which expand on existing programs. Activities
include a one-credit Career Foundations course, mentorship opportunities and
training, professional development seminars, undergraduate research
opportunities, and service projects.