* 0965495
* Technological Challenges for Hybrid Flexible Electronics and Photonics Workshop to be held in April 2010 at Arlington, VA
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2011
* Ananth Dodabalapur, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 03/31/2011
* USD 66,449.00

The goal of this workshop on Flexible Electronics is to assess the state-of-the-
art in terms of materials, devices, and systems in this area. The objective is
to identify what are the new areas of research that hold most promise and what
research issues need to be addressed so as to advance these research areas in
flexible electronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The first
commercial products were based on photo-conductive films, a business now with
annual sales in the multi-billion dollar range. Organic light emitting diodes
(OLEDs) and displays based on light emitting diodes have been introduced to the
market and a large expansion in market penetration has been forecast in the next
decade. One of the next key areas is going to be solid state lighting based on
OLEDs. Similarly, organic and flexible electronics offers significant
opportunities related to biomedical devices and systems that can help the total
cost of health care. This includes biomedical sensors, actuators, systems in a
foil, and systems for patient care and monitoring. Transistors have also been
successfully integrated with display elements such as LEDs and electrophoretic
cells and used as chemical and biological sensors. Another area of interest is
organic solar cells with power conversion efficiencies more than 6% have been
reported. As the field has evolved in the past few years, inorganic materials
are being increasingly used either singly or together with organic/polymer
materials, and it is more appropriate to speak of hybrid electronics. Despite
this impressive set of advances, it is clear that more research needs to be
done. The chief objective of the workshop is to help define the future of the
field. This will be done by having a series of experts give talks on key
subjects and also by encouraging debate and discussion amongst all participants
in a series of panels. The proceedings of the workshop will be a set of reports
and discussion summaries by group leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The workshop will also have an impact on research and development in the area of
flexible electronics. This is an area of research in which the United States is
currently outspent by about 3:1 by funding agencies in Europe. the WTEC study
(led by the PI) has assessed the state of this field in Europe. In this
workshop, opportunities in this area for researchers and industry in the US will
be identified. The workshop will also assess the needs for graduate and
undergraduate education aspects related to this area. A large number of
universities offer courses in the general area of organic semiconductors, and
the workshop will help define directions in this area as well as in retraining
high technology workers for careers in the organic and hybrid organic/inorganic
semiconductor fields. The workshop will also address issues of US
competitiveness in the field of flexible hybrid electronics vis- -vis Europe and
Asia and how this can be improved. &lt;br/&gt;