* 0966045
* IGERT:  Training Program in Sustainable Energy Recovery from the Earth --  Educational Innovation at the Intersection of Geosciences and Engineering
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2017
* Teresa Jordan, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2017
* USD 2,921,701.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the development of a new Ph.D. interdisciplinary training program at Cornell
University focused on sustainable energy recovery from the earth. Students in
engineering and in geosciences will be provided with a common language in
interdisciplinary science and design that will accelerate technological progress
in the sustainable exploitation of Earth's energy resources with acceptable
environmental consequences.

There are complex intellectual challenges associated with the design of new
subsurface technologies that extract energy from geothermal, conventional, and
unconventional fossil resources, or safely sequester waste products like CO2.
Trainees will participate in research that adds to fundamental understanding of
transport processes for thermal energy, and of fluids and fractures in
engineered rock systems. The initial interdisciplinary training will occur
through a series of courses that introduce natural systems phenomena, energy
conversion principles, economic, social and ethical considerations, and methods
of industrial ecology (life cycle analysis), of systems design and simulation,
and of risk analysis. Student teams will draw upon this coursework foundation
for their analysis and design projects that deal with real world, field-based,
cases. Trainees will develop skills to design energy options in consideration of
environmental, economic, and social benefits and risks, and to communicate with
those who must make informed decisions. In doing so, the nation gains a
workforce able to utilize the Earth's energy resources in better balance with
the natural environment.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.