* 0966672
* An Interdisciplinary Team-Based International Research Experience in Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Community Development in the Ecuadorian Andes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Janet Rachlow, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Franklin Carrero-Martínez
* 05/31/2014
* USD 144,883.00

The next generation of conservation professionals will require a unique skill
set encompassing trans-disciplinary problem solving, sensitivity to varying
cultural and political norms, and creativity and rigor in the face of
challenging research environments. This International Research Experiences for
Students (IRES) project seeks to train such professionals through directed
undergraduate research conducted in neo-tropical Ecuador, in a cooperative
initiative between the University of Idaho (UI) and the Universidad Técnica
Particular de Loja (UTPL). Participating students from Idaho will work in small,
vertically integrated, interdisciplinary teams (2-3 students) within the Andean
Region of southern Ecuador, addressing individual research questions focused
around an umbrella theme of biodiversity conservation and sustainable community
development. Specific projects include the conservation genetics of endangered
Andean species, biodiversity assessment and restoration of endangered orchids,
international protected areas management and policy, and invertebrate taxa as
bioindicators in regional watersheds. UI graduate students will serve as team
leaders, while UTPL faculty and staff, coordinated by research vice-rector Dr.
Juan Pablo Suárez, will serve as project leads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southern
Ecuador is noteworthy for its geographic, ecological, and cultural richness, and
yet baseline knowledge is lacking for much of the country's natural heritage.
This project's multinational research team encompasses expertise in landscape
and organismal ecology, conservation biology, molecular systematics, landscape
genetics, watershed management, environmental sociology, policy, sustainable
community development, and education. Through targeted application of this
expertise, the project will contribute to strategic conservation planning in the
United States and other countries. Participating U.S. students will also gain
experience with a rich array of cultures, thus building a sophisticated,
externalized perspective on science and collaboration.