* 0966413
* Exciton superfluids in low dimensional systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2010,12/31/2011
* Jinwu Ye, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 12/31/2011
* USD 160,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education to investigate possible exciton superfluids in two quasi-two-
dimensional semiconductor gallium arsenide/aluminum gallium arsenide systems:
electron-hole coupled bilayers and electron-electron coupled bilayers at quantum
Hall regime at total filling factor 1. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has
three parts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) The PI will investigate photoluminescence
from the quantum phases of excitons in electron-hole coupled bilayers,
especially the exciton superfluids, in experimentally relevant environments. The
PI will investigate the effect of an in-plane magnetic field and quenched
disorder. Photoluminescence includes all the photon characteristics such as the
angle resolved power spectrum, the momentum distribution curve, the energy
distribution curve, the two modes squeezing spectrum, and two-photon correlation
functions. The PI will also study how the photoluminescence can detect a novel
quantum phase diffusion process of exciton superfluids inside a harmonic
trap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) The PI will study Coulomb drag properties of gate
voltage generated excitons in the electron-hole coupled bilayers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Informed by the results of (1), the PI will revisit
outstanding unresolved phenomena involving the transport properties of possible
exciton superfluids in the electron-electron coupled quantum Hall bilayers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports training graduate students in
theoretical and computational materials research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education to investigate superfluidity
in semiconductor systems. Superfluidity is a phase of matter in which certain
fluids are able to overcome friction and flow through a narrow channel without
any viscosity. The ability of superfluids to flow without any resistance can
allow them to have a variety of important technological applications. However,
superfluidity has so far been observed in very few systems such as liquids of
the element Helium cooled to near the absolute zero of temperature.
Experimentalists are searching for superfluids made of excitons. An exciton is a
bound state of an excited electron and a "hole;? it is created when light
interacts with semiconductors or insulators and excites an electron from an
occupied quantum state to an unoccupied one, leaving behind an effective
positive charge called the hole. The electrostatic interaction between the
negatively charged electron and the positively charged hole stabilizes the
exciton. Although no exciton superfluid phase has yet been observed in any bulk
system, recently, exciton systems have been experimentally produced by many
groups using different methods in almost-two-dimensional artificial materials
made from semiconductors. There is good evidence that it might be possible to
experimentally observe exciton superfluidity in such systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education on
exciton superfluids in artificially fabricated semiconductor structures. The PI
will study theoretically all the possible new and unique features of light
emission processes and transport properties in exciton superfluids. The study
involves combination of advanced techniques from two branches of physics: many
body theory and quantum optics. The PI's theoretical study is expected to guide
experimentalists to realize, control, and especially detect these exotic quantum
phases in the laboratory. The research has fundamental importance, experimental
relevance, and potential industrial applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports training graduate students in theoretical and computational
materials research.