* 0966376
* IGERT: Sustaining Ecosystem Services to Support Rapidly Urbanizing Areas
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/2010,08/31/2017
* David Ervin, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 08/31/2017
* USD 3,094,042.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
supports the development of an interdisciplinary graduate program in Ecosystem
Services for Urbanizing Regions at Portland State University, in collaboration
with Heritage University, and an array of city, state, and federal agencies, and
community partners. Ecosystem services are the conditions and processes provided
by natural ecosystems that sustain and fulfill human life. Rapid urbanization
has contributed to widespread degradation of ecosystem services, thus creating a
demand for scientists and managers who can address these issues. This program
integrates scholarship from economics, environmental science, engineering,
geosciences, urban studies and planning, business administration and social
sciences to understand the complex roles that ecosystem services play in
supporting rapidly growing urban areas of the Pacific Northwest and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will engage in a three-year study sequence, in
research, and in field placements to develop an in-depth, interdisciplinary
knowledge of ecosystem service issues at multiple scales. A diverse faculty team
will build a curriculum and research program that integrates ecological, social,
and economic concepts and that explicates the role of values in planning and
management. Through new problem-based curricula, research, and community
partnerships, the program will create a new generation of scientists and
managers proficient in the science and cutting-edge management approaches for
sustaining vital ecosystem services for urbanizing regions. Trainees'
dissertations will be required to include a co-authored chapter on an
interdisciplinary topic, deepening student understanding of the relationships
between the natural and social sciences, and providing training for
collaborative projects. Trainees also will have an opportunity to complete PSU's
Graduate Certificate in Sustainability while pursuing a doctorate. National
recruitment for the program will target high-caliber students, with an emphasis
on under-represented groups, through a partnership with Heritage
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.