* 0966188
* IGERT: Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship in Magnetic and Nanostructured Materials
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2010,05/31/2017
* Suely Black, Norfolk State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 05/31/2017
* USD 3,184,089.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the development of an interdisciplinary graduate training program centered on
the design and study of novel materials with structure-derived functionalities.
The program is a collaborative effort between Purdue University, Cornell
University and Norfolk State University (NSU). Its goal is to train students to
conduct research that will lead to faster, smaller and more efficient devices
and technologies with numerous applications, including information storage,
signal detection, and biomedical possibilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
and professional training opportunities include annual laboratory training at
Cornell and NSU, ongoing video-conferencing of modular courses, regular
consideration of the ethical and social aspects of magnetic and nanostructured
materials, and student-driven research initiatives. Trainees will also explore
engineering education research in order to learn about the challenges of
translating new knowledge into educational resources for schools and the general
public. Students will benefit from structured mentoring and training for
individual career development--education elements that have been identified as
essential for the retention and success of underrepresented minorities in
science and engineering. This partnership, of two research universities and a
Historically Black University, will bring greater understanding of how the
integration of complementary capabilities and opportunities can better prepare
the next generation of scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is
an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze
a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.