* 0966482
* DHB COLLABORATIVE: Lifespan Dynamics of Cognition and Action
* NONE,NONE
* 01/11/2009,12/31/2012
* Charles Webber, Jr, Loyola University Stritch School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 12/31/2012
* USD 38,132.00

How well can you walk and talk at the same time? To behave adaptively, living
beings must coordinate body and mind. However important questions remain as to
how this may occur. First, is the direction of control exclusively mind or brain
to body? For instance does the coordination of motor components in walking
change the coordination of cognitive components in talking? Motor acts are
commonly treated as consequent on or independent of cognitive activity (e.g.,
thinking proceeds apace, whether one sits or walks). But preliminary data of
this research project corroborate that coordination of motor behavior has an
impact on cognitive dynamics. Second, how do control and coordination of
cognitive dynamics change across the lifespan? The dynamics of motor
coordination has a linear progression, in which dynamic patterns change from a
greater fractal dimension in childhood to a lesser fractal dimension in old age.
Does the same hold for cognitive tasks? For instance, it is unclear whether
cognitive coordination deteriorates with age.

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Van Orden and his
colleagues will substantially bridge these knowledge gaps as they investigate
control and coordina-tion of cognitive and motor behavior across the life span.
Their empirical studies will contribute to two distinct areas. First, findings
of interdependence of motor and cognitive components may overhaul the common
view that cognition unfolds independently of the motor actions of the body.
Second, findings on how control and coordination of cognitive activity changes
as a function of age will broadly inform developmental theory, including theory
that links behavioral changes to cortical organization in a child's or adult's
brain. The project also includes the use of new non-linear methods of recurrence
quantifica-tion analysis as tools for fractal analysis, which may circumvent
problems of linear tools, supply a more detailed picture of fractal behavior,
and add methodological rigor to the study of fractal phenomena in all fields
that confront such phenomena. Furthermore, support for this project will
contribute catalytic funds to fully realize a planned interdisciplinary center
for Cognition, Action & Perception at the U. of Cincinnati.