* 0966861
* Innovative methodologies for integrated planning and scheduling and industrial applications
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Marianthi Ierapetritou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 402,908.00

0966861&lt;br/&gt;Ierapetritou&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Production planning and
scheduling are decision making stages in process operations which have
traditionally been practiced in a non-symbiotic manner. The full coupling of
planning and scheduling models across the different temporal and spatial scales
can substantially improve production operations. However, simultaneous modeling
of planning and scheduling problems is currently plagued by its computational
intensity, the uncertainty in model parameters and the inherently complex nature
of manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The PI
plans on developing an integrated decision-making model that considers
production planning and detailed short term scheduling to optimize the overall
plant production capacity. By integrating planning and scheduling decision
making levels the model becomes very complex and conventional solution methods
turn out to be inefficient. She plans to develop an efficient modeling framework
and advanced solution approaches based on decomposition principles to provide
practical solutions to industry supplying alternative choices, but also
meaningful research contributions in large-scale optimization. The main goal is
to provide the decision maker solutions that are optimal in terms of production
capacity and feasible in terms of detailed production scheduling. To achieve
this target, the following ideas will be investigated:&lt;br/&gt;- Efficient
ways to represent scheduling feasibility so that the integration with the
planning problem will result in reasonable size model.&lt;br/&gt;- Efficient
modeling approaches for planning and scheduling integration based on alternative
ways to represent the scheduling feasibility and optimality
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;- Solution methodologies for the integrated model based on
decomposition methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The ultimate goal of
this work is to optimize the production planning operations in large-scale,
single-facility production plants considering the details of scheduling
decisions. Realistic case studies from petrochemical, fast moving consumer goods
manufacturing and chemical companies will be utilized to test and verify the
results of the proposed analysis tools. The impact of the work goes beyond a
specific industrial sector since the general ideas and findings can be applied
or extended to different types of production facilities. The educational
component of the work involves one graduate and two undergraduate students.
Funding for the undergraduate students would be pursued through REU supplements.
Students affiliated with program SUPER (Science for Undergraduates a Program for
Excellence in Research) of Douglass College of Women will be actively involved
with this project.