* 0966571
* Design Projects: Student projects in rehabilitation engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Richard Goldberg, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2016
* USD 124,996.00

PI: Goldberg, Richard L.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0966571&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives: The objectives of this
class, called "Rehabilitation Engineering Design", include the following: to
provide the students with a practical engineering experience that uses their
technical knowledge and develops their oral communication and technical writing
skills; to provide a personally rewarding experience to students; and to help
individuals with disabilities become more independent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods: Project ideas come from health care
professionals, who are enlisted to help supervise the projects they propose.
Several engineering faculty closely examine each project idea to ensure it is
appropriate for the class. Students spend the entire semester working on their
project, and at the end of the semester, they give the custom device and a
user's manual to the clients, free of charge. The class includes lectures and
discussions on related topics, such as engineering design, ethics,
communication, product safety, and rehabilitation engineering. Students also
develop better communication skills through presentations and technical writing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New initiatives: While the basic structure of the class
will remain the same in the next grant period, there will be new initiatives to
improve outcomes. Information technology will be applied in innovate ways to
improve project evaluation, student writing, and clinical assessment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Each student project is a unique
application of technology, and seeks to meet a need that is not satisfied by
existing commercial products. In the process, students develop a variety of
skills, including technical, project management, and communication skills. They
gain clinical experience by working with the client and their health care
provider throughout the semester. Most of our students continue their studies in
Biomedical Engineering graduate programs or medical school, so this clinical
experience is particularly valuable to their intellectual growth. The PI has 12
yeas of experience in developing assistive technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This program has a significant impact on
the students as well as on individuals in the community. The students integrate
research and design skills with their educational background to develop custom
devices that address the needs of their clients. They benefit educationally and
personally from this opportunity to do service-learning work in the community
for people with disabilities. This program also impacts the people who receive
custom devices from the students, as these clients will directly benefit from
the independence they gain by using their custom device. Results from the
program are widely disseminated through submission to national student design
competitions, conference presentations, and publication in the annual NSF book
of senior design projects for people with disabilities.