* 0966093
* IGERT: Water Across Boundaries - Integration of Science, Engineering, and Diplomacy
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2010,07/31/2018
* Kent Portney, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2018
* USD 3,195,140.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the development of an interdisciplinary graduate training program at Tufts
University, focused on water diplomacy. The goal is to prepare students who can
think across natural and societal boundaries and generate actionable knowledge
to help resolve water problems with competing needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
origin of many water problems is a dynamic consequence of competition,
interconnections, and feedback among variables in the natural and societal
domains. While scientific formulation and engineering solutions are necessary to
address these needs, societal and political contexts must be an integral part of
long-term solutions. Formulation and framing of water problems are intricately
linked; consequently, variables in natural and societal domains cannot be
treated independently. A main feature of this IGERT is the synthesis of these
viewpoints--through integration of knowledge from science, engineering, policy
and diplomacy--critical to effective water management solutions. This IGERT will
prepare a new cadre of water professionals with strong disciplinary grounding
and experience as problem solvers with interdisciplinary expertise and
negotiation skills. Strong institutional support and proposed innovations--e.g.,
integrating scientific assessment and policy relevance to create actionable
knowledge, exploratory research experience in real world settings, opportunities
for national and international field work, and engaging students in synergistic
interdisciplinary activities--will transform this IGERT project into a process
that will continue to produce a new generation of water professionals with the
skills and aptitude to cross boundaries and create an impact far beyond this
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.