* 0966141
* Increasing Diversity in the Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2015
* Daniel Willey, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 01/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

Allegheny College proposes, with NSF S-STEM support, to graduate two cohorts of
8 students. Preference is to be given to students of color, in line with the
mission of the college to increase the number of underrepresented students in
the natural sciences. Students are to receive a scholarship throughout all 4
years of college. The college is to support an additional 10 students with
private funding and is to assume the cost of supporting a second cohort of
students, who will continue their studies after NSF funding ceases. Twenty-six
students are to graduate in the natural sciences because of this scholarship
support. &lt;br/&gt;The College will provide enhanced support programs such as
common first year seminars, retreats and regular lunch meetings. Close mentoring
by faculty advisors is designed to ensure high retention and assistance is to be
provided with graduate school and job placement. In their first year all S-STEM
students will be housed in the College's newest residential complex.
&lt;br/&gt;Allegheny College is a private liberal arts college with a student
body of approximately 2,000 and a student faculty ratio of 13:1. Sixty-eight
percent of incoming students rank in the top 20% of their high school classes
with a median SAT score of 1220. Ninety four percent of majors in the natural
sciences receive their degrees in four years or less.