* 0966257
* Documentation of the Acoustic Phonetics of Shipibo
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Jose Elias-Ulloa, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 07/31/2013
* USD 144,845.00

The objective of this project is to document and analyze, from an acoustic
perspective, the sound system of Shipibo-Conibo, an endangered Amazonian
language indigenous to Peru. Shipibo has long puzzled linguists because of the
ways its consonants and vowels interact with other aspects of the language (in
particular, its prosody and morphology). Besides the study of vowels and
consonants, this project will provide a detailed characterization of the
intonational patterns of Shipibo as well as an acoustic examination of the
phenomenon of nasalization. The results obtained will allow for a much better
understanding of how human languages vary cross-linguistically. In addition to
the dissemination of the results through publications, a substantial amount of
high quality digital audio recordings will be made available to the wider
linguistic community through the Archive of the Indigenous Languages of Latin
America (http://www.ailla.utexas.org/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key element in
the project is the educational potential it will yield. The project interweaves
its research objectives with the training of graduate students, undergraduate
students, and the collaboration of Shipibo native speakers in recording,
analyzing and publishing the data. Part of the project includes the production
of a bilingual (Spanish-Shipibo) children's book, the creation of which involves
three generations of the Shipibo community. One of the aims of the children's
book is to facilitate ways in which the Shipibo can participate in the
conservation of their linguistic heritage.