* 0966998
* Model and Testing of Enhanced Cutaneous Perfusion to Manipulate Heat Convection between Skin and the Body Core
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Kenneth Diller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2013
* USD 324,995.00

0966998&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves
the design of novel devices and development of new models to take advantage of a
recently observed phenomenon capable of rapidly reducing body core temperatures.
The research builds upon observations that arteriovenous anastomoses (AVAs) in
glabrous skin become mechanically distended when a small negative pressure
(about 40 mm Hg) is applied to the body. When negative pressure is utilized in
conjunction with surface cooling of the skin, body core temperatures can be
rapidly lowered due to increased blood flow rates between the skin and the body
core. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual focus of this
project is to build a predictive model of heat transfer between the skin and
body core via enhanced blood perfusion through distended AVAs. The model will be
used to design devices and identify appropriate protocols for manipulation of
human thermoregulatory function. Specifically, the complex AVA control
mechanisms will be measured and characterized by way of human testing and the
corresponding constitutive models will be incorporated into the Wissler
thermoregulatory model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader focus
of the research is to develop a new technology that can rapidly reduce core
temperature from hyperthermic (heat stress) states for industrial, military and
athletic needs and from normothermia to hypothermic states for medical needs
(therapeutic hypothermia). The research may also lead to new treatments of
stroke, cardiac arrest and concussion. Outreach to local minority-serving high
schools will be a key component of the activity. New educational materials will
be developed in conjunction with the research and will be disseminated in the
archival learning science and engineering education literature. Experimental and
modeling outcomes of the research will also be incorporated into supplemental
learning materials of a new biotransport text.