* 0966227
* IGERT: Educating and the Interface: Nanomaterial Environmental Impacts and Policy   (EI-NEIP)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2010,12/31/2017
* Lorraine Fleming, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 12/31/2017
* USD 3,237,003.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award creates
a new interdisciplinary graduate training program whose focus is nanotechnology,
its environmental effects, and policy at Carnegie Mellon and Howard University,
in collaboration with the Center for Environmental Implications of
Nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will operate at the interface
of science and environmental policy and will produce an environmentally- and
policy-literate generation of nanoscience professionals with the skills needed
to assess and manage environmental risks associated with nanomaterials. The
program's goal is to foster the creation of knowledge and the exchange of ideas
within an innovative and stimulating educational experience that will advance
not only our knowledge of nanoparticles in the environment but also our
understanding of how best to avoid their potential negative consequences.
Broader impacts include the training of interdisciplinary Ph.D.-level scientists
and engineers who, in addition to receiving rigorous scientific training, will
have an understanding of the principles of good environmental stewardship,
societal concerns as they relate to nanotechnology, and will be prepared to take
leadership roles in dealing with environmental risk. Graduate students from
multiple disciplines will participate in this two-year training program where
they will learn the fundamentals of their core discipline and gain proficiency
in the analysis of environmental issues pertaining to nanotechnology, decision
science, and policy analysis, in new nanotechnology-themed courses. To promote
interdisciplinary research students will be advised by at least two faculty
members from different academic disciplines and will participate in laboratory
exchanges with international partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen
discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.