* 0966488
* Collaborative Research: Examining Emotional Reactions to Standards of Justice
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Lynn Smith-Lovin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2012
* USD 62,441.00

SES-0966536 &lt;br/&gt;Jody Clay-Warner &lt;br/&gt;Dawn T. Robinson,
&lt;br/&gt;University of Georgia &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0966488
&lt;br/&gt;Lynn Smith-Lovin &lt;br/&gt;Duke University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theories of justice predict that people feel negative
emotion when they receive either more than they deserve or less than they
deserve. Research consistently confirms that receiving less than one deserves
evokes negative emotion. However, research regarding how people feel when over-
rewarded is inconsistent. The current project investigates the idea that these
inconsistencies are the result of employing different standards of justice. The
researchers hypothesize that people feel distress and guilt when over-reward
results from violation of the equity standard of justice -- which is based on
local comparisons with specific others. They also predict that people do not
feel distress and guilt when over-reward results from a violation of the
referential standard of justice -- which is based on distal comparisons to some
generalized expectation. By this logic, a person would feel guilty if he worked
the same number of hours as a coworker but was paid more than the coworker.
Conversely, he would not feel guilty if he were paid a higher wage than the
typical ?going rate? for a particular job. In order to test these predictions,
the researchers will conduct a series of experiments to examine emotional
reactions to over-reward that will disentangle the effects of the justice
standard from the effects of contextual factors. If the predictions are correct,
then there may be fundamental differences in equity and referential comparison
processes and thus a need for greater specification of justice theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
broad implications for work settings, for policy discussions and for
understanding social movements. Since the under-rewarded typically lack the
ability to gain more resources for themselves, it is often incumbent upon the
over-rewarded to remedy unjust inequality. As a result, understanding how the
over-rewarded feel about their favored position will lead to a better
understanding of how injustice may be remedied in a variety of settings. The
proposed research will also provide training and mentoring opportunities for a
diverse group of undergraduate and graduate research assistants at two
institutions