* 0966838
* SoCS:  Enhancing Immersive Social Perspective Taking and Perceived Virtual Similarity to Enable Intelligent Social Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Christopher Dede, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 748,126.00

Virtual learning environments are proliferating, yet the social interactions
between learners in these contexts remain challenging. Cues (such as gestures)
that facilitate reading other people in face-to-face contexts are absent in many
virtual environments. However, these contexts can endow participants with
communicative capabilities that are not possible face-to-face. Because social
interactions and relationships are pivotal to an array of outcomes, we need to
facilitate interpersonal communication in these
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will conduct four experiments to
capitalize on the affordances of computer mediated learning environments to
improve the relationships participants from within them. These experiments will
examine undergraduate and middle-school learners who are learning about complex
causality within ecosystems. In each study, relationships between learners will
be improved through transformed social interactions, an approach in which
participants are endowed with capabilities for navigating their social world
that humans do not normally possess. Specifically, participants will be able to
take the perspective of other participants and to increase their similarity to
other participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This study makes
important intellectual contributions through experimentally testing ways to
improve learners' relationships, examining the impact of these interventions on
learning and motivation (and affective outcomes), and advancing the state of the
art in non-verbal signals in computer-mediated
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts. Because of the
proliferation of online learning communities, the capacity for these
environments to involve a diverse cross-section of students, and the novel,
widely-replicable, computational approach, these studies may have broad impact
across the fields of education, communications, and computer science.