* 0966068
* ECS Academic Catalyst for Excellence (ACE) Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2018
* Susamma Barua, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2018
* USD 597,999.00

The College of Engineering and Computer Science (ECS) at California State
University-Fullerton (CSUF) is an accredited and federally-designated Hispanic-
serving institution. The plan is to establish a scholarship program, the
Academic Catalyst for Excellence (ACE), by which ECS hopes to reverse its
historical legacy of high student attrition. &lt;br/&gt;Over the 5 years of the
program, scholarships will be awarded to 54 students. A well established network
of student services will support cohorts of ACE scholars majoring in civil,
environmental, electrical, mechanical, and computer engineering and computer
science. The guiding principle as supported by research into best practices is
to provide 4 years of continuous financial support, to the maximum number of
incoming freshmen and sophomores. &lt;br/&gt;The program targets academically
promising but economically disadvantaged students with special emphasis on
first-generation college students and those underrepresented in STEM fields.
Scholars will be housed at the ACE Center an office in the engineering building
devoted exclusively for such purposes. Sustainability beyond the term of NSF
funding is built into the model. Dissemination will occur at meetings of
organizations such as the American Society of Engineering Education, the
National Association of Multicultural Engineering Program Advocates, and
Frontiers in Education, in the hope that other institutions may adopt and adapt
the model.