* 0966178
* Achieving Community College Excellence for Scholarship Success (ACCESS)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2017
* David Babb, West Hills Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

The ACCESS (Achieving Community College Excellence for Scholarship Success)
program is supporting scholarships for academically talented, financially needy
students and enabling them to enter the workforce following completion of an
associate degree in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. Goals include improving educational opportunities for students,
increasing retention of scholarship students to degree achievement, improving
student support programs for scholarship participants, and increasing the
numbers of well-educated and skilled employees in technical areas of national
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Scholarships are being awarded to
25 students each semester in STEM disciplines. The goals are (a) 75% of ACCESS
Scholars maintain or exceed a 2.6 grade point average (GPA); (b) 70% of ACCESS
Scholars persist until associate degree achievement; and (c) 100% of students
are provided transfer or job placement assistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: As the sole accredited provider of postsecondary education in a large
service area, the mission of the college is to provide accessible higher
education opportunities to community residents. By offering scholarships to
academically talented, financially needy students majoring in STEM disciplines,
the college is meeting the needs of both the agricultural industries in the
district and students. Over 70% of the students attending the college are first-
generation who have had little exposure to scientific career opportunities.
About 40% of the students are Hispanic and a great number of these students come
from families where the parents are migrant workers or field laborers.
Recruitment of these students into scientific careers not only impacts their
future, but it also increases the scientific awareness of friends and family
members in their communities. The broader impact resulting from improved STEM
education and STEM scholarships conveys the message that exciting, lucrative
careers exist in the sciences and that agricultural careers are not limited to
field work.