* 0966627
* Radiation Tools for the Determination of Temperatures and Concentrations from Radiometric Measurements in Laminar and Turbulent Combustion Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Michael Modest, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 05/31/2015
* USD 366,000.00

0966627&lt;br/&gt;Modest&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the
prediction and measurement of species and/or soot concentrations and
temperatures in laminar as well as turbulent combustion systems. Although
optical diagnostics have reached high levels of refinement, it remains very
difficult to make accurate measurements in turbulent combustion environments.
The difficulties are largely attributable to the highly non-linear interactions
between the structure of the turbulent flow field and the corresponding
radiation field. Not only do these interactions make measurements difficult,
they also have an important effect on both the heat release and the chemical
cascading as well as soot formation that is inherent in combustion systems. This
proposal seeks to explain, using fundamental experimental, analytical and
computational approaches, the nature of the turbulence-radiation interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Nonintrusive spectral
radiation tools will be developed to measure species concentrations and
temperatures in both laminar and turbulent reacting flows, based primarily on
line-of-sight techniques. The measurements will be used to reconstruct the
distributions of the variables of interest, and guide the development of, and
validate theoretical models for such flows. One unique aspect of the research is
inclusion of the predicted response of instrumentation that would be used to
measure the quantities of interest in a companion experiment. This capability
reduces the uncertainties in comparisons made between measurements and
predictions, and increases our understanding of the underlying physical
phenomena. The predictive model is based upon the transported PDF
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Turbulent combustion is associated
with production and/or conversion of most of the energy used in the U.S. The
associated heat transfer, including the radiation heat transfer, is utilized in
applications ranging from electric power generation to transportation. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be engaged in the research at the PIs
institution, which is a new component of the University of California System.
Undergraduate students will be primarily responsible for making the experimental
measurements, giving students from underrepresented groups important exposure to
advanced research. Collaboration will be made with researchers at Edwards Air
Force Base and Sandia National Laboratories.