* 0966845
* Operator Theory and Complex Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* John McCarthy, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 235,000.00

The PI will study a range of problems on the interplay between complex analysis
and operator theory. These two areas of mathematics have become symbiotic, with
each leading to growth and development in the other. One problem the P.I. will
study is the entropy of polynomials that have all their zeroes on the unit
circle. There is a natural conjecture here that the entropy is minimized if the
polynomial has equally spaced zeroes; this conjecture, which can be reformulated
in operator theoretic terms, has consequences in complex analysis, such as
understanding extremal maps into punctured disks. The P.I. will work on the
intriguing problem of linking operator theory with functions of several
variables. In particular, he will seek to characterize those functions of
several variables that are matrix monotone; this will extend the fundamental
results of K. Löwner from 1934 that characterized the functions of one variable
with this property. The P.I. will also continue his collaboration with
specialists in medical ultrasound imaging on ways to improve the imaging by
analyzing the entropy rather than the energy of the reflected signal. The most
immediate impact of the P.I.'s work will be in the field of ultrasound. His work
with M. Hughes is aimed at producing software that can fit into a handheld
ultrasound scanner that can be used in the home to measure the muscle density of
children with Duschenne muscular dystrophy, and thus allow daily adjustments of
their drug regimen. His work in pure mathematics, as is normal in the
dsicipline, will diffuse more slowly into broader fields of science. Initially
the main impact will be in pure mathematics, and in the education of future
researchers, but there is a long history of crossover from operator-theoretic
complex analysis into the engineering field of control theory, and that should
continue. The P.I. Has a successful record of collaborating with chemical and
electrical engineers, physicists, chemists, biologists and doctors. His
background in pure mathematics leads to a different approach to their problems,
which has often been successful. He will continue to seek out scientists and
engineers to collaborate with.