* 0966574
* Collaborative Research: pH-responsive Capsules for Enhanced Delivery and Recovery of Cellulases for Biomass Hydrolysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Andriy Voronov, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 309,357.00

0966574&lt;br/&gt;Voronov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective, efficient, and
economical conversion technologies are needed to meet the potential of using
biobased feedstocks to produce liquid fuels and other high-value chemicals.
Enzymatic hydrolysis of plant cell wall structural carbohydrates into soluble
and fermentable sugars has been technically achievable for decades. Despite
significant advances in the past five years, the economical production and use
of cellulase enzymes for biomass hydrolysis remain key hurdles. This is true
whether one is seeking hydrocarbons or economical cellulosic ethanol.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key to conquering these obstacles according to the
collaborating PIs Minko of Clarkson University in Potsdam, NY and Voronov and
Pryor of North Dakota State University at Fargo rests in placing the enzymes in
nanostructured capsules. These carefully designed and fabricated, hybrid
organic-inorganic microcapsules are loaded with a cocktail of cellulase enzymes
for the conversion of cellulose into fermentable glucose. These unique capsules
protect the enzymes and preserve their activity, allow for a simple
reuse/recovery process for the enzymes, and provide an opportunity to regulate
enzymatic reactions using external signals, such as pH. This enzyme recovery and
reuse, facilitated through the encapsulation process and magnetic separation,
are expected to have significant impacts on processing costs to produce biomass-
derived sugars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to create a website as a
means of sharing data and plans between the research groups at the two
universities, and to allow public access to follow aspects of the project. They
intend to utilize REU opportunities and high school researchers as a part of
their outreach efforts. This is a challenging project for all of the
researchers. There are many synthetic chemistry components that all must come
together in the fabrication of the encapsulated enzymes. The successful
development of reversible encapsulation technology for applications of enzymes
would have far-reaching implications in a number of industrial processes and
would constitute a significant advance in the field.