* 0966378
* Student Tuition Aid for Research and Transfer in Urban Polynesia (START UP)
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2017
* John Rand, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 05/31/2017
* USD 592,716.00

At Kapiolani Community College (KCC), University of Hawaii (UH), START UP
scholarships support the College's dual mission to prepare students in an
Associate in Science in Natural Science (ASNS) program to meet rigorous degree
requirements, go on to complete baccalaureate degree requirements, and meet high
employment standards in a diversifying state economy. KCC START UP is making
progress towards four ambitious, major goals: to 1) provide scholarships of 1-3
years in duration to 100 academically talented and financially needy STEM
students over five years; 2) to support/nurture all S-STEM students to make
satisfactory annual progress; 3) to increase financial aid participation and
program success rates from approximately 60 to 90 percent; and 4) to increase
the number of ASNS degree students from 86 to 300, with 65 completing the ASNS
degree and/or transferring to baccalaureate degree programs. Recruitment
strategies for scholarship applicants include a summer bridge program that
provides STEM enrichment activities for Native Hawaiian, underrepresented, and
other talented 11th and 12th grade students. Scholarship selection employs
rigorous GPA and academic progress criteria and engages six STEM faculty members
in the biological and physical sciences and engineering annually. Support
activities for the START UP scholars as they pursue comprehensive STEM academic
programs include a STEM learning center, peer mentoring, career placement
services, opportunities for undergraduate research experiences and community
service, and formalized STEM transfer pathways in engineering, ecology,
biotechnology, and human physiology. These activities and strategies for
ensuring academic success of START UP scholars leverage operational models and
infrastructure from other NSF-funded projects, as well as from additional
federal and state investments. The START UP program allows KCC to continue to be
an effective incubator of science talent, particularly Native Hawaiians and
other underrepresented students in STEM, who are academically talented and
economically disadvantaged.