* 0966700
* Exploiting links between nano-technology and heterogeneous catalysis: Shaped silver nano-particles as selective catalysts for partial oxidation of olefins to form chiral and..
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Suljo Linic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2014
* USD 341,000.00

0966700&lt;br/&gt;Linic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed work
is to explore the potential of shaped Ag nano-particles as heterogeneous
catalysts for the epoxidation of propylene to form propylene oxide and for the
asymmetric epoxidation of larger olefins (i.e., styrene) to form chiral
epoxides. The studies build on earlier work by Linic at the University of
Michigan to produce ethylene oxide. Heterogeneous Ag catalysts are almost
exclusively used for this reaction commercially. EO is a critical chemical used
in the synthesis of ethylene glycol (antifreeze), ethanolamines, and detergents.
Computations by Linic suggested that particular faces of Ag would offer higher
selectivity to desired products. Novel synthetic strategies were then developed
for the synthesis of the shape-specific Ag nano-structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the demonstration that well-defined Ag nano-
structures can be highly selective catalysts for partial oxidation of ethylene,
the challenge of propylene partial oxidation to propylene oxide is a logical
extension. There are no selective heterogeneous catalysts for this important,
large scale chemical process. The PI has shown that there exists a critical link
between the shape of catalytic metallic Ag particles and their performance, and
that the main factor affecting the performance is the shape-specific surface
termination of the particles. The PI hypothesizes that Ag nano-cube and nano-
wire catalysts, terminated specifically by the Ag(100) facet, will be
significantly more selective in direct epoxidation of propylene than
conventional spherical Ag particles, which are terminated by the (111) facet.
The PI hypothesizes that specific metallic Ag nanostructures, enhanced with
chiral modifiers, will be promising heterogeneous catalysts for asymmetric
epoxidation of larger olefins (for example styrene) to form chiral epoxides.
Currently, complex and expensive homogeneous catalysts are used for chiral
oxidation reactions as they offer greater regio- and stereo-selectivity than
conventional heterogeneous solid state catalysts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research project attempts to constructively integrate the fields of
nanoscience and heterogeneous catalysis by taking advantage of recent advances
in the controlled synthesis of metallic nano-particles of different shapes and
different surface terminations to design highly selective inorganic catalysts.
The transformative nature to the successful outcome of this study is quite
apparent. A new heterogeneously-catalyzed route to propylene oxide has large
scale commercial implications. Furthermore, developing viable heterogeneous
catalysts for chiral olefin epoxidation reactions would offer significant
advantages with respect to their homogeneous counterparts including easy product
separation, longer catalyst lifetime, easier catalyst regeneration, and possible
utilization of cheaper and environmentally friendlier oxidizing agents such as
oxygen.