* 0966584
* Breath of Life Archival Institute for Indigenous Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2010,04/30/2013
* Leanne Hinton, Endangered Language Fund, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 04/30/2013
* USD 152,870.00

Breath of Life (BOL) is a two-week workshop with 70 participants (40 Native
American researchers and 30 mentors, lecturers and organizers) to take place in
Washington, D.C. in the summer of 2011. The purpose of the workshop is to
breathe life into endangered languages of the Americas by connecting members of
heritage communities with primary source material that documents their
languages. BOL has been very successful in the context of indigenous California
languages and this model is now being brought to a national level. Central to
the workshop is collaboration between researchers (Native American heritage
language learners) and mentors (experts in linguistics who guide the
researchers' work), supplemented by lectures and workshops on linguistics and
related topics. The workshop will be co-hosted by the Smithsonian Institution's
National Anthropological Archives and National Museum for the American Indian,
and the Library of Congress. The workshop will be the inaugural one in a
biennial series that will be hosted at various archives throughout the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Breath of Life benefits three groups: endangered
language communities, linguists who study and document endangered languages, and
archives that preserve and provide access to documentation. Endangered language
communities benefit from the expertise that researchers gain. Based on previous
BOL experiences in California, Breath of Life stimulates language learning,
teaching and research within heritage communities, sometimes resulting in long-
term collaborative research. Linguists benefit by forging new or stronger
relationships with endangered language communities, and by learning how
documentation can be used effectively within heritage communities. Some
linguists find that their approach to documentation and dissemination of data
changes significantly after collaborating with endangered language communities.
Archives benefit from the relationships developed during Breath of Life and from
the associated publicity. Activities that highlight endangered language archives
affirm their importance within their institutions and to the general public.