* 0966956
* Development of Ultra-low Loading Platinum Alloy Cathode Catalysts for PEM Fuel Cells: Theoretical and Experimental Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Prabhu Ganesan, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 02/28/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0966956&lt;br/&gt;Popov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
establish a scientific and engineering basis for the development of proton
exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell cathode catalysts having ultra-low Pt loadings
and increased durability for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). These
catalysts are expected to have fast reaction rates and good stability that are
essential for developing next generation fuel cells for sustainable energy
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid
cathode catalysts (HCC) will be synthesized using a carbon composite catalyst
(CCC) with an ultra-low loading of Pt. The CCC has a high content of active
pyridinic nitrogen sites, and will be used as a support for ultra-low loading of
platinum instead of carbon black, which is currently used in the commercial
catalysts. Besides its own contribution to the overall catalyst activity, the
noble metal free CCC will enhance the activity of Pt and Pt alloys (e.g., Pt-
Co/CCC, Pt-Fe/CCC, Pt-Ni/CCC) through synergistic effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A first-principles mathematical model and density
functional theory (DFT) calculations will be used to help understand the oxygen
reduction kinetics on the HCC catalysts. Structure-property relationships will
be established using a wide range of electrochemical and surface
characterization techniques. These studies will create a framework for the
development of novel synthesis procedures to prepare highly active and stable
catalysts for ORR with ultra-low Pt loading. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the world's low platinum reserves (30,000
tons of unproven reserves), the hybrid cathode catalyst (HCC) proposed in this
study has the potential to reduce both the cost of the PEM fuel cell and
consumption of this precious metal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary
courses at both the graduate and undergraduate levels in quantum chemistry &amp;
material surface characterization, as well as materials science &amp;
electrochemical engineering, will be developed. Programs will be developed to
accelerate the transition from passive learners to scientists and engineers by
training students in group-based problem solving, helping students acquire
technical and time management skills, and by challenging them to complete a
project related to electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction. In addition, the
program will increase community awareness of next-generation energy technology
and career opportunities, and promote the involvement of students from under-
represented groups in these activities.