* 0966000
* Collaborative Research: Chiral objects in microfluidic  shear flows: chiral separation and microbial locomotion
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Roman Stocker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 09/30/2013
* USD 207,058.00

This project investigates the dynamics of chiral particles and chiral organisms
in shear flows, using a combination of microfluidic experiments and mathematical
modeling. Chiral particles are particles with shapes that cannot be superimposed
upon their mirror images, and are of broad interest for both basic science and
technology. Chiral particles are ubiquitous in biology: for example, amino acids
are chiral molecules. Since the intermolecular reactions involved in life
processes depend on the geometry of participating molecules, di&#64256;erent
enantiomers of chiral drugs, pheromones, pesticides, and odorants have
di&#64256;erent biological e&#64256;ects. As a consequence, there is much
interest in devising ways to separate pure enantiomeric samples out of a mixture
of both enantiomers. Furthermore, in biology chirality occurs not only at the
molecular scale, but also at the cellular scale. Many swimming microorganisms
have chiral helical structures, such as the propulsion-generating &#64258;agella
of most bacteria. At the same time, the watery environments of microbes are
constantly subject to &#64258;uid &#64258;ow, and hence shear, such as in the
oceans, groundwater, industrial pipe &#64258;ow, and catheters. This project has
two specific aims: (i) exploiting the chirality-dependent motion of particles in
shear &#64258;ows to separate a mixture of enantiomers by handedness in a
micro&#64258;uidic channel, and (ii) understanding how chiral morphologies of
microbes a&#64256;ect their swimming and foraging. These aims are uni&#64257;ed
by the ultimate goal of better understanding the behavior of chiral particles in
shear &#64258;ows, and hence amenable to the same experimental and theoretical
research tools. The proposed research has the potential to (i) transform our
technological capability to separate a racemic mixture into component
enantiomers, by developing a simpler and less expensive separation strategy than
those currently available, and (ii) improve our understanding of microbial
motility, with applications ranging from the recycling of limiting elements in
natural systems to the spreading of disease and bio&#64257;lm formation.