* 0966225
* Promoting Diversity through STEM Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Nannette Smith, James A. Rhodes State College
* Continuing Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 06/30/2015
* USD 586,471.00

The STEM Scholars Program at James A. Rhodes State College aims to increase the
number of well-educated and skilled employees in technical areas of national and
local need by recruiting, selecting, and enrolling 102 full-time, academically
talented, financially needy students for scholarships over five years. The main
focus of the Program is the enrollment and financial support of underrepresented
groups (e.g. women, minorities, and persons with disabilities) in Engineering
Technology and Information Technology fields, and the improvement of educational
opportunities and support programs for these students in order to maximize
probability of their retention, graduation, employment or transition to four-
year institutions. Integral to success of the Program is the strengthening of
ongoing partnerships between the sponsoring college and K-12 school systems, the
West Central Ohio Tech Prep consortium, four-year institutions, regional
education initiatives, and local high tech industries in order to improve
collaborative efforts in providing academic and social support services, and
internship and mentoring relationships for scholars. The STEM Scholars Program
is building upon the current academic and social support structures available to
all students at Rhodes State College, such as services offered by 1) the
Learning Center and the Math/Science Skills Center for enhancing STEM Scholars'
academic skills and providing techniques for college success; 2) the Student
Advising and Development Office for tracking scholars' academic success and
providing social support; and 3) the Career Placement Office for assisting the
scholars with job placement or transfer to four-year institutions. Specific
programs initiated for STEM Scholars to ensure success in the program include 1)
creation of cohort groups to provide a network of support for the scholars as
they work collaboratively and collectively on improving their own and others'
learning experiences, growth and development; 2) a tutoring program that offers
targeted tutoring sessions for cohort members whose needs have been identified
by an educational planning form and advisement process; and 3) innovative
multidisciplinary sessions that assist scholars with integrating coursework and
workforce readiness and professional development. The STEM Scholars Program is
broadening participation by increasing recruitment, admission, retention and
graduation of targeted groups who are underrepresented in STEM fields. The
program is advancing the understanding of the unique needs of these groups by
tracking their individual academic and student support requests, incorporating
the needs expressed in the requests into each STEM Scholar's educational
planning process, and coordinating services through community partnerships. This
method is expected to be of benefit to other institutions of higher learning as
they attempt to bring about more comprehensive support systems for
underrepresented students.