* 0966346
* IGERT: WATER - Integrated Water Atmosphere and Ecosystem Education and Research
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2017
* Neil Grigg, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2017
* USD 2,728,060.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the development of an interdisciplinary graduate training program in water
science. There is a critical need for scientists who can manage water resources
responsibly because water management decisions generate conflicts between
humans, ecosystem needs, and political jurisdictions. Uncertainty of water
availability causes managers to store and redistribute water to control risk,
while climate variability exacerbates uncertainty. Three important questions
must be answered: 1) how can limited fresh water be distributed equitably in a
socially acceptable and sustainable framework; 2) what are the relative hydro-
climatic, ecological, and societal benefits and drawbacks of management actions;
and 3) how can science provide answers for wise water management decisions?

This program will address these challenges by training Ph.D. students to conduct
complex, interdisciplinary research at the interfaces between hydrologic,
atmospheric, ecologic, and management disciplines. Issues of variability and
uncertainty, vulnerability of human use and ecosystems, and sustainability will
be probed in the framework of the following research themes: 1) Hydrologic,
atmospheric, and ecologic systems; 2) Hydrologic, ecologic, and socio-economic
systems; 3) Hydrologic, atmospheric, and socio-economic systems; and 4) Research
integration and synthesis. The program involves 11 science and engineering
departments at Colorado State University (CSU), and includes opportunities for
trainees to participate in internships at federal and state agencies. To recruit
and retain a diverse group of trainees, CSU will partner with Historically Black
Colleges and Universities and with Hispanic Serving Institutions, and coordinate
with undergraduate research programs.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.