* 0966581
* GOALI: Understanding Plasticization and Compaction Mechanisms in Perfluorocyclobutyl Polymer Thin Films and Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Earl Wagener, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 04/30/2014
* USD 310,433.00

This 3-year research and education program entails collaboration between Prof.
Scott Husson at Clemson University and Dr. Earl Wagener of Tetramer
Technologies, L.L.C. (Tetramer) in Pendleton, SC. Our overall goal is to develop
fundamental structure-property relationships for perfluorocyclobutyl (PFCB)
polymer thin films and use these relationships as the foundation for improved
molecular architecture design and production practices of PFCB-based membranes
with enhanced resistance to compaction and plasticization by CO2 and
hydrocarbons.

Tetramer's PFCB polymers are new to the membrane art. They have a significant
percentage of fluorine in the backbone and structures designed to increase free
volume. No previous plasticization/compaction studies have been performed on
these polymers. Partnership with Tetramer will give Clemson researchers access
to these promising new membrane polymers. A variety of standard and new to the
membrane art analytical techniques are proposed to determine the fundamental
structure-property relations for a set of PFCB polymers having a range of
molecular architectures. A better understanding of how the structure of the
membrane separation layer affects its susceptibility to
plasticization/compaction/physical aging would allow better prediction of
performance and may lead to new ways to limit their negative impacts. Tetramer
plans to use the data generated to determine which mitigation techniques, such
more rigid backbones, crosslinking, or even segmenting the architecture, would
be most effectively applied to increase their competitive advantages over
current commercial products. New knowledge on plasticization and compaction
phenomena also will contribute to membrane technology in general. CO2 and
hydrocarbon-induced plasticization deteriorates the performance of polymer gas
separation membranes. Thus, our effort to suppress its negative effects would
have great beneficial impacts.

This program will enhance the infrastructure for research and education at
Clemson and Tetramer. The PI and his students will gain valuable access to new
membrane production and performance testing facilities. Tetramer will extend its
in-house research capabilities to understand the fundamental physical changes
PFCB polymers undergo during performance testing. Prof. Husson and his students
will (1) conduct weekly research meetings, (2) carry out research on membrane
preparation and performance testing, and (3) present industrial seminars to be
given by Prof. Husson each year. Students in this industry-university
collaborative research program will gain exposure to the workings of industry
and receive mentoring from industry collaborators, as they perform some of their
research at Tetramer. Our work will have immediate commercial relevance. Thus,
contributing to the university mission to put research to use in teaching and
economic development and advance knowledge on functional membranes, which play a
vital role in the US economy. A diverse group of students will be recurited, as
Prof. Husson has done successfully throughout his career. This diversity extends
to gender, race, disability, academic major, and stage of academic progress. One
of the points considered in team member selection will be the contribution to
diversity. Our work would provide technical knowledge needed to design molecular
architecture and production practices to produce more selective, more permeable,
and more robust membranes for CO2 separation from natural gas. A result would be
a lower cost operation for natural gas pretreatment. Since natural gas is the
fastest growing primary energy source in the world and provides over 20% of all
energy used in the US, the economic impact could be tremendous.