* 0966165
* ACHIEVING DIVERSITY GOALS: A PROGRAM TO ADVANCE LEADERSHIP IN  ENGINEERING AND COMPUTER SCIENCE
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2018
* Anne Raich, Lafayette College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2018
* USD 586,500.00

The long-term objective of this project is development of a recruitment and
retention program designed to attract and graduate engineering and computer
science leaders (Leadership Scholars) who have been traditionally
underrepresented. Strategies to achieve this objective include strengthening the
pipelines with engineering academies and community colleges, as well as
retention strategies focused on leadership and academic excellence. These
recruitment and retention strategies are being developed, tested, and refined as
part of a college program designed to advance leadership in engineering and
computer science. Specific objectives for the Class of 2015 engineering and
computer science graduates are:&lt;br/&gt;1. At least 30% of the students who
graduate belong to underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;2. A minimum four year
retention rate of 70% is attained for underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;3. The
Leadership Scholars belong to the top half of their respective graduating
classes.&lt;br/&gt;4. The necessary recruitment and retention strategies to
sustain these goals are in place by the project completion
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underrepresented students in computer science and
engineering at the college belong to one or more of the following three
categories: non-European ethnic groups, first-generation college students, and
women. The college is recruiting a cohort of approximately 13 first-year
students and 6 community college students. These Leadership Scholars receive
tiered, need-based scholarships that increase after they declare their majors.
Upon matriculation, the Scholars participate in a three-semester Leadership in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) co-curricular program
designed to strengthen the cohort, and to expose them to the distinctive
opportunities available at a liberal arts college The Leadership Scholars have
opportunities to participate in voluntary paid summer research or internship
experiences during their first two years at the college.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is modeled after the
successful Meyerhoff Scholars Program, however, it is adapted to emphasize the
particular benefits of STEM education within a liberal arts context. Studies
regarding science education at liberal arts colleges conclude that they are very
successful in developing STEM leaders since they offer extraordinary benefits
that support many of the goals outlined in strategic plan of NSF including the
need for alternative and diverse approaches to excellence in education, cross-
fertilization between disciplines, and discovery-based learning
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project supports the recent
strategic plan at the college that embraces a vision to graduate diverse
engineering and computer science leaders by broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields. By disseminating the project results,
the program advances the understanding of strategies that are successful in
recruiting and retaining diverse STEM leaders.&lt;br/&gt;