* 0966478
* Characterization of Polymers with the Kerr-Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Alan Tonelli, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 12/31/2014
* USD 360,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: To more fully understand and improve the properties of
polymer materials detailed structure-property relations must be developed to
determine how changing the chemical microstructures of polymers effects their
behaviors. Establishment of such structure-property relations requires
measurement of the properties of polymers with different microstructures, and
these micro-structures need to be carefully characterized. The latest NSF
Workshop report on Polymers concluded that "recent advances in polymer syntheses
leading to elaborate and precise architectures require accompanying advances in
microstructural characterization beyond currently available techniques, which
are collectively inadequate". Observation of the birefringence that is produced
by application of a strong electric field to dilute solutions of polymers
dissolved in non-polar solvents with low dielectric constants, ie., electrical
birefringence or the Kerr-Effect, may provide a means to more fully characterize
polymer microstructures than can be achieved with the currently most sensitive
technique, NMR spectroscopy. Molar Kerr constants, mKs, of small molecules
including monomers, range over more than four orders of magnitude, and, in
addition, may be either positive or negative in sign. mKs of polymers measured
from their dilute solutions can be more sensitive to their microstructures than
NMR spectra. Because a polymer's mK is a "macroscopic" property characteristic
of its entire chain, any microstructural element that alters its overall
polarizability tensor or changes the magnitude and/or orientation of its overall
dipole moment vector with respect to the direction of its maximum polarizability
will effect its mK. Unlike NMR or other spectroscopies dependent only upon local
polymer microstructures, the macroscopic positions/locations of microstructures
along the polymer chain (middle vs. end) may also effect its mK or Kerr-Effect,
thereby permitting identification of the positions/locations of such "elaborate
and precise polymer architectures". NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY : The latest NSF
Workshop report on Polymers concluded that "recent advances in polymer syntheses
leading to elaborate and precise architectures require accompanying advances in
microstructural characterization beyond currently available techniques, which
are collectively inadequate". The changes in optical characteristics produced by
and observed upon application of a strong electric field to dilute solutions of
polymers may provide a superior means to characterize the microstructures of
their constituent long chain molecules leading to the establishment of improved
microstructure-property relations for these materials and their design and
optimal application to various end uses. Along with graduate students,
undergraduate and high school students will assist in conducting the intended
optical property based microstuctural characterizations of various polymers.
Each summer a high school student will be mentored under the Project SEED
program of the American Chemical Society, which seeks to provide a stimulating
summer research experience to encourage underprivileged and underrepresented
high school students to go to college and major in a science/technology field.
In addition, advancements made in improving structure-property relations for
polymers by characterizing their microstructures will be introduced in graduate
Polymer Science and Engineering courses.