* 0966764
* Electrically Driven Dielectric Fluid Flows with Phase Change in Micro- and Nano-Scales
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2010,01/31/2013
* Alexander Yarin, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2013
* USD 354,815.00

Escobar&lt;br/&gt;CBET - 1231324&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membranes are widely used
in the chemical, petrochemical, food processing, food packaging, medical and
pharmaceutical industries. Therefore, it is crucial for U.S. scientists and
engineers to participate in activities that foster professional growth and new
ideas in an area that impacts the U.S. economy. This proposal seeks funding to
partially support the travel of 20 U.S. graduate students to attend the North
American Membrane Society (NAMS) 2012 National Meeting in June 2012. The
objective of this funding request is to encourage student participation in the
largest American meeting focused on membrane science and engineering, to provide
opportunities for them to present their work, meet other scientists and
engineers from around the world with similar interests, and see state-of-the-art
presentations from other research groups working in this area. This opportunity
will help develop the next generation of scientists and engineers and retain
U.S.?s standing in membrane education and research. Attendence is expected from
the most respected and accomplished membrane scientists and engineers from
government, industry, and academia. The meeting will cover emerging areas of
membrane science and engineering and feature three world-class lectures on water
treatment and sustainability, gas separations, and materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested support will allow U.S. graduate students to
attend the 2012 NAMS National Meeting and present research results on membrane
science and technology. The students will develop professionally through an
extensive student program comprising of the Young Membrane Scientist Forum,
?Dining with the Legends? event, student workshop on career planning and a
student poster competition. There will also be four workshops planned for
students to receive intensive, tutorial training in key fundamental and
developing areas of science and technology. The selection committee will ensure
representation of students from underrepresented groups. Applications from
students with disabilities will be encouraged. Student participation will
enhance research infrastructure by giving students access to leading scientists
and engineers from around the world in the technical sessions and in workshops.
Students will also have the opportunity to network with potential employers and
with students and faculty members with similar interests. This activity will
produce better trained, more knowledgeable graduate students to push the
frontiers of membrane science and technology in a wide range of practical
applications.