* 0966307
* ONSIGHT Collaborative Scholarship Project
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Mark Ainsworth, Seattle Community College District Office
* Continuing Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2016
* USD 487,000.00

The three colleges of Seattle Community College (SCC) District VI are awarding
170 scholarships of up to $6,000 each over a 5-year period to talented, low-
income students pursuing careers or transfer associate degrees in astronomy,
biology, botany, chemistry, computer science, engineering, environmental
sciences, geology, mathematics, nanotechnology, oceanography, physics and
sustainable agriculture. This ONSIGHT Collaborative Scholarship Project began at
Seattle Central Community College, and therefore the new collaboration between
the Seattle Central, Seattle North, and Seattle South Community College campuses
relies on and is building upon established and successful scholarship
procedures, student support infrastructures, undergraduate research programs,
the previous experience of the management team on Central's project, and the
powerful collaboration of three Science and Mathematics Divisions across the
district. The Seattle Community Colleges serve highly diverse populations.
Central alone serves the largest number of underrepresented students of any of
the 34 colleges in Washington State. Recent records show that over one-half of
the potential ONSIGHT Collaborative scholarship appplicant pool consists of
women, over 30% are first generation, over 43% are students of color and over a
third reside in households in the lowest two socio-economic quintiles. Thus the
recruitment and selection processes, and the mentoring and support service
structures established for the ONSIGHT Collaborative Scholarship project are
designed to support the significant participation and success of scholars
typically underrepresented in STEM fields. The project's evaluation plan is
contributing to the base of S-STEM knowledge regarding student support
interventions and their correlated impacts; dissemination of success and lessons
learned to local and national audiences is providing information for
replication. The project is transformative due to the necessary collaboration
between the three Science and Mathematics Divisions: deans, faculty, student
support service personnel and scholars are meeting and working together
frequently to assure student success. Situated within one of the great science
and technology centers of the nation, the Seattle Community College District
finds that there is no better focus to exercise the benefits of collaboration
than by working together in support of its up-and-coming STEM students.