* 0966868
* Engineering Nanostructures for Tailoring Thermal Radiation in the Near Field
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Bong Jae Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,826.00

0966868&lt;br/&gt;Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface nanostructure can strongly
affect far-field radiation properties of engineering surfaces, such as surface
reflectivity, transmissivity, and absorptivity. Analogous to far-field
situations, it is expected that engineered nanostructures can interact with
thermally-emitted waves, allowing one to tailor near-field radiation heat
transfer rates. This research seeks to identify ways to achieve desirable near-
field thermal radiation properties by modifying surfaces using nanostructures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Experimental and theoretical
approaches will be taken to investigate the fundamental physical mechanisms of
near-field thermal radiation heat transfer between nanostructured surfaces.
Quantitative measurement of the near-field transfer between two parallel plates
with or without engineered nanostructures, will be made. A theoretical model
will be developed, based on fluctuational electrodynamics, to predict the near-
field thermal radiation transfer between such surfaces. The theoretical aspect
of the research will improve the fundamental understanding of near-field
interactions between thermally emitted electromagnetic waves and nanostructures
due to surface plasmon resonance, scattering, diffraction, and photon
localization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Controlling the near-field
thermal radiation between nanostructured surfaces may provide a unique
opportunity to realize a near-field thermophotovoltaic energy conversion system
with high power output. Outcomes of the proposed research will be incorporated
into a new graduate course designed to expose engineering students to recent
developments in heat transfer research related to nanotechnology and renewable
energy. The PI will also conduct K-12 outreach through established programs at
the University of Pittsburgh.