* 0966662
* Differential Neighborhood Organization: A Multi-Level Theory of Crime
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2010,10/31/2014
* Ross Matsueda, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/2014
* USD 211,440.00

SES-096662 Ross Matsueda University of Washington

This project addresses a crucial social problem facing contemporary America:
criminal violence in local communities. An innovation of the project is the
specification of a multi-level model, in which individual choices produce
community social capital, which affects crime rates. The direction of this
effect depends on how social capital is used--either to facilitate or control
crime. Crime rates are hypothesized to be high when organization in favor of
crime is strong and low when organization against crime is strong. The project
studies organization against crime by examining how neighborhood social capital
and collective efficacy are produced. Residents are hypothesized to act
rationally: they exchange favors and information when they have an incentive to
do so (e.g., needing help fixing a car) and are free of constraints (e.g., they
have the time to reciprocate). In turn, these incentives and constraints are
hypothesized to be a function of broader community structures and resources.
Exchange among residents has a positive externality--the creation of
neighborhood social capital, including trust, social ties, obligations, and
norms. The resulting social capital provides resources for collective efficacy,
the ability of a neighborhood to solve local problems, such as crime. Collective
efficacy is, in turn, hypothesized to reduce neighborhood criminal violence. A
final hypothesis to be tested is that the correlation between neighborhood
disorder and violence, based on the broken windows hypothesis, is actually
spurious because collective efficacy explains both disorder and violence. The
project also investigates organization in favor of crime by testing the
hypothesis that a violent street culture based on the code of the street
develops in structurally disadvantaged neighborhoods. Residents, particularly
young black males, are hypothesized to have less human capital, poor labor
market prospects, and few resources, leading to alienation from society. This
alienation is hypothesized to be exacerbated by observations of racial bias and
profiling by police, which leads to distrust, and in turn, increases the
likelihood of turning to the streets to resolve disputes and gain respect,
status, and credibility. It is hypothesized that when such alienated residents
reach a critical mass in the presence of social capital, their frustration is
translated into a neighborhood system of achieving status through a code of the
street (e.g., never back down from a fight, always retaliate when a peer is
disrespected, project a tough image on the street). Finally, collective efficacy
and neighborhood street codes are hypothesized to interact in their effects on
violence.

To test the hypotheses, the project will use survey data collected on nearly
6,000 households across 123 census tracts in Seattle, along with neighborhood
census data and police crime data. The nested design will be used to estimate
multilevel generalized linear models, including individual-level rational choice
models of reciprocated exchange and distrust of police and neighborhood-level
models of collective efficacy and codes of the street. To explore further the
possible mechanisms by which individual action translates into macro-level
outcomes, the project will sample neighborhoods on and off the regression lines,
and conduct in-depth qualitative interviews of residents. This exploratory
analysis will help identify causal mechanisms specified in the model, and by
examining outlier neighborhoods, provide insights into mechanisms not measured
in the survey.

Broader Impacts: The project is a key feature of the Racial Democracy, Crime,
and Justice Network, an NSF-supported research network for fostering the study
of race, crime, and justice and increasing diversity in the academy by mentoring
junior faculty of color. The PI and several members of the project team (faculty
of color) are core members of RDCJN. The project incorporates a gender and
racially diverse set of graduate and undergraduate students into the research
process. The PI will incorporate his research findings Into both undergraduate
and graduate teaching, and make data available to the public.