* 0966626
* Collaborative Research: Thermodynamics and Ion Transport in Block Copolymer/Lithium Salt Mixtures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Nitash Balsara, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2014
* USD 320,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

A fundamental study of the interplay between ordered morphology, grain
structure, and ionic conductivity in mixtures of block copolymers and lithium
salts is proposed. The results of the work have the potential to impact the
development of high specific energy batteries with solid electrolytes. The work
will focus on mixtures of polystyrene-polyethyleneoxide block copolymers,
synthesized by anionic polymerization, and bis-trifluoromethylsulfonimide
(LiTFSI), a salt that is often used in batteries containing polymer
electrolytes. Small-angle X-ray scattering and depolarized light scattering will
be used to determine the nature of the order-disorder and order-order phase
transitions in these materials. Conductivity measurements will be made on the
same samples as those used in the X-ray and light scattering studies using AC
impedance spectroscopy. Measurements will be made over a wide range of block
copolymer compositions, salt concentration, temperature, and annealing
conditions.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The fundamental work proposed in this project is motivated by the need to design
safe rechargeable batteries for clean energy-related applications such as
electric vehicles and stationary energy storage. The proposed nanostructured
ion-conducting solid will be used as the electrolyte in a lithium battery. By
replacing the flammable liquid electrolyte that is used in current lithium
batteries by a solid, one can use higher energy electrodes that, in turn
increase the energy density of the battery. The absence of a flammable component
makes the battery safe. The co-PIs will use solid-state batteries for
demonstrations in their outreach activities involving high school students.
Garetz works with the David Packard Center for Technology and Educational
Alliances in New York City to mentor local high school students in fields
related to technology and research. Balsara works with Math and Science Summer
Academy program at Berkeley, and enrichment program which brings students from
the Oakland School District to the University of California. The PIs will
continue an ongoing collaboration with Professor M. Banaszak at A. Mickiewicz
University, Poland on the subject of ion-containing polymers that arose from an
NSF-sponsored workshop in Poland.