* 0966166
* IGERT--Interdisciplinary Evolutionary Primatology: Conservation and Human Evolution join Behavior, Bones and Genes
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2017
* Eric Delson, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 12/31/2017
* USD 3,204,176.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the further development of the New York Consortium in Evolutionary Primatology
(NYCEP), a program that draws upon faculty and resources from five institutions
in New York City: City University of New York, Columbia University, New York
University, the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH), and the Wildlife
Conservation Society (WCS). The program spans the integrative and
interdisciplinary field of "evolutionary primatology," which applies methods and
theories from a broad range of the natural sciences to the study of the biology
and evolution of humans and other primates.

This renewal award allows NYCEP to amplify its training in conservation science
and human evolution; implement a number of innovative curricular initiatives
that ensure interdisciplinarity; restructure the training program to enable
students to progress faster towards the Ph.D. and publish earlier; expand
international research opportunities; develop new partnerships with programs in
geological sciences at Rutgers, Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia,
and AMNH, genetics and human evolution at Max-Planck Institute/Leipzig and
Universität Tübingen, and field behavior and conservation in South Africa,
Kenya, Ecuador and Peru; extend its relationships with the Richard Gilder
Graduate School at AMNH and in conservation science with WCS; develop novel
approaches to recruit underrepresented groups; and enhance the NYCEP community
by involving graduate students more extensively in NYCEP-wide activities. This
innovative training program produces graduate students who are professionally
and technically qualified to lead scientific research, education and public
outreach in an increasingly socio-politically complex, interdisciplinary and
global arena.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.