* 0966375
* IGERT: Training, Research and Education in Engineering for Cultural Heritage Diagnostics
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2016
* Thomas Levy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 12/31/2016
* USD 3,200,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the development of an interdisciplinary graduate training program in engineering
for cultural heritage diagnostics. Forensic engineering, the investigation of
failures and failure mechanisms, is uniquely suited yet rarely used to assess
the damage to artifacts of cultural heritage, including ancient monuments,
historic buildings and paintings, from the ravages of time, pollution, natural
disasters and decay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IGERT, based at the University of
California at San Diego, trains graduate students to develop diagnostic
methodologies and analytical models that will be deployed and tested on a)
Renaissance art works and historic structures in Florence, Italy, and b)
archaeological sites and artifacts in Jordan and Israel. Trainees learn and
develop new state-of-the-art methods for the long-term "health monitoring" of
cultural artifacts, including non-destructive testing, cyberinfrastructure and
engineering analysis. Using a team-based approach, trainees will create an
integrated platform for diagnostic and predictive modeling, including
multispectral imaging, simulation, data synthesis and visual analytics. Students
are advised by three co-mentors, one from the student's primary discipline and
two from other disciplines. Substantial field research abroad will prepare them
for careers in international science and engineering, and the tools and
methodologies developed for cultural heritage can be applied more broadly to the
analysis of degraded or obsolete infrastructure, such as public buildings, roads
and bridges, as well as almost any other engineered component or system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.