* 0966298
* IGERT:  Sustainable Grid Integration of Distributed and Renewable Resources
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Alexis Kwasinski, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2017
* USD 3,129,768.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
a research and educational program at The University of Texas at Austin to
address sustainable grid integration of distributed and renewable energy
systems, a crucial priority for greenhouse gas reduction and energy
independence. A key context for this project is The Pecan Street Project, a
collaborative university-utility Austin-based effort to redesign and reformulate
Austin's electric power system. The research goal is to revolutionize the way
energy is produced, used, stored, and traded consistent with economic,
environment, social, and security objectives. Results will be applicable to
distributed power (smart grid) systems throughout the U.S. and will have a
significant economic impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will be engaged in
collaborative basic and applied research in data communications, cybersecurity,
network management computation, distributed generation (solar, wind, fuel
cells), power electronics and controls, energy storage (batteries, flywheels,
compressed air, thermal storage, electric vehicles), building HVAC systems and
energy efficient buildings, efficient appliances, and sensors for system
performance, tracking, and optimization. IGERT trainees will develop course
materials appropriate for high school math and science educators in support of
UTeachEngineering, and will assist in the creation of content for a graduate-
level course on the Grid Of The Future. Outreach to underrepresented groups in
K-12 will be facilitated by UTeachEngineering and development of new educational
materials for high school engineering courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an
NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze
a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.