* 0966229
* Phonon Recycling in Photonics
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Massoud Kaviany, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 03/31/2014
* USD 310,000.00

0966229&lt;br/&gt;Kaviany&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates how
heat that is generated during energy conversion in a solid state device can be
recycled before it becomes wasted, thus make the energy conversion process more
efficient. Examples include devices that both (a) produce or use photons and (b)
are employed in modern communications, diagnostics, and high-power applications
such as the rare-earth doped solid-state lasers and light-emitting diodes.
Currently, excess heat that is generated in these photonic devices has limited
both their efficiency and their broader implementation. In this research, phonon
recycling, which uses emitted phonons to assist in the photon emission process,
is employed to alleviate excess heating and improve photonic efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Phonon recycling is a new approach to
the atomic-level design of thermal systems. A quantum mechanical approach that
accounts for energy carrier population nonequilibra will be taken in order to
predict the performance of devices that utilize phonon recycling. The theory
will convert the current picture of electron-photon dominated transport to a
phonon-oriented view, thus removing barriers that have historically limited the
understanding of the fundamental phenomena in such
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The research will be integrated
with the continued development of atomic-level heat transfer research and
education. In addition to international outreach, a Heat Transfer Physics entry
in Wikipedia (the online encyclopedia) will be developed to train and educate an
international audience on topics involving phonon, electron, fluid particle, and
photon transport.