* 0966393
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Fundamental Studies of Spin-Exchange Optical Pumping for the Production of Large Quantities of Highly Spin-Polarized Noble Gases
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2012
* Nicholas Whiting, Whiting                 Nicholas       R
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 07/31/2012
* USD 131,420.00

0966393 Whiting

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Nicholas
Whiting to work with Drs. Michael J. Barlow, Peter Morris, and Thomas Meersmann
at the University of Nottingham in the United Kingdom and with Dr. Boyd Goodson
at Southern Illinois University Carbondale in the United States.

?Hyperpolarized? (HP) noble gases can be used to enhance the magnetic resonance
(MR) detection sensitivity for a host of potential and realized applications.
Because the nuclear spin polarization achieved in conventional MR methods is
usually on the order of ~10-5?10-6, the orders-of-magnitude higher spin
polarization manifested by such HP gases can translate directly into
correspondingly massive enhancements in MR detection sensitivity?thus enabling a
wide range of novel experiments and approaches that would not be possible
otherwise. One of the primary methods for generating HP gases is spin-exchange
optical pumping (SEOP). SEOP is a two-step process where angular momentum is
transferred from resonant, circularly polarized laser light to the electronic
spins of an alkali metal vapor, and then subsequently transferred to the nuclear
spins of a noble gas via collisions?allowing the nuclear spin polarization to
accumulate over time. The fundamental physical processes underlying SEOP are
surprisingly multifaceted and interdependent, and despite decades of research
into the optical, atomic, and molecular physics of these processes, they have
yet to be sufficiently explored; indeed, there is much that is not known or
understood?particularly when SEOP is performed under key regimes and
experimental conditions that are most relevant for MR applications.

The objectives of the proposed research are to gain a deeper fundamental
understanding of SEOP processes involving selected alkali metals and noble
gases, and to apply these insights to improve SEOP for MR applications requiring
large amounts of highly spin-polarized gases. The proposed research will involve
SEOP using both rubidium (Rb) and cesium (Cs) as alkali metals, and xenon-129
(129Xe) and krypton-83 (83Kr) as noble gas species (with the possibility to
expand to 131Xe); while Rb/129Xe SEOP has been well characterized in the past
(although not under the conditions proposed in this work), studies involving
Cs/129Xe as well as efforts to boost the polarization and MR applications of the
quadrupolar 83Kr/131Xe isotopes are still largely in their infancy. The proposed
studies of fundamental SEOP processes at the Host institution include: the
dependence of the alkali metal electronic spin polarization (PRb/PCs)
distribution ?map? on noble gas type and density, cell temperature, total
pressure, laser flux, spectral offset, etc. using optical electron spin
resonance (ESR) spectroscopy; investigations of energy-transport mechanisms
within the OP cell (as a function of the same parameters) using Raman
spectroscopy to measure the rovibrational temperature of nitrogen gas; and
studies of the corresponding nuclear spin polarization distribution (and gas
dynamics) across the OP cell via low-field 3-D MR imaging. The Nottingham
apparatus?which the PI will help complete?will for the first time allow the
comparison of all of these experimental observables in real time. These
experiments will not only provide new knowledge concerning SEOP, but will inform
the optimization of conditions for generating HP gases for MR
applications?including proposed experiments that will explore the use of highly
spin-polarized gases for probing porous materials and surfaces. While the
proposed research is fundamental in nature, the results?to be widely
disseminated in conference presentations and publications?should have a direct
impact on both emerging and established applications of HP gases; such
applications are manifold and vary from studies of materials to clinical human
MR imaging of lung spaces and tissues. The University of Nottingham is uniquely
positioned to serve as host, given its vast resources in state-of-the-art
experimental instrumentation, expert personnel, and strong history in MR
innovation?providing vital training and experiences, as well as establishing
long-lasting international collaborations, that will positively impact the PI
throughout the duration of his professional research career.