* 0966187
* IGERT: INSPIRE: Information Security and Privacy: An Interdisciplinary, Research and Education Program
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/2010,08/31/2017
* Rae Zimmerman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,848,461.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the development of a graduate training program in information security and
privacy. Trainees will learn to translate the foundational principles of
security and privacy into information technologies based on a deep understanding
of social, economic, behavioral and public policy implications and requirements.
The program will produce a cadre of technologists and scientists who can
integrate technical, legal, financial, and psychological knowledge into
practical solutions.

The program has at its core a new paradigm for building trustworthy systems,
where technical security issues are seen only as one spoke in a wheel, along
with equally important legal, social, psychological, policy, and economics
issues. Trainees with this interdisciplinary background will join academia,
industry, create new companies and drive public policy. A unique bridging
program with local and national minority serving institutions and organizations
will ensure that the program recruits and retains a diverse set of trainees.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.