* 0966858
* Collaborative Research:  Fate and bioavailability of steroidogenic compounds in aquatic sediment
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Alan Kolok, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 262,704.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Fate and bioavailability of
steroidogenic compounds in aquatic sediment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigators: Bartelt-Hunt, Shannon; Kolok, Alan&lt;br/&gt;Institutions:
University of Nebraska-Lincoln; University of Nebraska-Omaha&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Nos: CBET-0966850; CBET-0966858&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Environmental exposures to
elevated levels of steroids have been linked with negative reproductive outcomes
in fish and potential human health impacts including defective bone formation
and impacts on brain development. Previously-published studies indicate that
exogenous steroids will sorb to aquatic sediments, however the bioavailability
of sediment-associated steroid hormones to aquatic organisms is not clear. The
PIs? preliminary data suggest that sediment-associated steroids remain
bioavailable and, moreover, may represent the principle source of bioavailable
steroidogenic compounds in aquatic systems. The proposed work is innovative as
it represents the first study to examine how association with sediment alters
the bioavailability of steroids to aquatic biota. The PIs will examine the
physical and chemical factors responsible for estrogen and androgen fate and
transformation in sediment as well as the routes by which macroorganisms are
exposed to biologically-active steroid hormones. The results of the proposed
research will provide a better understanding of the role of sediment in steroid
transformation and biologic uptake and will support design of effective
mitigation strategies in aquatic systems impacted by steroidogenic compounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this application is to examine the role
that sediments play in the environmental fate, transformation and
bioavailability of steroidogenic compounds. The central hypothesis of this study
is that sediment-associated steroids remain bioavailable. They plan to test
their central hypothesis and accomplish the objective of this application by
pursuing the following three specific aims: (1) determine the exposure routes by
which steroids become bioavailable to the fathead minnow, a ubiquitous
freshwater fish, (2) evaluate the physicochemical mechanisms governing steroid
in sediment, and (3) validate their laboratory results with controlled field
studies conducted in aquatic systems with known steroidogenic discharge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational and outreach plan for this project is
focused on undergraduate and graduate student education as well as providing
information to regional, national and international groups with an interest in
endocrine-disrupting compounds. The proposed project represents a collaborative
research effort between faculty at a research I University (University of
Nebraska-Lincoln) and a predominantly undergraduate institution (University of
Nebraska at Omaha). Educational modules outlining the methods and results of
this research will be integrated into existing courses focused on contaminant
fate and transport, environmental sampling methods, and toxicology taught by
project investigators at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and the University
of Nebraska at Omaha. Research results and information on hormones in the
environment will be disseminated to wastewater treatment plant operators, to the
public through articles published in a University of Nebraska quarterly
publication and an interactive website designed for a lay audience.
International outreach will be achieved through a graduate student exchange
program with the Corporación para Investigaciones Biológicas and the University
of Antioquia in Medellin, Columbia.