* 0966614
* Mechanisms by which Nanoparticle Agglomerates Enhance Aerosol Performance
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2013
* Eric Munson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 03/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Pulmonary delivery of therapeutics represents a
significant area of growth in the pharmaceutical industry. Dry powder aerosols
represent the formulation of choice due to improved aerosol delivery and drug
stability compared to nebulized or metered solutions. Obtaining dry powders
typically requires processing techniques such as milling or spray drying that
yield polydisperse powders with large aerodynamic diameter (&gt;5 ìm), poor
dispersibility and inadequate flow characteristics. Furthermore, processed
particles (~1-5 ìm) must dissolve or disperse rapidly once deposited in the lung
to avoid being cleared by cilia or by alveolar macrophages. Nanoparticles
possess desirable properties for avoiding these clearance mechanisms; however,
nanoparticle aerosols are typically exhaled due to their small size.
Nanoparticle agglomeration has been identified as an effective means to
incorporate the desired micro- and nanostructure into dry powder formulations.
Nanoparticle agglomerates possess a low density microstructure to enhance lung
deposition. Furthermore, the nanostructure of these particle assemblies
dramatically improves the dissolution rate of drugs compared to microparticles
of a similar size. In objectilve 1, processing conditions will be systematically
studied and agglomerates characterized for two types of drug nanoparticles.
Objective 2 will analyze the powder properties of nanoparticle agglomerates
compared to micronized drug and correlate these properties to physicochemical
traits of the agglomerates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will broadly impact students, researchers, industry, and
ultimately patients. Defining nanoparticle agglomeration as a pharmaceutical
processing modality will provide new insights to researchers working in
nanotechnology, pharmaceuticals, particle processing, and aerosol science.
Flocculation of colloids is currently applied in diverse industries such as
waste recovery, food and health care product processing, and microbial
separations. These industries will also benefit from dissemination of the
results of studies proposed here. The educational cornerstone of this proposal
is a program entitled ?Education through Outreach? (EtO) aimed to introduce high
school students to the role of scientists and engineers in product development
by enlisting them to present projects to junior high students. The program aims
to capture students at critical educational crossroads as they transition to
high school or to college. This educational program will enhance student
awareness of science and engineering in everyday products, spurring them on to
STEM-based careers.