* 0966452
* Bouncing droplets: from fundamentals to digital microfluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* John Bush, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 06/30/2014
* USD 250,001.00

0966452 Bush

A series of experiments will explore novel bouncing configurations of small
liquid droplets that may bounce indefinitely on a vertically vibrated liquid
interface. Accompanying theoretical models will be developed. In certain forcing
regimes, these bouncing droplets walk steadily across the interface; moreover,
these bouncers or walkers can interact in a variety of ways, repelling or
attracting, forming stable lattice structures that translate or rotate, or
merging to produce a larger drop that may coalesce with the underlying bath.
This novel means of drop levitation provides an attractive alternative for
handling droplets for microfluidic applications, as it avoids the complications
resulting from fluid-solid contact. The proposed research will be directed
towards better understanding the rich dynamics of bouncing droplets with a view
to informing and developing new digital microfluidic technologies.

Intellectual Merit: The work builds on the observations of Yves Couder and
coworkers who have demonstrated that the bouncing droplet experiment is
extraordinarly rich, exhibiting features of optics (diffraction), quantum
systems (wave-particle duality, tunneling), statistical physics (phase
transitions) and astronomy (complex orbital motions). Most startling is the fact
that millimetric walking droplets exhibit features of quantum systems (e.g.
photons) that are smaller by a factor of 10 billion and governed by the
probabilistic laws of quantum mechanics. A salient question is whether the
diffraction of walkers passing through a slit is an example of chaotic dynamics
giving rise to apparent quantum behavior. An improved understanding of the
bouncing dynamics will yield valuable insight into the quantum nature of
bouncing droplets. The proposed exploratory examination of droplets bouncing on
a rotating bath will provide a novel system with features (gravitational
attraction, orbital motions and collision) analogous to those arising celestial
dynamics. The release of multiple walkers onto a rotating bath will thus
represent a simple and provocative laboratory analogue of planetary accretion
and solar system evolution.

Broader Impact: Droplets bouncing on a vibrated interface is a visually striking
effect that may be reproduced with a simple desktop experiment. Moreover,
walking droplets exhibit features of wave-particle duality, and so represent a
provocative macroscopic analogue of a quantum mechanical system. As such,
bouncing droplets are ideally suited to attract the interest of both science
students and the general public. The PI's work on the subject has received
considerable media attention. Such exposure should increase the general public's
awareness and appreciation of science, and attract the attention of science
museums. The research will be performed in part by undergraduate students
supervised by the PI and co-PI. The experiments are particularly
straightforward, and so provide an ideal entry into the lab environment for MIT
undergraduates. The PI's laboratory has a long history of undergraduate
involvement through MIT's UROP Program, with women and underrepresented
minorities being hired preferentially. The PI is actively involved in both high
school outreach and MIT's Science and Engineering Program for Teachers.