* 0966904
* An FTIR Spectrometer for the Development of Nanostructured Solar Cells and Novel Fuel Cell Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Matthew Law, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 02/28/2011
* USD 70,519.00

0966904&lt;br/&gt;Law&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore new ways to
probe the surfaces of nanocrystalline solar cell materials and fuel cell
electrodes using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometry. The unique
capabilities of this FTIR, including far-IR, in situ diffuse reflectance, and in
situ variable-angle silicon and diamond attenuated total reflectance (ATR)
spectroscopy will enhance efforts to develop fuel cell cathodes with much faster
kinetics for oxygen reduction, as well as robust nanocrystal solids with long
carrier diffusion lengths suitable for high-efficiency solar cells. The
nanocrystal work will utilize applied studies of organic and inorganic ligand
exchange, molecular bonding, surface diffusion, oxidation, doping and other
surface processes occurring in electronically-coupled nanocrystal films. The
fuel cell work will leverage the instrument's unique in situ capabilities to
explore the polarization processes of solid oxide cathodes under operating
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
use of FTIR to probe the surfaces of nanocrystalline solar cell materials and
fuel cell electrodes will answer important questions concerning the surface
composition and interfacial dynamics of these materials. For example, colloidal
nanocrystal solids are a novel class of hybrid organic/inorganic materials with
great technological potential in optoelectronics, but little is known about how
the electronic properties of these materials depend on the atomic and molecular
species that are adsorbed on their large internal surface. FTIR will help to
elucidate the structure-property relationships needed to develop nanocrystal-
based devices, particularly cheap and efficient solar cells for large-scale
power conversion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fund the acquisition of a
PerkinElmer Spectrum 400 Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer to
support ongoing and future research projects in the areas of nanostructured
solar cells and fuel cells by two assistant professors in the Physical Sciences
and Engineering at UC Irvine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to opening new
avenues for research in alternative energy and other areas, acquisition of the
proposed instrument will greatly enhance teaching and training capabilities at
UCI. The instrument will be used by postdocs, graduate students and
undergraduate researchers to address vital questions in their research. No fewer
than 16 Chemistry and Materials Science and Engineering students will utilize
the instrument in the first two years. At least one hundred students will
benefit from employing advanced FTIR techniques in their research over the
lifetime of the instrument. The FTIR will be used in summer research programs
for local high school students run by the Center for Solar Energy, in which
students pursue projects in several chemistry and materials science labs over
the course of the summer and present posters about their research at the Orange
County Science Fair, as well as the California State Summer School for
Mathematics and Science (COSMOS-UCI), a month-long summer session funded in part
by the National Science Foundation. The instrument will also be used by at least
one minority undergraduate researcher every year as part of the California
Alliance for Minority Participation (CAMP) Summer Scholars Program.