* 0966076
* Trailblazer Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Randall Jones, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 03/31/2015
* USD 586,500.00

This scholarship program is a new model for targeting need-based assistance in
STEM disciplines to non-traditional students with dependents, educating
individuals most likely to remain in Appalachia. The Trailblazer Scholars
Program supports a cohort of 15 academically-talented, financially challenged
nontraditional students with dependents to obtain two- and four-year degrees in
STEM disciplines at Marshall Community and Technical College (MCTC) and Marshall
University (MU). Trailblazer Scholars have the ability to choose between
entering MU directly or beginning at MCTC and transferring once they have earned
an associate STEM degree. The 2+2 academic programs included are Bioscience
(MCTC) and Biotechnology (MU); Information Technology (MCTC) and Computers and
Information Technology (MU); and Geospatial Science (MCTC) and Geography (MU).
Students interested in other College of Science and College of Information
Technology and Engineering majors are also supported. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Trailblazer Scholars Program identifies nontraditional students with dependents
as both an underserved population and an untapped resource for development of a
diverse and well qualified STEM workforce. Applicants for the program are
recruited through an existing outreach infrastructure that involves MCTC/MU
recruiting programs, high school teachers, and community organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative student support programs address unmet academic
and social needs of the nontraditional student with dependents. Targeted summer
bridge programs, learning communities reinforced by enrollment in cohort
courses, flexible, family-friendly daycare solutions, and online social
networking communities for nontraditional students encourage student retention
and degree completion. In addition, career placement exploits existing strong
alumni connections within regional STEM businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals
of the Trailblazer Scholars Program are to:&lt;br/&gt; - expand the technical
and science-based workforce in the Huntington-Ashland OH-WV-KY Metropolitan
Statistical Area;&lt;br/&gt; - improve educational opportunities and student
services for nontraditional students with dependents; and &lt;br/&gt; - build a
stronger, mutually-beneficial relationship between MU and MCTC STEM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;