* 0966249
* Students Actualizing Talent at Education?s Subsequent Stages (STATESS)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2014
* USD 599,973.00

Twenty academically talented students at the University of Central Florida (UCF)
are being selected each year from science and engineering disciplines, with a
special focus on mathematics and computer sciences, for scholarships in the
range of $4,000 to $10,000 depending on financial need. Recruited students are
in one of the following three groups (a) recent transfers to the university, (b)
freshman undergraduate students and (c) first-year graduate students. New
transfer students to UCF are being provided moral and financial support to help
them with the transition and to ensure they will successfully complete the
bachelor's degree in a STEM field. In particular, juniors are in a critical
period in their university studies because it is when they embark on advanced
courses in the major. The support of the S-STEM mentors ensures these transfer
students are being supported during this critical period of time. The support
for freshman undergraduates is providing them with much-needed study skill
development and academic guidance when they are adjusting to a more independent
life. Support for incoming graduate students is stabilizing their transition to
heightened demands and is providing release from employment duties so they can
focus on their academic endeavors. UCF has a significant population of
underrepresented students and more than 80% of transfer and 60% of entering
freshmen have demonstrated financial need; thus, the S-STEM scholarships are
appealing to a broad range of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carefully designed
activities are engaging all the student participants in active research
seminars, lectures, departmental and college colloquia of the various academic
units at UCF involved with the S-STEM project. These activities are providing
incentives to keep the students engaged in their STEM major and motivating them
to excel academically. Students completing the year-long project will be
streamlined into existing research groups that have good industrial
partnerships. These industrial connections will be used to place qualified
students directly into the workforce.