* 0966226
* Illinois State University Computer Science/Information Systems (CS/IS) Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Saad El-Zanati, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 02/29/2016
* USD 599,843.00

To help address the nationwide decline in enrollment in computer science and
information systems (CS/IS) programs, this S-STEM program is 1) providing 33
scholarships (18 full scholarships of up to 4 years, and 15 transfer
scholarships) to academically-talented, financially-disadvantaged students
majoring in CS/IS or in mathematics with a CS/IS minor; 2) enhancing the
educational experience and increasing retention among the S-STEM scholars; and
3) assisting the S-STEM scholars in finding employment opportunities. The
program components are thus being implemented to foster a transformative R-E-P
process (Recruitment, Education/Retention, Placement) that supports the S-STEM
scholars while building on existing community-academic-industrial ties. The
project in particular is building on strong connections with the Chicago Public
School system to recruit scholars from amongst a large urban population that
includes students from low-income communities and groups that are
underrepresented in CS/IS. Recruitment activities include workshops at the high
schools and on-campus open houses held throughout the year. Support structures
for scholars include small-sized course sections, tutoring centers that provide
"program debugging" assistance for all programming-related courses, numerous
community-building activities, optional (but encouraged) research experiences
and internships, special seminars and symposia, sponsored visits of scholars to
information technology departments of local employers, and assistance with job
placement. The project's evaluation plan addresses specific objectives and
outcome measures that are related to the overall goals of recruitment,
education, retention, and placement, and is being used to inform the process of
developing a strong, transformative program. Results achieved through the
scholarship program are being presented to the CS/IS community at national and
international meetings, and published in professional journals.