* 0966742
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Domain Computational Framework  for Simulating Musculoskeletal Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Yasin Dhaher, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2013
* USD 173,408.00

PI: Thelen, Darryl G., Negrut, Dan, and Dhaher, Yasin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0966535 &amp; 0966742&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individuals who experience knee
ligament injuries are at high risk for early onset osteoarthritis, which can
result in chronic pain and loss of function. It is believed that biomechanical
factors may contribute to such long term problems, with abnormal cartilage
loading inducing secondary micro-trauma and joint degeneration processes. The
goal of this study is to establish a validated computational framework that
would be used to investigate how injury (e.g. partial or full ligament tears),
surgical (e.g. ligament reattachment sites, soft tissue tensioning) and
rehabilitative (e.g. stretching, muscle re-training) factors can alter tissue
loading during movement. Two research aims focus technical effort to meet the
stated goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim involves the construction of
subject-specific, finite element (FE) knee models from high resolution medical
images. The FE models include continuum descriptions of connective tissues, and
uniquely account for interactions between the tibio-femoral and patella-femoral
joints. The second aim investigates a computational approach for predicting knee
kinematics, ligament strains and cartilage loading during movement. A co-
simulation framework is proposed in which finite element models are solved
simultaneously with multi-body and musculo-tendon dynamics, thereby accounting
for inherent interactions that exist between knee mechanics and movement
dynamics. Bayesian analysis techniques will be used to both statistically
calibrate and validate the computational models by comparing model predictions
to in vivo measures obtained using dynamic magnetic resonance
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outreach objectives are to: 1) educate medical
practitioners about the inherent coupling between movement and internal joint
mechanics that arise naturally during functional tasks, 2) engage minority high
school students from Wisconsin and Illinois in Computational Science related
activities. The research/education integration plan involves the development of
case studies for the physiatry residency program at the Rehabilitation Institute
of Chicago (RIC). By relying on the predictive simulation capability developed
under this project, these studies will illustrate the importance of considering
biomechanical factors when planning clinical interventions that address
musculoskeletal injury and diseases. The high school outreach effort will
involve a two tier approach that each year will (a) start by organizing seminars
that popularize computational science, and (b) follow up by a one week
residential summer program at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The program,
?Promoting the Computational Science Initiative? (ProCSI), is aimed at under-
represented high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this study stems from combining advanced computational science, biomechanical
modeling and statistical analysis techniques to establish a new computational
framework for simulating musculoskeletal function. Broader impact will be
achieved by promoting the use of biomechanical modeling to scientifically
evaluate the clinical treatment of musculoskeletal injuries, and also by
providing under-represented students an opportunity to use computational tools
to address meaningful medical problems.