* 0966462
* Corpus and lexicon development: Endangered genres of discourse and domains of cultural knowledge in Tu'un isavi (Mixtec) of Yoloxochitl, Guerrero
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2010,02/28/2018
* Jonathan Amith, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 02/28/2018
* USD 197,376.00

This project will produce and use extensive primary documentation (over 100
hours of digital recordings and time-coded transcriptions) to analyze the
phonetics, phonology, and morphosyntax of Yolox√≥chitl Mixtec (YM), a little-
studied, isolated Mixtecan verb-initial language spoken by 15,000 people in four
villages within a 12 kilometer radius in coastal Guerrero, Mexico. The complex
phonetics and phonology of Mixtecan languages (floating tones, sandhi, and the
diversity of tonal sequences on the bimoraic tone-bearing-unit) is of
significant theoretical interest. YM is noteworthy for its inventory of 5 tone
levels and 18 sequences on the bimoraic tone bearing unit. Nasalization in
Mixtecan languages has also attracted significant interest and here too YM is
unusual in that nasal vowels are limited to word-final syllables. Syllable-
initial vowels in disyllabic stems are never nasal. Finally, the acoustics of
stress has received little attention in Mixtecan studies although the nature of
stress in tonal languages is a complex topic of considerable theoretical
concern. These and other topics in YM phonetics and phonology will be studied by
an interdisciplinary research team, including a native speaker with a masters
degree in linguistics and a team of phoneticians and
phonologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like other Mixtecan languages, YM is verb
initial, a basic word order sequence represented in only approximately ten
percent of world languages. This project will provide a detailed
morphosyntactical study of this unusual type and address specific research
questions, such as the pragmatic and discourse implications of nonbasic word
order. The development of both an extensive corpus of transcribed natural
recordings and elicitation material targeting specific questions in YM
morphology and syntax will provide an unusually rich set of materials for
linguistic research. In sum, this project will provide extensive primary
documentation and establish an analytical base for future linguistic studies,
particularly in phonetics, phonology, and morphosyntax, areas in which YM is of
typological interest.