* 0966521
* Thermally Responsive Surface Topologies from Patterned Reactive Mesogens
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Gregory Crawford, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 09/30/2013
* USD 113,753.00

The underpinning scientific goal of this work is to develop a detailed
understanding of the local thermal expansion "landscape" of patterned reactive
mesogen films through advanced experimental characterization and modeling to
create thermally responsive micro-, meso-, and nano-surface relief topologies,
and to fundamentally understand their tailorability through interfacial,
molecular, and thermodynamic control. By spatially patterning regions of
captured helical cholesteric order surrounded by locked-in isotropic disorder in
a periodic way, a rich variety of surface topologies can be created and
thermally activated. Three fabrication methodologies are proposed to tailor
surface relief features on different dimensions, including lithography for the
micrometer-scale, holo-lithography for the meso-scale, and templating for the
nano-scale. A battery of experiments will be performed (optics, thermo-optics,
interference, electron, and confocal microscopy, and nuclear magnetic resonance)
to probe their thermal, structural, optical, and dynamic properties to elucidate
their basic topology and underlying physical phenomena, and evaluate their
potential use in applications. Both graduate students and undergraduate students
will be trained to use these modern experimental techniques. An international
collaboration with the Technical University of Eindhoven in the Netherlands has
been established so students can capitalize on their facilities and expertise in
reactive mesogen chemistry, as well as experience the importance of
international collaboration.

%%%

An increasing interest in reactive liquid crystals (or mesogens) continues to
emerge at the cross-disciplinary interface of liquid crystal science, offering
unique opportunities to permanently capture various liquid crystalline phases
and configurations for passive and active optical applications, and to further
the fundamental understanding of liquid crystalline ordering. The goal of this
proposal is to create a patterned polymer sample, which responds to heat. By
applying heat to the sample, regions of the sample will expand (pop-up) and
adjacent regions will remain level. This creates a film with differences in
height across the sample. Since it is designed to be periodic, it may be useful
for new optical devices that steer light. By understanding the basic science
behind this novel effect, the material can potentially be optimized for use in a
number of intriguing application areas, including telecommunications switches,
flat panel displays, and security features for passports and currency. The
research results emanating from this proposal will be integrated into
undergraduate and graduate entrepreneurship courses where students strive to
create commercial and societal value out of university discoveries and
innovations. The graduate students participating in the research will also
greatly benefit from the international research experience with the Technical
University of Eindhoven in the Netherlands, where they will not only capitalize
on scientific expertise and state of-the-art infrastructure, but they will also
experience the research enterprise in a foreign country. The education outreach
component of this proposal is far reaching - it is the goal of this work to
inspire and enable young people in the Greater Providence Area, particularly
those from neighborhoods of limited means and resources, those who have had
educational troubles and behavioral problems, those who are incarcerated, and
those with disabilities, to realize their full potential as productive,
responsible and caring citizens using science and engineering as a vehicle. Two
new educational outreach platforms will be developed to accomplish this
ambitious goal, which includes the intersection of art/fashion and science, and
a novel cartoon medium based on underlying scientific themes and facts.