* 0966758
* Heavy Rainfall Mechanisms During the 2008 Terrain-influenced Monsoon Rainfall Experiment (TiMREX)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Richard Johnson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 555,000.00

The Terrain-influenced Monsoon Rainfall Experiment (TiMREX), centered on Taiwan
in the summer of 2008, collected special observations to improve understanding
of the physical process associated with terrain-influenced heavy precipitation
systems over this mountainous island and the monsoonal environment in which they
are embedded. This award will allow researchers to implement quality control
checks on potentially problematic rawinsonde data, combine these corrected data
with other observations to create a more comprehensive gridded analysis, and
then apply these data to investigate processes leading to heavy rainfall over
and surrounding Taiwan.

The Intellectual Merit of this research includes focus on analysis of special
rawinsonde intercomparison launches with an eye toward sonde-dependent biases
and ancillary satellite and ground-based remote , satellite and ground based
remote sensing, and prior knowledge of sonde biases to reduce biases in moisture
measurements taken by the several different atmospheric sounding systems used
during the TiMREX campaign. The researchers will then conduct diagnostic studies
of processes related to the production of heavy rainfall, including
investigation of rainfall patterns upstream of and over Taiwan in relation to
flow blocking, investigation of atmospheric boundary layer structure in the
TiMREX region and its connection with aforementioned precipitation patterns, and
use of the sounding network to diagnose properties of convection during the
field experiment.

Broader Impacts of the research will accrue through improved understanding of
mechanisms (and ultimately prediction) of heavy rainfall, both specifically
during the East Asian monsoon season and more generally in mountainous tropical
and subtropical environments including those found in the Americas. A quality-
controlled version of the TiMREX meteorological dataset will be disseminated for
access and exploitation by the broader scientific community, and graduate
student education will be supported.