* 0966429
* IRES: U.S.-France Research and Education on Contextual Reasoning and its Application to Conversational Agents
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Avelino Gonzalez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2014
* USD 141,129.00

In this IRES project supported by the Office of International Science and
Engineering, U.S. graduate and undergraduate students under the direction of
Professor Avelino Gonzalez at the University of Central Florida will participate
in a collaborative research effort in conversational avatars with Dr. Patrick
Brezillon at Universite de Pierre et Marie Curie in Paris, France. The U.S.
students will explore the possibility of using contextual graphs (CxGs) to model
and develop a tool for identifying the context of conversations and improving
dialog management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conversational avatars are artifacts,
such as computer programs, robots, or animations, which behave and communicate
like specific people. Such avatars have potential applications across many
fields, including health, business, and defense. One example is in the area of
health maintenance, where improvement in the naturalness of avatars could
improve their acceptance by senior citizens who need human-like coaching in
therapy or medicine management. In the course of working on their research
projects, the students will learn both how to speak French as well as how to
interact in French culture. They will thus gain an invaluable research
experience in an international setting, helping contribute to the development of
a new generation of a skilled technical workforce with a global perspective.