* 0966675
* Documenting Endangered Highland Varieties of Chechen
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Johanna Nichols, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 07/31/2014
* USD 199,864.00

The highland varieties of Chechen, a Nakh-Daghestanian language spoken in the
central Caucasus range in Russia and Georgia, are not all mutually intelligible
with each other or the (lowland) standard Chechen language. They preserve some
of the most archaic grammar, vocabulary, epic literature, and oral traditions of
their very ancient family, which is possibly the only surviving linguistic link
to ancient north Mediterranean civilization. They are among the world's most
complex languages and have many rare structural properties of phonology,
grammar, and lexicon. Important aspects of grammar, lexicon, and language-
related knowledge in the Caucasus are transmitted fully, or only, when
individuals grow to linguistic adulthood in their traditional and ancestral
locations. Highland Chechen towns were cleared and the population deported in
1944, so the entire body of highland language and knowledge will pass with the
passing of speakers now over 75 years. This project will bring together Chechen
and U.S. scholars to make extensive audio and video recordings of these elders
and jointly begin transcription and analysis, gathering enough material to make
clear the importance of Chechen to historical and comparative linguistics,
sociolinguistics, ethnography, archaeology, and comparative mythology.

If extensive documentation can be done while enough of the generation over 75
can still be recorded, the body of material will be large and varied enough to
be useful for advanced corpus and language processing work for the foreseeable
future and beyond. This is a magnitude now available only in corpora of large
national languages, and the world's last chance to bank for future research on
these very distinctive linguistic varieties.