* 0966161
* Michigan Biology Academy Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Claire Sandler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 03/31/2015
* USD 599,999.00

The Michigan Biology Academy Scholars program, from the Departments of Ecology
and Evolutionary Biology (EEB) and Molecular, Cellular, and Development Biology
(MCDB) in the University of Michigan's College of Literature, Science and the
Arts, supports up to twenty scholarship recipients per entering cohort, for a
total of up to 80 students over a four-year period. This effort is part of the
University of Michigan (M) STEM Academy which recently implemented a new
integrated, holistic curricular and co-curricular support system for students
with high ability and potential in STEM disciplines, but who, for reasons of
socioeconomic status, first generation college status, racial or gender bias, or
lack of rigor of high school background, might not be successful at a highly
competitive elite research university. The Academy provides academic support for
first and second year undergraduates to increase the number, success, and
diversity of STEM students. The biological sciences component of the M-STEM
Academy is geared towards increasing the number and diversity of students
entering biologically-related fields by two different yet interrelated methods:
(1) increase the actual number of students pursuing degrees in biological
sciences, and (2) increase the retention to degree and the academic success and
experiences of diverse students. Increased financial support is critical for
both of these aspects to reduce the debt burden and the time spent away from
studies to earn money during the academic year. Assessment and evaluation of the
Michigan Biology Academy Scholars program is being provided by the Center for
the Study of Higher and Postsecondary Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A special
aspect of this project is the extensive collaboration across University of
Michigan college boundaries. In particular, critical STEM departments in the
College of Literature, Science and the Arts and the College of Engineering have
initiated curricular innovations and bring a myriad of academic support offices
in order to provide comprehensive services to all M-STEM students
including:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; - the Science Learning Center, which supports
student learning in the sciences by providing well-coordinated resources,
vibrant learning communities and engaging co-curricular programs;&lt;br/&gt; -
the Comprehensive Studies Program, a learning community that offers a variety of
academic support services designed to support, academically enrich, and retain
students;&lt;br/&gt; - the Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program, a
nationally recognized program that enhances the undergraduate educational
experience through the integration of teaching and research;&lt;br/&gt; - the
Women in Science and Engineering Program, a nationally recognized model for
advocacy and research on issues for girls and women in STEM fields;
and&lt;br/&gt; - through collaborations with other educational pipeline programs
on campus, including the Michigan Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation and the Michigan Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate.