* 0966408
* S10MM Evaporative Self-Assembly of Polymers, Nanoparticles, and DNA
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2011
* Zhiqun Lin, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 03/31/2011
* USD 7,500.00

0966408&lt;br/&gt;DeVincent&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funding
to support the Symposium MM on Evaporative Self Assembly of Polymers,
Nanoparticles, and DNA to be held at the Materials Research Society meeting
April 5-9, 2010 in San Francisco, CA. The symposium will focus on: (a)
strategies of using controlled evaporative self-assembly to direct the
alignment, size, shape, and periodicity of self-organized assemblies of
polymers, microparticles, nanoparticles, and DNA over a large area, (b)
technological applications of the resulting assemblies, and (c) modeling of the
related mass and heat transport, and fluid flow during the evaporation process.
The symposium is the premier fundamental and applied multidisciplinary research
forum for this field and supporting scientists. Attending from all over of the
world, leading scientists from academics and industries gather with young
faculty, postdocs, and students for three days of oral presentations and posters
on state of the art strategies and modeling of evaporative self
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Symposium will serve as a forum for presentations and exchange of cutting edge
ideas in a rapidly growing area of nanoscience and nanotechnology. The sixteen
invited speakers chosen for the Symposium MM at the MRS meeting are amongst the
most eminent scholars and researchers in the world. Besides bringing many of the
established intellectual leaders of the subject together to brainstorm the
future, there is also a very strong involvement of practicing engineers and
young faculty, postdocs, and students from multiple related disciplines. They
will not only learn of the latest research advances but will also contribute to
the paradigm changes in the approaches, which are necessary for underpinning and
enabling the future. The symposium will emphasize the mechanisms and phenomena
governing particulate and multiphase processes, including micro- and nano-
structured fluids, self and directed assembly of nanostructures involving
particulates from the viewpoints of experiment, theory, and computer simulation.
An important aspect of the symposium is the heavy representation by speakers and
poster presenters in the field of multiphase flow phenomena (particle/droplet
dynamics), and self and directed assembly of particles into functional materials
and devices, which are the current research focus areas of NSF Particulate and
Multiphase Processes program. The symposium will contribute to improving the
basic understanding, predictability, and control of particulate and multiphase
processes with particular emphasis on new frontiers in nanotechnology, complex
engineering systems, and novel manufacturing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant
will provide travel and registration support for invited speakers, as well as
young faculty, postdocs and graduate students who will markedly benefit from the
networking experience which the symposium provides. Significant efforts have
been made and will continue be made to enhance the involvement of women and
minorities in this symposium. 25 percent of the invited speakers are women and
we will seek to increase the percentage of female new faculty and graduate
student presenters. We aim to identify women and minority research laboratories
in this research field and will actively solicit their involvement through
contributed talks by emails and phone calls. Funds requested from NSF will
partially be used to provide 5 travel awards with $500 each to support graduate
students, postdocs or young faculty to attend the symposium. Priority will be
given to graduate students and postdocs who are female and attend their first
national meeting, young faculty who will give oral presentations, and those from
underrepresented ethnic minorities.