* 0966388
* Scholarships for Transfers to Engage and Excel in Mathematics (STEEM)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Kenneth Millett, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2016
* USD 599,996.00

The Scholarships for Transfers to Engage and Excel in Mathematics (STEEM) is
providing an innovative and comprehensive support program to significantly
increase the graduation rate and success of community college students in
Mathematics Majors at the University of California-Santa Barbara (UCSB).
Community colleges serve a disproportionately high number of females,
underrepresented minorities and non-traditional students, many of whom are
financially independent and also first-generation college attendees. By
targeting this population, STEEM will increase the persistence of high-
potential, high-risk students; those who might not complete a degree without
financial support. Approximately 10 new scholarships are awarded each year.
Additionally, there are about a dozen yearly summer session stipend awards to
help students complete the one critical course needed to transfer or to
graduate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address academic needs of new transfer
students and improve performance, a new adaptive transitional course is being
developed to emphasize the tools of mathematical thinking needed for success in
upper division and advanced mathematics courses. Students are actively engaged
in the mathematics community through participation in "Meet a Professional
Mathematician" monthly activity and quarterly STEEM organized social networking
with peers, graduate students and faculty at informal gatherings. Additional
academic and professional development is provided through peer led workshops,
graduate student tutoring in upper division courses, faculty mentoring, teacher
preparation activities and research endeavors. Early intervention and new web
resources provide prospective and admitted transfer students crucial information
needed for timely graduation and graduate school preparation. Most STEEM
activities are open to all students, to extend program impact and facilitate
integration of STEEM Scholars and transfer students into the greater
mathematics, science and engineering community at UCSB.