* 0966963
* Intent Seeking Algorithms for New Human-Machine Interface
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Sanjay Joshi, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2015
* USD 283,362.00

PI: Joshi, Sanjay S. Proposal Number: 0966963

Project Summary: We have created a novel human-machine interface (HMI)
technology for paralyzed persons which uses the surface electromyography (sEMG)
signal of a single, facial muscle for simultaneous multidimensional control of
external devices. Our new controller has the potential to significantly increase
the quality of life for its users. Unlike many existing humancomputer interfaces
for this population, our interface is: unobtrusive & inconspicuous,
noninterfering with eyes/mouth/tongue, continuously available when needed,
multifunctional, easy-to-use in almost any head position, and portable. We have
recently discovered that humans can learn how to simultaneously manipulate power
levels in two separate frequency-bands of a sEMG power spectrum (simply by
contracting the muscle). Each frequency band becomes a separate control channel,
which can simultaneously control different aspects of a device. Thus, we may
exploit a single muscle?s natural electrical signals in far more complex ways
than previously known. Using this underlying discovery, we have developed a new
user interface that relies on a single head muscle?s surface EMG signal, which
is easy to obtain and restricted to a small non-descript area near the ear. Our
system is somewhat similar to some electroencephalographic (EEG) based brain-
computer interfaces (BCI) in which a person learns to ?guide? a cursor to
certain positions on a computer screen. These positions on the screen could be
virtual buttons that open computer applications (human-computer interfaces),
turn on/off lights (environmental control units), or control wheelchairs
(mobility applications). Two central challenges in all ?cursor-guided? HMI
systems are 1) intent (how does the computer know where the user intended to
place the cursor?), and 2) speed at which the cursor can achieve the intended
position. These two questions are intertwined in that earlier knowledge of
intent can lead to faster systems. We propose to develop new ?intent-seeking?
algorithms that could make our HMI much faster than our currently instantiated
system. In addition, in order to conduct evaluation studies on subjects with
disabilities who cannot leave either home or hospital, we will develop a new
smaller mobile version of our hardware that is very easy to transport, setup,
and use anywhere. Intellectual Merit: The use of a single sEMG signal for
simultaneous multidimensional control in human-computer interfaces is
potentially transformative. The notion of predicting the future location of a
target (in this case a computer cursor) arises in many different applications
(e.g. aerospace engineering, robotics, brain-computer interfaces). These
applications employ a combination of mathematical and computer-science
techniques including statistical decision making, optimal filtering, and
artificial intelligence. We intend to draw from these fields to develop
accurate, fast algorithms for our human-computer interface application. From a
hardware perspective, entire new classes of computing devices are appearing that
can perform complex computations and run graphics-intensive applications from a
hand-held (or smaller) footprint. Designing our interface around these operating
platforms will advance the area of highly portable and easy-to-use assistive
interfaces. Broader Impact: A recent study initiated by the Reeve Foundation
(2009) estimates that more than 5.5 million people live with paralysis in the
United States. Many of the most severely paralyzed use ventilators to breathe,
and are confined to certain head/body positions at different times during the
day. Our goal is for severely paralyzed persons to regain some control of their
surroundings and some basic independence. We are committed to including disabled
persons in our research, not only as subjects but also as researchers
themselves. As such, our work will create an additional broader impact in terms
of research inclusiveness. In terms of intellectual broader impact, our new
intent-seeking algorithms could have applications for many computer operating
systems/programs for which disabled or non-disabled persons use various devices
to guide cursors on a screen.