* 0966920
* Novel Strategies in Cartilage Tissue Engineering: Enhancing Cartilage Stability Using Muscle-Derived Factors and Scaffold Selection
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* David Kaplan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 450,000.00

0966920 Zeng

Cartilage is a tissue that has a poor capacity for self-repair. Current tissue
engineering strategies aim to replace damaged tissue by seeding cartilage cells
or chondrocytes into three-dimensional scaffolds. Within the scaffolds, these
chondrocytes proliferate and secrete extracellular matrix, leading to the
formation of regenerated cartilage. This regenerated cartilage will then be
transplanted into the host, with the goal of assuming the function of native
cartilage. The biomechanical strength of engineered cartilage is directly
correlated to the amount of extracellular matrix produced by cartilage cells.
Yet, even regenerated cartilage with good mechanical properties may be damaged
by pro-inflammatory cytokines present in the host site, compromising the
stability of the regenerated cartilage. Thus, there is a critical need for
engineered cartilage to be resistant to pro-inflammatory cytokine-induced
degradation.

Intellectual merit. This interdisciplinary research combines the expertise of
developmental biology (Dr. Zeng) with tissue engineering (Dr. Kaplan). It aims
at solving key issues in the technology of cartilage tissue engineering by
testing the central hypothesis that muscle cells and scaffolding selection can
enhance the stability of regenerated cartilage in terms of cartilage matrix
production and inflammatory cytokine resistance. A comprehensive battery of
biochemical and biomechanical analyses are planned to test this hypothesis. Very
little is known regarding the mechanism by which muscle cells regulate cartilage
gene expression, and the role of muscle cells or scaffolding materials on
cytokine response has never been reported. Thus in addition to advancing
cartilage tissue engineering technology, completing this research will also lead
to a deeper and more complete understanding of the biology of cartilage
regulation. The strategy described in this proposal was inspired by concepts
from animal development, when tissues develop alongside each other (such as
cartilage and muscle) play crucial roles in cell-cell signaling between adjacent
tissues and their subsequent differentiation and proliferation. Thus, cartilage
formation involves not just cartilage cells, but cells of multiple surrounding
tissues. Thus our idea of mimicking embryo development may inspire the creation
of novel strategies to engineer other tissue types as well.

Broader impacts. This proposed research seeks to advance education and learning
in addition to the knowledge of science. Two new modules are designed to build
into two courses (i.e. Biomaterial and tissue engineering and Developmental
Biology), which will focus on enhancing cartilage tissue engineering using the
concepts and approaches in developmental biology, and using tissue engineering
approaches to recapitulate and investigate developmental processes. The courses
will be divided into classroom lectures, student presentations and literature
reading. Both Dr. Zeng and Dr. Kaplan belong to a variety of educational
programs, such as TAHSS (Teachers and High School Students) and BDBS (Building
Diversity in Biomedical Sciences). These programs recruit minority or
economically disadvantaged students who otherwise may not have the opportunity
to be exposed to research. The education aspect of research plan has been
carefully developed to enable students of different levels to perform
interdisciplinary research in both laboratories.

The proposed research activity will also enhance the infrastructure of the
scientific community. First, this work will directly benefit the local community
of Tufts University. In particular, it will contribute to the infrastructure of
the Tufts Bioengineering and Biotechnology Center. Through its education and
training programs, the center connects members within the academia community
(students, postdocs and faculty) and between academia and industry. Moreover,
the results obtained from this research will be shared with other scientists
through publications, and in conferences and research seminars throughout the
nation. Thus, the activities resulting from this research will have a positive
impact on the broad scientific community as well.