* 0966884
* PIRE--Ancient biodiversity and global change in the New World Tropics: A once-in-a-century opportunity along the Panama Canal
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Douglas Jones, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 3,905,831.00

The New World Tropics (NWT) contain extraordinarily high levels of biodiversity
that are threatened today by climate change, human impacts and extinction. Yet
comparatively little is known about when this biodiversity originated and how it
has evolved over time. This PIRE project seizes upon a unique opportunity for
research presented by the Panama Canal expansion project in which fossil-bearing
rock strata are being exposed for the first time since the canal's completion a
century ago - a rare and exciting opportunity to significantly advance our
knowledge of the origins and evolution of this rich biodiversity. This
international research and education collaboration between four U.S. and three
Panamanian institutions - the Panama Canal Project (PCP) - focuses on the
systematic documentation of the ancient biodiversity of the NWT in the
25-million-year record preserved in the canal basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PCP builds upon prior individual initiatives to collect and study fossil,
geological, and archaeological samples in the canal basin where remarkable
fossil discoveries provided a glimpse into the diverse ancient biota preserved
in the basin. As excavation activities intensify over the next several years the
PCP fossil recovery effort will exponentially add to the world's NWT fossil
specimen collection for immediate study and to be housed in museum collections
for future study. These fossils have the potential to transform our
understanding of several significant geobiological issues including: the
magnitude and timing of major episodes of diversity change in the NWT; the
biogeographic origins, relationships, and dispersal history of Central American
fauna and flora; the antiquity of the rainforest; and the temporal effects of
global and regional climate change on tropical biodiversity. Also ripe for
scientific exploration are fundamental questions relating to the impacts that
the emergence of the Isthmus of Panama - which severed the marine connection
between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans and created the land bridge linking
North and South America - had on ancient marine and terrestrial
biota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next generation of international scientists
produced by this project will be technically competent in their field of
specialization, internationally experienced, and have a heightened appreciation
for the broader impacts of science on society and the important role of science
education. Through innovative international experiences participants will spend
semesters or summers abroad working in the field and/or in laboratories,
teaching in partner institutions, interning in museums, and learning another
language and culture. Students and faculty will be engaged in a variety of
outreach projects in Panama and the U.S., such as seminars, websites accessible
to K-12 and public audiences, an on-line database enabling global-wide research
access to the fossils, and bilingual educational courses. The PIRE program will
add an international dimension to the career development of students earning
traditional or non-traditional science degrees, preparing them for international
engagement in academic or scientific research environments or alternate careers
in science education, museums, NGOs, government agencies, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participating institutions will use this PIRE
award and partner funding to further develop, internationalize and strengthen
scientific infrastructural capacity, particularly in fossil collections and
museum technology areas, and sustain the benefits far beyond the lifetime of the
project by institutionalizing the infrastructure and educational tools to be
developed during the project. A new museum dedicated to biodiversity, the
Biomuseo, will open near the canal in 2011 and this PIRE project will develop a
bilingual travelling exhibit, Panama Canal Discoveries. This exhibit,
complemented by coordinated web-based components, will be hosted at the three
PCP museums and other venues throughout the U.S. and Panama. The Biomuseo and
travelling exhibit are expected to engage a combined 750,000 international
visitors annually. The PCP also presents an opportunity for the University of
Florida - Florida Museum of Natural History to strengthen their recently re-
designed museum collections information system, and test how new technologies
might improve usability interfaces between PCP data resources and other on-line
and literature-based scientific research databases. This PIRE project has the
potential to leverage various institutional grants and initiatives, including
new faculty, to add value to and sustain the PCP into the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four key U.S. Institutions are: Florida Museum of
Natural History (FLMNH) at the University of Florida, Smithsonian Tropical
Research Institute (STRI) - Panama campus, New Mexico Museum of Natural History
(NMMNH), Florida State University - Panama Canal campus. The three international
institutions are: Biomuseo (Ancón, Panamá), Universidad de Panamá, and Sociedad
Mastozoológica de Panamá (SOMASPA). Panamanian funding partners include the
Secretaría Nacional de Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación (SENACYT) and the
Autoridad del Canal de Panamá (ACP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-
funded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering, the Division of
Earth Sciences, and the Division of Research on Learning in Formal and Informal
Settings.