* 0966014
* Ligand-Actuated Fluorescent Protein Biosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2015
* Eric Shusta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 316,324.00

Molecular detection is a pervasive challenge in biology, medicine, and the
environmental sciences. Most often, the detection process is mediated by
antibodies or other binding moieties that specifically recognize the target
molecules. Subsequently, the target is imaged or detected by a secondary means
such as fluorescence or enzymatic reaction. Recently, we and others have
engineered fluorescence proteins endowed with binding capability that allow
facile one-step detection of target ligands as a result of their intrinsic
fluorescence properties. While a suitable substitute for antibodies or other
binding scaffolds, the true potential in a fluorescent binding protein would be
if the fluorescence generated were a function of the target ligand presence. In
other words, such a ligand-actuated fluorescent protein biosensor would undergo
reconstitution or changes in the chromophore upon binding to cognate ligand
yielding a fluorescence readout. Here we endeavor to create an ideal ligand-
actuated fluorescence protein platform that is compatible with broad library-
based identification approaches, analogous to those used in antibody
engineering, capable of yielding ligand-actuated fluorescent proteins against a
wide range of molecular targets.

In addition to the research objectives, this proposal possesses significant
broader impact. First, it provides a new conceptual framework and toolkit for
the creation of ligand-responsive biosensors. In addition, ligand-responsive
biosensors could revolutionize the study of processes in living cells and the
facile detection of contaminants or toxic materials. Next, the project is
designed to train a graduate student and several undergraduate students in the
protein engineering field to prepare them for careers in industry and academia.
To date, the PI has trained 33 undergraduate and graduate students, several of
whom are from underrepresented backgrounds. Research results will be integrated
into courses that the PI regularly teaches as protein engineering modules in his
"Design of Biological Molecules" graduate course and as coupled transport-
reaction problems in his undergraduate mass transfer course. Finally, research
results will also be disseminated to high school students in the form of the
Wisconsin High School State Science Olympiad, through an "Applied Protein
Modeling for Medical Uses" symposium that the PI organizes and hosts.