* 0966086
* Attracting and Retaining Promising Transfer Students into STEM Fields
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Christopher Jarvis, Hampshire College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2017
* USD 441,550.00

The effort of the college to open access to transfer students comes at a time
when increasingly sophisticated methodological methods are being developed to
forge connections across science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) fields. This project acts as a catalyst for these developments and offers
up to 20 transfer students a pathway to achieve bachelor degrees. This project
is motivated by the institutional objective to better attract and retain science
concentrators in STEM fields. Additionally, a core team of faculty, whose work
investigates questions in computational science, artificial intelligence, and
the biological sciences, are interested in building structural and cultural
cohesion around concentrators who may already be motivated by work and life
experiences to excel in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
While the college has done well attracting underrepresented students in STEM
fields, the overall attrition rate for underrepresented groups is somewhat high.
The college has begun to take deliberate and careful measures to address these
attrition rates. This project allows the college to offer a more robust
financial aid package to help to attract and retain transfer students. These
transfer students provide diversification, which strengthens the overall
demographic makeup of the college and offers a more diverse range of
perspectives in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The inquiry-
driven, cross-disciplinary approach to teaching science at the college has
demonstrated success in attracting students from diverse backgrounds to STEM
fields. According to recent admissions data, the college graduates more science
concentrators (15%) than it initially attracts (10%). Moreover, from 2005-08,
women and students from underrepresented groups comprised 70% of science
concentrators. Many of these students enter a range of scientific and medical
careers, or pursue graduate study upon matriculating. This project allows
faculty to work with a greater number of students and is expected to result in
higher numbers of talented graduates prepared to make meaningful contributions
to national and international scientific challenges.