* 0966407
* Immunoliposome Formation via Microfluidic Flow Focusing
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Don DeVoe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 03/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

0966407&lt;br/&gt;DeVoe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The utility of liposomes as
functional nanoparticles for biological and biomedical applications is presently
limited by the bulk production methods used for their manufacture. For example,
although considerable progress has been made towards the commercialization of
liposomes as drug delivery vehicles, existing production methods result in
polydisperse formulations that exhibit variations in drug encapsulation levels,
blood clearance rates, and cell uptake, with negative consequences for drug
efficacy and toxicity. Our goal here is to develop a fundamental understanding
of the physical processes which drive liposome self-assembly in a new
microfluidic process, based on the hydrodynamic focusing of two miscible solvent
streams. By taking advantage of the unique interactions that occur at the
submicron boundary between the solvent streams, small and uniform unilamellar
liposomes may be generated in a simple integrated microfluidic chip. We propose
a combined computational and experimental effort to improve our understanding of
the liposome selfassembly process within the microfluidic system, and apply this
understanding to optimize the process for the integrated and in-line formation
of functionalized immunoliposomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort is expected to result in three
specific advances in the nanoparticle arena, namely (1) theoretical and direct
experimental evaluation leading to an improved understanding of the liposome
formation process, made possible by the ability of the microfluidic system to
precisely specify chemical and molecular distributions within a well-defined
laminar mixing zone, (2) a multi-scale model coupling the underlying physics
with system-level parameters including channel geometries and flow conditions,
and (3) application of this model to demonstrate fully integrated system for the
on-demand production of immunoliposomes with minimal polydispersity, and with
diameters that may be dynamically tuned by the simple adjustment of on-chip flow
conditions. Thus the combined computational and experimental approach will
impact our fundamental understanding of the liposome self-assembly process while
also leading to the development of a unique and novel tool for controlled
liposome and immunoliposome production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to generate liposomes with tunable and
narrowly distributed diameters over a wide size range has important implications
for and range of biological and biomedical applications. The high throughput
process is directly scalable to large volume production of encapsulated drugs,
together with in-line decoration of liposomes with antibodies or other ligands
for targeted drug delivery. As a result of these features, the method offers
great promise as a simple and low-cost approach to the production of
personalized drug preparations in point-of-care settings. Beyond drug delivery,
homogeneous liposomes are also of great value for application to immunoassays,
where controlled signal amplification can only occur when the liposome
populations exhibit a narrow size distribution [1]. In this application,
fluorescent encapsulants within the immunoliposomes provide signal amplification
for each antibody-antigen interaction, enabling highly sensitive detection. The
microfluidic system itself offers a potential base for future development of an
integrated immunosensor platform employing on-demand formation of
immunoliposomes. The technology will find application in a range of biosensing
systems, including portable and ultrasensitive quantitative diagnostic tests.
Finally, the project will contribute to the education of next-generation
students at the graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 levels. The project will
provide interdisciplinary training of one Ph.D. Bioengineering student who will
receive training across the fields of bioengineering, mechanical engineering,
and chemistry, providing a solid bridge across these disciplines. Undergraduate
students will also be recruited to particulate in the research project through
an established NSF sponsored Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering REU Program,
and local high school seniors will participate in selected experimental aspects
of the project through an established internship program.