* 0966844
* Collaborative Research:  VOCALS--Structure and Mechanisms of Coupled General Circulation Models' Systematic Biases in Southeast Pacific
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Toshiaki Shinoda, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2011
* USD 110,584.00

This project is a contribution to VOCALS (the VAMOS Ocean-Cloud-Atmosphere-Land
Study).

The primary goal is to improve our understanding of the structure and mechanisms
of the systematic biases in the Southeast Pacific (SEP) in coupled general
circulation models (CGCMs). Simulations by CGCMs and ocean GCMs will be compared
with the extensive measurements from the Variability of the American MOnsoon
Systems (VAMOS) Ocean-Cloud-Atmosphere-Land Study (VOCALS) Regional Experiment
(REx) and long-term observational datasets. The simulations of 24 CGCMs
participating in the Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth
Assessment Report (AR4) will be examined, together with forced experiments using
one ocean GCM. The investigators will diagnose the structure and mechanisms of
the biases in stratocumulus clouds and surface fluxes in the SEP in all 24 IPCC
AR4 CGCMs, analyze the upper ocean currents, thermal structures and heat budget
in this region in these models, examine their air-sea coupling processes in this
region, especially how well the ocean-atmosphere feedbacks are simulated, and
conduct forced ocean GCM experiments to examine the sensitivity of upper ocean
processes to atmospheric forcings relevant to the biases in the AGCMs.

Broader impacts of this work are in its potential implications for improving
global climate models. Proper representation of ocean-atmosphere-land coupled
processes in the stratocumulus deck region in global climate models is a major
challenge for their further improvement. The project will promote
interdisciplinary training through support of a graduate student.