* 0966130
* IGERT:   Geoinformatics for Environmental and Energy Modeling and Prediction (GEEMaP)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2018
* David Bennett, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2018
* USD 2,655,254.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award to the
University of Iowa supports an interdisciplinary graduate training program
designed to train students to use advanced computational methods to address
real-world problems in environmental science and energy production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This novel Ph.D. training program uses team-based research
projects, internships, and international research experiences to produce a new
generation of quantitative and computational scientists who are prepared for
interdisciplinary collaboration with engineers, social and natural scientists,
government policy-makers, and industrial leaders in the global arena of
environment and energy production. Geoinformatics--the science of measuring,
storing, managing, analyzing and visualizing data related to phenomena occurring
on or near the earth's surface--plays a key unifying role in the curriculum.
Applications include prevention, control, and mitigation of floods; remediation
of air, soil, and water contamination; and increasing wind and hydroelectric
energy production--challenges that directly impact human health, safety, and
quality of life. The project will broaden the participation of students from
populations underrepresented in the science, technology, engineering and
mathematical fields (women, U.S. ethnic minorities, and low-income and rural
students) through coordination with established and successful recruitment
programs at the University of Iowa, offering these students a unique program of
innovative science, policy, and technology-based rotations. Student and faculty
research results will contribute new computational tools and methods as well as
scientific insights that will support the formulation of new environmental
policy at the local, regional, national, and global
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.