* 0966060
* IGERT: Reverse Ecology: Computational Integration of Genomes, Organisms, and Environments
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2017
* Mitchell Sogin, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,976,843.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
a novel graduate program in Reverse Ecology, training Ph.D. students at the
interface of computational biology, genomics and environmental science. It
leverages new education and research collaborations between Brown University and
the Marine Biological Laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reverse Ecology is the
application of genomic approaches to living systems to uncover the genetic bases
of functional variation in nature. The revolution in high-throughput DNA
sequencing and gene expression technologies redefines the notion of a "model"
organism. Interrogation of genomes from animals, plants and microbial
communities can identify genetic markers of processes at multiple scales:
ecological, physiological, developmental, and transcriptional. The full
interpretation of these powerful datasets demands intellectual dialogue between
ecosystems ecologists, microbial geneticists, biogeochemists, and computational
biologists. The program will train a cohort of Ph.D.s who can apply these
technologies creatively to convert genomic and computational power into novel
insights of organismal function in nature. Program highlights include 1) a year-
long immersion course focused at Long Term Ecological Research sites where
students design an experiment, use high-throughput genomic and computational
strategies to test hypotheses and prepare multi-authored manuscripts for
publication; 2) jointly mentored research rotations where students and faculty
cross disciplinary boundaries; and 3) career training integrating grant writing,
public speaking, ethics, diversity and international perspectives on science.
This graduate program's research themes include 1) microbial and comparative
genomics; 2) genetic responses to environmental stressors; 3) assembling genomes
from environmental samples, and will engage IBM and the J. Craig Venter
Institute in creating a new model for graduate education. Students will be
trained in the context of university, institutional, and corporate environments
to become leaders in the identification and integration of scientific questions
across formerly distant disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen
discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.