* 0966959
* Novel Solid Amine Sorbents and Their Uses in Fluidized-Bed Process for Carbon Dioxide Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Robert Pfeffer, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2013
* USD 241,803.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing use of fossil fuels to meet energy
needs during the past three decades has led to much higher carbon dioxide
emissions into the atmosphere. Rising CO2 concentrations have been reported to
account for half of the greenhouse effect that causes global warming. It is
therefore essential to develop efficient and cost-effective CO2 management
schemes to curb its emission into the atmosphere. The very high costs associated
with current CO2 separation technologies require research and development of new
technologies that will allow for economically acceptable methods for the capture
and sequestration of CO2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of their unique
properties due to their large porosity, open pore structure, very large surface
area and very small primary particle size per unit mass, we believe that
nanostructured, high surface area, high porosity, aerogels and/or silica
nanopowders modified with amine groups will act as efficient super sorbents to
separate CO2 from a flue gas stream. The adsorbed CO2 can then be desorbed at
higher temperature, so as to regenerate the sorbents so that they can be reused
over many cycles. However, no work has been reported on using these types of
supports to immobilize amine to act as sorbents for CO2 capture. We also plan to
configure the nanostructured sorbents in a micro-jet assisted fluidized bed
rather than a packed bed. Using a fluidized bed has many advantages over a
packed bed, such as low pressure drop, good mixing, temperature uniformity,
continuous powder handling, and higher catalyst or sorbent effectiveness
factors, which heretofore have not been utilized because of the difficulty in
obtaining smooth, bubble-less fluidization of ultra-fine powders or
nanostructured aerogels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research
project will include synthesizing the amine surface-modified aerogels and silica
nanopowders using a variety of chemicals with active amine functionalities,
either chemically bonded to the support or immobilized within the porous
support, and using different coating methods to produce an optimum amine
modified sorbent. We will study the amount of amine loading and its interaction
with the support by TGA/DSC and FTIR. CO2 adsorption/desorption equilibrium and
kinetics on these super sorbents will be studied using a Cahn microbalance. We
will then configure the most promising amine modified sorbents, first in a
packed bed (for comparison purposes) and then in a fluidized bed, to measure
their ability to separate carbon dioxide from simulated flue gas. We will
regenerate the sorbents by raising the temperature and determining the effect of
cycling the sorbent over many cycles on their adsorption/desorption and
stability properties. Modeling will focus on understanding the sorption
equilibrium and sorption kinetics of amine modified sorbents and predicting the
performance of the fluidized bed under different operating conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Undergraduate and graduate students
working on the research will receive broad education and training in particle
technology, nanotechnology, fluidization, separation processes, and
environmental science. They will also have an additional advantage of gaining an
industrial perspective by interacting with Cabot and AVEKA engineers who have
agreed to lend their expertise, and provide guidance and advice to the project.
The Co-PIs will serve as guest lecturers in appropriate ASU undergraduate or
graduate courses, where they will present different aspects of the research to
ASU students in the classroom. The Co-PIs will also strive to target the large
ASU undergraduate minority and woman talent pool to join the project as research
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique combination of using amine modified,
very high surface area, nanostructured aerogels or silica nanopowders rather
than micron-sized solid supports with a fluidized bed process is a
transformational approach in developing a new technology for the efficient
capture of CO2 from flue gas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existing technologies
for CO2 separation from flue gas consume at least 20% of the energy generated by
burning coal or natural gas and also involve substantial equipment and operation
costs. The successful implementation of the proposed research should offer
substantial energy saving for CO2 capture because of improved CO2 sorption
capacity, recyclability of the sorbent, reduced pressure drop of the fluidized
bed and the ability for continuous operation. It will also serve to increase
industry?s awareness of the myriad opportunities that exist for using
nanostructured and nano-size particles in unique applications and will
contribute to ensuring US competitiveness and technological lead in the area of
CO2 capture, the reduction of greenhouse gases, and the preservation of the
environment.