* 0966931
* EAGER: Quantification of Dissolved Titanium in Open Ocean Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Richard Murray, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/29/2012
* USD 115,224.00

An important aspect of studies targeting inorganic and organic proxies of
particle flux to the open ocean has been to trace aluminosilicate inputs to
constrain sources of atmospheric dust and fluvial material, both of which are
critical for understanding biogeochemical cycling and climate variability in
space and time. Quantifying detrital material in particles and sediments is
essential to determine dust and fluvial fluxes, so as to account for
compositional dilution (i.e., normalization to 100% as a closed array) that
affects measured composition. Accounting for the inorganic aluminosilicate
material is vital in order to "remove" the terrigenous component from the total
flux.

Along with the aluminum and the isotope Th232, the element titanium (Ti) is
commonly used towards these ends, but the assumption that these species are
truly only contained in the refractory aluminosilicate phase(s) needs to be
considered more carefully. There are less than five published profiles of Ti in
the open ocean, and greater coverage is needed to fully understand the complex
biogeochemistry of this important element. Without such an understanding, the
use of Ti as a tracer will not be to its fullest potential. Pioneering work in
the early 1990s laid the groundwork for a resin-based pre-concentration
procedure followed by quantification by ICP-MS analysis.

With funding through this EAGER award, researchers at Boston University will (a)
develop a methodology to quantify dissolved Ti in open ocean seawater, and (b)
apply this methodology to a suite of previously gathered samples to test whether
the GEOTRACES rosette sampling system, small parts of which are constructed of
Ti-bearing materials, can be used to gather seawater samples that are
uncontaminated with respect to Ti. The new analytical procedure is based on a
new resin, NOBIAS CHELATE-PA1. This EDTA-based resin is tailored specifically
for GEOTRACES research, and has been shown to result in excellent pre-
concentration, followed by ICP-MS analysis, for a suite of other low-
concentration elements. This study will be the first to solely focus on Ti. In
consultation with collaborators at GSO-URI, MIT, and UC Santa Cruz, the Boston
University team have developed an analytical research plan comprising the study
of coastal seawater samples, Standard Reference Materials, calibration samples
(e.g., SAFe), non-GEOTRACES samples gathered with established clean sampling
techniques, and GEOTRACES materials. This strategy will allow the team to
achieve the dual goals of establishing the new technique and testing the
suitability of the GEOTRACES rosette for Ti.

Broader Impacts: The proposed research is expected to have several significant
Broader Impacts. First, the research has clear benefit to society in that the
ability to eventually understand the geochemical cycling of Ti will
significantly improve our ability to trace dust and fluvial fluxes -- both of
which will assist in the study of climate change over multiple temporal and
spatial scales. The project also will enhance infrastructure for research and
education, by establishing collaborations between multiple institutions (Boston
University, University of Rhode Island, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
UC-Santa Cruz). This proposal also speaks to the development of next-generation
instrumentation and analytical methodologies. Finally, the lead investigator has
a long record of incorporating his research results into learning and education
at the undergraduate and graduate level, and this project is well-suited to
continuing such activities.