* 0966151
* Recruiting and Keeping Undergraduate Students in the Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Keith Pannell, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 08/31/2016
* USD 552,000.00

The College of Science at the University of Texas-El Paso (UTEP) is to offer 12
S-STEM scholarships, to talented freshmen in financial need, who major in the
disciplines of biology, chemistry, mathematics, geology and physics. The
scholarship is to be up to $10,000 per year for two years. The focus is to be on
recruiting Hispanic scholars from local high schools in the community, who
demonstrate an aptitude for science. Scholarships are to carry students over the
first two years of their degree plan, i.e. to reach junior status in the 4 year
institution. In the case of selected scholars not meeting the financial need
status for a $10,000 scholarship, more scholarships are to be offered. In
addition to a direct financial scholarship the students are to be immediately
housed in the University Student Village so that they become immersed in the
College experience. In addition, the incoming S-STEM freshmen student cohort of
6 is to be enrolled in a Learning Community with other incoming students who
declare the same major. The Learning Community involves a University Seminar
class, which will be major specific. Each of the Scholars is also to be enrolled
in the same Introduction to Research class every semester during their freshman
and sophomore years. The second year students will automatically become peer
leaders/guides to their incoming colleagues. Students are prepared for and will
be encouraged to engage in undergraduate research. The faculty member with whom
they choose to do research will be their mentor and advisor until graduation.
The intent is to graduate at least 30 students in 4-5 years who will then go to
graduate school. The request is $550,381 for five years.