* 0966967
* Systematic Studies of Plasma Reactions on Dynamic Surfaces, Using a Novel Rotating Substrate
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* Vincent Donnelly, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 04/30/2013
* USD 299,999.00

0966967&lt;br/&gt;Donnelly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will systematically investigate
selected chemistry occurring at the boundary between a gaseous plasma discharge
and the walls of the reactor that contains the plasma. Such basic knowledge of
the plasma-wall boundary is lacking in plasma science and is critically needed
for control of plasma processing such as etching for fine-line pattern transfer
in silicon integrated circuits and other future nano-technology. To gain access
to the plasma-wall boundary, a cylindrical substrate within the plasma chamber
wall will be rapidly rotated, allowing portions of the surface to be
periodically exposed to the plasma and then analyzed. Previously, we used this
?spinning wall? method to investigate surface recombination reactions of oxygen
atoms in an oxygen plasma and chlorine atoms in a chlorine plasma, and as well
as surface reactions that form chlorine oxide and chlorine dioxide in plasmas
with mixtures of oxygen and chlorine. The new studies will focus on four topics
of critical importance to understanding and controlling chemistry at surfaces
immersed in plasma: 1) What is the role of weakly bound stable adsorbates such
as Cl2 on recombination of Cl atoms? We previously found that physisorbed Cl2
blocks sites for Cl recombination. We will extend the study to a much wider
range of conditions and investigate other suspected cases such as Br2 and
fluorocarbons. 2) How widespread is, and what is the mechanism for, catalyzed
recombination by trace metals, as we recently discovered for O in the presence
of sub-monolayer coverages of copper? The oxidation-reduction mechanism proposed
for copper will be tested with other metals, and recombining atoms. 3) The
relative importance of the two prevailing mechanisms for surface reactions (the
so-called Langmuir-Hinshelwood or delayed reaction vs. the Eley Rideal or prompt
reaction) will be determined for selected atoms and small molecules. Except for
hydrogen atoms on pristine surfaces, such information is almost completely
lacking. 4) What are the roles of ion and electron bombardment on surface
chemical reactions? Positive ions bombarding the surface can create or destroy
reaction sites, while electron bombardment can cause decomposition of adsorbed
layers, as well as create negative ions and reduce catalytic activity of higher
oxidation states of trace metals. The proposed work will be an extremely
challenging, basic research project that is critical for improving our
understanding of plasma-surface interactions with an emphasis on plasmas used
for etching of nano-scale features in integrated circuits and other future
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will provide challenging projects for two graduate student and one or more
undergraduates, with rich scientific and educational payoffs, as well as
technological advances. While it will improve our understanding of surface
reactions under complex plasma conditions, it will also contribute to diverse
areas such as space physics, combustion chemistry, catalysis, and atmospheric
heterogeneous reactions. In addition, the new methods for isolating such complex
reactions have broad implications for and potential impact on these diverse
areas, as well as basic surface science. Several outreach activities are
planned, including involving a high school teacher in the research, and the
participation by undergraduate students through programs such as the Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) at UH. Finally, the participation of
underrepresented students (more than half of the University of Houston
undergraduate students are minorities) will be pursued.