* 0966142
* IGERT: Complex Scene Perception
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* David Brainard, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2017
* USD 2,697,643.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award to the
University of Pennsylvania supports the development of a new training paradigm
for perception scientists and engineers, and is designed to provide them with a
unique grasp of the computational and psychophysical underpinnings of the
phenomena of perception. It will create a new role model of a well-rounded
perceptual scientist with a firm grasp of both computational and experimental
analytic skills. The existence of such a cadre of U.S. researchers will
contribute to the country's global competitiveness in the growing machine
perception and robotics industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and training
activities are organized around five thematic areas related to complex scene
perception: (1) Spatial perception and navigation; (2) Perception of material
and terrain properties; (3) Neural responses to natural signals, saliency and
attention; (4) Object Recognition in context and visual memory; and (5) Agile
Perception. Interdisciplinary research will enable new insights into the
astounding performance of human and animal perception as well as the design of
new algorithms that will make robots perceive and act in complex
scenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT trainees will commit in advance of acceptance
to a five-year graduate training program, comprising the following components:
(1) Core disciplinary training; (2) one-year cross-disciplinary training in a
chosen second discipline; (3) participation in two foundational and one
integrational IGERT courses; (4) attendance of an interdisciplinary IGERT
seminar; (5) co-advising throughout the 5 graduate years by an interdisciplinary
faculty team ; and (6) completion of the Ph.D.
dissertation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.