* 0966248
* IRES: US-Germany Joint Study of X-Ray Optics Thermomechanical Stability and Control
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Alex Volinsky, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2014
* USD 149,970.00

In this IRES project supported by the Office of International Science and
Engineering, U.S. graduate and undergraduate students under the direction of
Professor Alex Volinsky at the University of South Florida will participate in a
collaborative engineering research effort with two German institutions, the
Technical University in Dresden and Deutsches Elektronen-Synchotron (DESY)
research center in Hamburg. Over the course of three years a total of 15 U.S.
students will work in teams on optimization and control of the thermomechanical
stability of X-ray optics using both Finite Elements (FE) modeling and X-ray
diffraction experiments. The students will receive special training in
thermomechanical modeling and X-ray diffraction prior to their international
visit. The international collaborators include Professor Dirk Meyer in Dresden
and Professor Dmitri Novikov at DESY.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heating of X-ray
optics is a major problem with synchrotrons and in-house X-ray sources, since it
causes beam distortions and makes beam conditioning a challenging task. Only one
degree Celsius change in surface temperature significantly affects the
diffracted X-ray beam wavelength, rendering it unusable. Currently liquid
nitrogen is used to cool diffraction-based synchrotron optics, but through
design improvements and optimization the results of this project could help
significantly to improve the thermomechanical stability of the X-ray optics
without requiring such cumbersome operating conditions. The students involved in
this project will gain an invaluable research experience in an international
setting, helping contribute to the development of a new generation of a skilled
technical workforce with a multidisciplinary and global perspective.