* 0966929
* SoCS:  Socio-Computational Systems to Support Public Engagement and Deliberation
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Walter Lance Bennett, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2014
* USD 749,231.00

Public engagement and deliberation play key roles in democratic society. Yet,
civic engagement is uneven at best, and thoughtful public deliberation about
major issues is often displaced either by apathy or shrill and extreme voices.
This project develops new ways for citizens and government to communicate using
social-computational systems. The project develops systems that facilitate
adding crisp, relatively neutral summaries alongside advocacy statements;
jointly-authored position statements, with flexible ways to sign on to existing
statements, fork new ones, and understand and track changes; and enhanced
moderation techniques. A partnership with the City of Seattle is enabling the
researchers to test their ideas and systems in actual use.

The research studies a set of difficult and unsolved research issues in social-
computational systems. How can systems support alternate divisions of labor
among citizens and government, including effective support for automating some
tasks and making the remaining tasks easy for human participants to work on? How
can systems effectively support understanding a range of positions, and
highlight who is agreeing or disagreeing and why? How can engagement systems
allow and encourage effectively building on others' ideas and opinions? How can
they handle strategic activity in which individuals or groups flood the system
with duplicate posts, or create multiple accounts to give the impression of
widespread support? How can input be effectively summarized and presented? The
broader impacts of the work are substantial: if successful, this research will
strengthen democratic process by facilitating effective citizen participation
and deliberation.