* 0966419
* Understanding Cellulose Primary Thermo-chemical Reactions to Enhance the Yields of Anhydro-saccharides from Fast Pyrolisis
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Armando McDonald, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2012
* USD 297,239.00

0966419&lt;br/&gt;Garcia-Perez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although biomass
fast pyrolysis followed by the hydrotreatment of resulting bio-oils is an
efficient approach to convert lignin into green gasoline, the conversion
efficiencies of cellulose to valuable products is low. Enhancing the selectivity
of cellulose thermo-chemical reactions towards the production of levoglucosan
and cellobiosan is critical to increasing the overall efficiency of this
technology. The preliminary data obtained suggest that modifying cellulose
structure through pre-treatment (formation of active cellulose) in conjunction
with a better control of pyrolysis conditions (reduction of pyrolysis
temperature and addition of small amount of acids) could be an effective way to
enhance the selectivity towards the production of levoglucosan. The major
drawback of this approach is that undesirable cross-linking reactions leading to
the formation of charcoal might happen if pre-treatment is not well controlled.
Furthermore, the presence of lignin seems to inhibit the depolymerization
reactions responsible for the formation of anhydrosugars. Previous studies
reported in the literature suggest that the inhibitory effect of lignin can be
mitigated if small amounts of acids are added to the pyrolysis reactor. Thus the
primary goal of this project is to advance understanding of the kinetics of
reactions happening during pretreatment (active cellulose formation and cross
linking) and of those happening during fast pyrolysis (active cellulose
formation, cross linking, depolymerization and fragmentation) and to identify
the optimal combination of pretreatment and fast pyrolysis conditions maximizing
the yields of levoglucosan and cellobiosan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will be carried out in two stages. The first stage will consist of fundamental
studies to establish the kinetics of active cellulose formation and cross
linking. The kinetic studies will be carried out in a wire mesh reactor. A
mathematical model to describe the behavior of pretreatment reactors will be
proposed and validated in a continuous auger reactor available at WSU. In the
second stage the kinetics of fragmentation and depolymerization reactions will
be obtained and these kinetic equations will be used to obtain the optimal
pretreatment and pyrolysis conditions to maximize the yield of levoglucosan and
cellobiosan. Blends of รก-cellulose and lignin will be pretreated and pyrolysed
at these conditions and the resulting oils will be fully characterized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort will advance the science required to
design new pretreatment and pyrolysis technologies to enhance the production of
anhydrosugars from lignocellulosic materials. The PI is building a program at
WSU in biomass thermo-chemical conversion which integrates research and
education. A new course in "biomass thermo-chemical conversion technologies" is
now offered. The new installations planned herein will be used for this course
and will be accessible to other research groups. WSU has launched a new
initiative for high school students called "Imagine Tomorrow"
(http://imagine.wsu.edu/). This project will offer scholarships to some of the
winners of this competition to work in the PI's lab during the summers of 2010,
2011 and 2012. A workshop in bio-fuel production will be prepared for high
school students attending WSU summer camps. In addition to publishing the
outcome of the research in peer reviewed journals and conference proceedings,
the results will be disseminated to the public through the WSU Energy Program
website (http://www.energy.wsu.edu/).