* 0966274
* Leadership Development Program in Engineering and Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* John Nicklow, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 05/31/2016
* USD 597,591.00

The Leadership Development Program is modeled after a successful 3 year
scholarship program that was funded by an alum for talented economically-
disadvantaged transfer students seeking a Bachelor of Science degrees in
engineering and technology. The program provided students with a monetary award,
additional training and mentoring opportunities that prepared them for
leadership roles in engineering. The program has proven to be a tremendous
success with all six students of its first cohort graduating within two years of
transferring to SIUC and securing fast-track careers. In continuing this model,
applicants are chosen from Illinois' southern-most 11 community college
districts. A total of twenty-nine recipients receive $9000 scholarships their
junior and senior years. These scholarships remove economic barriers that would
prohibit a largely first generation college student demographic from achieving a
professional career, and improve the recruitment, retention, graduation rates,
and job placement of these students. In particular, the project aims to achieve
a three-year graduation rate (i.e., four and one half years after beginning at
the community-college level) of at least ninety percent and become self-
sustaining through corporate sponsors interested in developing a diverse
engineering population. Support activities for scholarship recipients build upon
the College of Engineering's many existing student support programs (i.e., peer
mentoring, minority support programs, and tutoring). The intellectual merit of
this project is the determination as to whether retention, graduation, and job
placement rates of students attracted to engineering and technology can be
increased by providing financial support and by implementing student support and
leadership programs. The broader impact of the project is an increase in the
breadth of social and economic backgrounds of students graduating in engineering
and, thus, of prepared individuals entering the job market.