* 0966977
* Design and Characterization of Alpha-Sheet Compounds
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* Valerie Daggett, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 04/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0966977 Daggett

Intellectual Merits: Some years ago a novel protein secondary structure was
"discovered" by computer simulations of amyloidogenic proteins. Interestingly,
this structure, รก-sheet, was initially predicted by Pauling and Corey in 1951.
This structure is observed under amyloidogenic conditions but not under normal
conditions. The structure is adopted in a variety of proteins with completely
different starting, biologically active conformations. This structure is
proposed to represent a generic toxic amyloidogenic structure. This proposal
seeks to design small stable รก-sheets to characterize their properties
biophysically, including directly determining the structure using experimental
techniques. Furthermore, the designs will be tested for their ability to prevent
amyloid formation in the protein transthyretin (and formerly known as
prealbumin) and to preferentially bind the toxic form of the protein because of
its complementarity. The proposal marries computational and experimental
approaches to take a prediction from simulation and prove that the structure
exists and corresponds to a state of critical importance to human disease.

Broader Impact: The results from this study will be published in peer-reviewed
high-quality science journals. In addition, the work will be presented in a less
technical form on the Daggett Group website. Since the work makes use of the
Dynameomics Database for peptide design, the results will also be featured at
www.dynameomics.org. This site receives about 500 hits a day from around the
world. Both undergraduate and graduate students will be encouraged to articipate
in the project. Given that the project contains both computational and
experimental components, it provides broad training potential. Those involved in
the computational work will have the opportunity to use a government high
performance computing facility.

There are also potentially broad implications to the proposed research for human
health. The research should provide fundamental information critical to the
future development of diagnostic and therapeutic agents for amyloid diseases. As
the demographics shift and our population ages, amyloid diseases are on the rise
and Alzheimer's disease alone is projected to reach epidemic proportions in the
next 5 years. For most of these diseases there is no cure and no way to diagnose
the disease aside from an autopsy. While the work proposed here is more basic,
the รก-sheet idea is novel and may provides another route to attack these
problems, which is desirable since the conventional approaches have made little
headway. In addition, there is increasing interest in using amyloids as
biomaterials for a variety of nanotechnology, including biomedical,
applications. Here it is very desirable to have more information about toxic
species addressed in this proposal so that they can be avoided.