* 0966520
* Collaborative Research: Documenting Wounmeu (NOA)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Julie Velasquez Runk, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 08/31/2014
* USD 224,082.00

This project documents Wounmeu (NOA), a Chocó language of Central and South
America, via the analysis of sixty years of recorded myths and legends from
Colombia and Panama. There are approximately 7,000 adult Wounaan in Panama and
the same number in Colombia according to the last censuses. The research goals
of this project have been co-determined with the aid of Wounaan leaders and
esteemed story-tellers in Panama. They include 1) preparation and archiving of
audio recordings of Wounaan myths and legends, 2) documentation and analysis of
the Wounaan language and culture through transcription and translation of the
myths and legends, 3) a Wounmeu-Spanish dictionary, 4) training of native
speakers in language documentation, and 5) dissemination of the research
results.

This research reflects the speaker community's passionate interest in language
documentation and conservation as they experience their children's loss of
language fluency. It documents a small and understudied language, Wounmeu, one
of only two languages in the Chocó language group. For language documentation,
this project draws on an uncommon historical depth of cultural and linguistic
materials spanning sixty years. It makes available and permanently archives
these historic audio recordings. Central to this project is the training of
Wounaan, a historically underrepresented group, in language documentation and
dissemination. Wounaan will be the main workforce in this project, and project
researchers will train Wounaan in linguistic skills, cultural and language
documentation, materials development, and computer skills. In addition, this
research will greatly enhance the infrastructure available to Wounaan via the
Foundation for the Development of Wounaan People in Panama, including computing
and internet availability. The project also provides training for a joint
anthropology and linguistics graduate student. Conference papers and articles
will report on linguistics and collaborative language documentation.