* 0966829
* Low - Dimensional Transition Metal Oxides with Correlated Electronic Properties: Synthesis and Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2015
* Martha Greenblatt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 04/30/2015
* USD 586,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the experimental program,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program is to synthesize
new materials with strongly correlated electronic properties that are on the
verge of electronic and structural instabilities, and to fine-tune the competing
electronic interactions through the unstable region in a controlled way.
Experience shows that materials with novel behavior are likely to be discovered
when competing electronic interactions exist. In low-dimensional (LD) materials
the interplay of competing electronic interactions is enhanced. The object of
this project is the synthesis and characterization of new reduced/oxidized-
transition metal compounds with quasi-LD properties. A number of systems will be
investigated which share the common feature of interplay between localized and
itinerant degrees of freedom, a highly variable conduction electron bandwidth,
which may be tuned by changing e.g., the crystal structure, chemical
composition, external strain and degree of disorder. The variability of
bandwidth leads to a variety of important phenomena, including metal-insulator
transitions (or sharp crossovers) driven by variation of temperature, pressure,
magnetic field, electric field, illumination, lattice distortion and other
variables. We expect that in the vicinity of these transitions the transport,
electronic/magnetic properties will also change dramatically and will be
tunable. The experimental studies will be augmented by theoretical investigation
of the electronic structure by density functional theoretical calculations.
These studies are expected to yield novel materials, provide fundamental
insights into correlated electronic and magnetic behavior and ultimately allow
the enhancement and control of electron-phonon and/or electron-electron
interactions and the concurrent magnetic couplings that lead to interesting and
useful macroscopic properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide advanced materials for
potential applications in microelectronics and magneto-electronics, including
computers, sensors and communications. These are critical areas for maintaining
US technological leadership worldwide. Moreover, the education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in solid state
chemistry/materials science is essential to meet the technological challenges of
the twenty first century. The research proposed is highly interdisciplinary.
Collaborative work of the PI with other chemists, physicists and ceramicists is
well established nationally and internationally. Single crystals and other
material products of the work are provided to the scientific community for
detailed further investigations.