* 0966410
* International: Sustainable Water Management Research Experience in Bolivia: Influence of a Dynamic World on Technological and Societal Solutions
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Linda Phillips, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 04/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Water management is fundamental to human societies, and requires scientists and
engineers who can integrate cultural, institutional, and international
dimensions of water resources with sophisticated technologies and solutions.
This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project engages U.S.
students in water management research in Cochabamba, Bolivia. Undergraduate and
Ph.D. students with engineering and anthropology backgrounds will collect field
data to: 1) assess the treatment performance and carbon neutrality of sanitation
technology and 2) develop mathematical models to estimate the sustainability of
water supplies from natural springs and rainwater under scenarios of population
growth, urbanization, development, agricultural land use, and climate change.
Students will partner with an engineer from the community-based nongovernmental
organization Aqueous Solutions, and will also work with students and faculty
from the Universidad Tecnol√≥gica Boliviana, under the mentorship of faculty
member Dr. Santiago Morales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will
integrate their research with participation in a new 16-credit Graduate
Certificate in Water, Health, and Sustainability. Undergraduates will return to
campus to continue research via the USF Honors College or other undergraduate
research initiatives. Undergraduates will also participate the following year in
a 6-credit International Capstone Design course. Three of the course credits
will take place in Bolivia through an established partnership with the civil
engineering at the Universidad Privada del Valle (Cochabamba).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Office of International
Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET).