* 0966609
* The Market as a Commons Workshop: Developing a Comparative Framework for Investigating Cultural Resources in Regional Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Rudolf Colloredo-Mansfeld, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 27,768.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Colloredo-Mansfeld will
host twenty-one scholars in a two-day workshop that examines how communities use
cultural assets in order to develop local economies. In particular, the workshop
will assess how theories of the commons that explain natural resource systems
can be adapted to investigate cultural resources. Indeed, unique, heritage-based
resources have found prominence in the global economy. Many communities have
sought legal protection for place-based crops, handcrafted commodities or
ethnically identified wares. Other communities turn to cultural claims to
restore economic value to traditional manufacture and commercial trades. The
workshop aims to build an analytical framework that will allow comparison across
such regional economies. The two day gathering will bring together an
international group of scholars from the United States, England, Belgium and
Australia who are currently researching artisan communities, indigenous cultural
heritage, local food economies, and natural resource commons. Participants will
divide their effort into four primary sessions: (1) the identification and
valuation of cultural assets; (2) the description of interactions that generate
cultural assets; (3) the place-based strategies that link culture and economy
and shape the defense of regional trades; and (4) moderated round table
discussions to narrow a research agenda and enable collaborative research
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central intellectual task is to connect
research on local trades to the commons literature. Writers on law, popular
culture, indigenous heritage, and technology, have embraced the idea of the
commons to explain the importance and vulnerability of shared resources in a
globally connected economy. However, work needs to address the crucial
differences between assets that form within market systems themselves and
forests, fisheries and pastures that stand apart from markets and become
exploited as their products gain economic value. Participants in the workshop
will develop the analytical terms to describe cultural resources, identify
patterns of competition and cooperation that build these shared assets, and
document rules, settings, and strategies used to defend resources against
appropriation by powerful outsiders or over-exploitation by local producers. The
objective is to articulate practical research questions that will allow
researchers to return to their field sites and data sets to assess the use of
cultural assets and compare their results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will set up an international collaboration that contributes to training, engaged
scholarship, and policy work. In practical terms, UNC-Chapel Hill's Center for
Integrating Research and Action (CIRA) will both provide support for the
dissemination of project-related research and serve to promote graduate training
rooted in the workshop's models. More broadly, the planned follow-up for the
workshop in terms of research, a symposium, and publication will enable pathways
of participation for other scholars, policy makers and potential graduate
students seeking to engage and evaluate the workshop's model.