* 0966559
* Halorespiration of a Natural Organochlorine and Trichloroethylene in a Historically-Uncontaminated Soil
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Paige Novak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 03/31/2013
* USD 197,119.00

Novak&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0966559&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the next 30 years, the
EPA has estimated that 350,000 contaminated sites in the United States will
require remediation at a projected cost of $250 billion. Halogenated pollutants
are one of the most common sources of contamination at these sites.
Microorganisms, called (de)halorespirers, have been identified that can reduce
toxic chlorinated organics to less- or non-toxic compounds using chlorinated
organics as electron acceptors for growth and energy. Although halorespirers
have been shown to be marginally effective for bioremediation at some
contaminated sites, the potential that these microorganisms hold remains
unrealized. The PI recently discovered that Dehalococcoides-like microorganisms
exist in uncontaminated soils at high numbers and that their concentration in
the environment statistically correlates to the amount of natural chlorinated
organic matter present. This discovery raises questions regarding the links
between uncontaminated and contaminated environments. The research proposed
herein will begin to address these links by examining the ability of organisms
in uncontaminated soils to halorespire different chlorinated compounds,
investigating the transcription of reductive dehalogenase (rdh) genes from
uncontaminated soils during halorespiration, and determining how the rdh genes,
gene transcripts, and bacterial communities change in uncontaminated soils upon
exposure to anthropogenic chlorinated compounds. It is hypothesized that
halorespirers from uncontaminated soils can respire both chlorinated xanthones
and trichloroethylene and that the reductive dehalogenase enzymes used for the
respiration of these two different compounds are homologous. This research will
further our understanding of halorespiration, particularly in uncontaminated
environments. This has critical implications for the remediation field, ecology,
and geochemical cycling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
provide a direct educational benefit for one graduate student and one
undergraduate student, developing their experimental and critical thinking
skills and helping them develop as engineers/scientists. In addition, results
obtained in this research will be incorporated into the lecture notes of several
classes, including Introduction to Environmental Engineering, a required course
for undergraduate Civil Engineers at the University of Minnesota, and
Environmental Microbiology, an upper-level undergraduate and lower-level
graduate laboratory course. In particular, results from this project will be
incorporated into lecture material on bioremediation and elemental cycling.
Finally, if successful, this research could result in more rapid and successful
remediation through the discovery of natural agents for use in bioaugmentation
and biostimulation at contaminated sites.