* 0966201
* Thin Film Metal Ferrite Spinels for Solar-thermochemical Redox Cycles to Split Water
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2015
* Alan Weimer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 04/30/2015
* USD 331,215.00

0966201 Weimer

There is a need to develop cost-effective, renewable energy processes for the
production of clean fuels such as hydrogen gas (H2). If H2 can be obtained cost
effectively by the splitting of water using concentrated sunlight, then it is
possible to operate a fuel cell using renewable H2 to generate electricity or to
synthesize other fuels based on renewable H2.

Intellectual Merit

The overall objective of the proposed research is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the ability of metal ferrite spinels to split water into
hydrogen gas via a solar-thermal reduction/oxidation (REDOX) cycle. The focus of
the research is nickel ferrite (NixFe3-xO4) produced through atomic layer
deposition (ALD) on zirconia and alumina substrates. The ALD process allows for
precise control of the atomic ratio of Ni/Fe in this material, and also has the
potential to provide tight control over the mass loadings of the active ferrite
on high surface area substrates.

The performance of various ferrite materials and alternative water splitting
cycles will be evaluated for their potential to produce H2. Variables to be
investigated include ferrite stoichiometry, substrate composition, substrate
surface area, REDOX temperatures, rate of reduction heating, and water
concentration for oxidation. Specific measurements include REDOX reaction rates
and thermochemical cycling using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) for both
thermal reduction at up to 1500 C and steam oxidation at up to 1200 C; depth
profiling via X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD)
to evaluate chemical and structural changes during REDOX cycling; and finally,
atomic force microscopy (AFM) to evaluate the robustness of ferrite materials
and to assess the possibility of "islanding" resulting from sintering.
Experiments are planned to carry out the REDOX cycles under simulated solar-
thermal conditions using a High Flux Solar Furnace equipped with a TGA for real-
time measurement of heating and cooling rates. By all of these approaches, the
importance of diffusion vs. kinetic rate limitations on the splitting of water
to H2 by metal ferrite spinels can be assessed.

The proposed research is potentially transformative because metal ferrite
materials produced through the ALD process have unique a potential to provide
high hydrogen gas production rates at the efficiencies needed to make solar-
thermal hydrogen production technology viable.

Broader Impact

The education activities will make use of existing NSF (REU) and Department of
Education programs (GAANN) to recruit and train undergraduate and graduate
students in the proposed research, including students from under-represented
groups. Outreach to K12 will also be organized through these programs using
students involved in the proposed research.