* 0966472
* PIRE: Wildfire feedbacks and consequences of altered fire regimes in the face of climate and land-use change in Tasmania, New Zealand, and the western U.S.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2018
* Cathy Whitlock, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 3,948,040.00

Fire is an important natural disturbance in forested ecosystems around the world
and serves as a critical but poorly understood link between climate change and
biosphere response. In recent decades, drought, land-cover alteration, and non-
native plant invasions have altered natural fire regimes at an alarming rate,
and in the process threatened native biodiversity and human well-being across
the planet. This interdisciplinary PIRE project focuses on similarities and
contrasts in fire, climate, and land-use interactions in Australia, New Zealand
and the U.S. because all have experienced extreme drought, rapid land-use change
and past and present devastating fires. The main research questions to be
addressed in this project are: 1) To what extent are prehistoric and modern fire
regimes shaped by climate, landscape and fuel arrangements, and human
activities? 2) How has the well-documented warming of the late 20th century
altered wildfire activity in comparison with the variability of these fire
regimes at centennial and millennial time scales? 3) How does understanding the
historical range of variability of wildfire activity inform decision making with
respect to mitigating and adapting to climate change impacts over the next
several decades? State-of-the-art field, laboratory, and modeling tools will be
used to reconstruct past and current fire regimes in multiple watersheds and
increase our understanding of regional and hemispheric fire-climate linkages and
land-use feedbacks. Each country's personnel lend unique expertise to this
interdisciplinary team of biologists, geographers, geoscientists,
paleoclimatologists, and anthropologists who will draw from and integrate
techniques in paleoecology, paleoclimatology, dendroecology, GIS science and
remote sensing, and fire behavior modeling to examine the past and present role
of fire in the biosphere. The PIRE team anticipates that such a broad and
integrated approach will help provide the scientific results necessary to guide
current and future fire-related land-use decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
U.S. educational impacts include the training of two early-career scientists,
two postdoctoral research associates, four graduate students, and 14
undergraduate students over a five year period. Educational activities range
from undergraduate internships to graduate and postdoctoral fellowships, and two
international scientific workshops that will provide training for students and
professionals about international issues in fire science, global change, and
land management. Team-taught courses, online courses and discussions, and
educational materials will be developed and made available to academic
institutions, government agencies, and NGOs. One unique feature of this PIRE
project is the participation of young filmmakers and scientists to produce high-
quality media products to extend the project's outreach to popular science and
natural history web platforms. The PIRE project will team with Montana State
University (MSU)'s Science and Natural History Filmmaking program, which trains
science graduate students to create accurate and compelling media that
communicate STEM disciplines to the public. Podcasts of WildFIRE PIRE research
and discoveries will be available through the project's webpage as well as via
MSU's award-winning science and natural history website TERRA: The Nature of Our
World. An MFA student in the program and an undergraduate intern will gain
valuable field-based experience planning, directing, and producing mini-
documentary podcasts describing and reporting on the PIRE project's fire
research and science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutional impacts of the project
include strengthening international collaborations among partners and linkages
to the global fire science community. The project's research addresses national
priorities in the U.S., Australia, and New Zealand concerning climate change,
fire, ecosystem management, and sustaining native biodiversity. It will also
enhance and contribute to international fire programs, including International
Geosphere Biosphere Program Cross-Project Fire Initiative and Core Program
Activities; the UK-based Global Paleofire Working Group; and NOAA's
International Multi-proxy Paleofire Database to study fire globally. In
addition, including undergraduates from across the country, including from
tribal colleges, in the overseas field research and outreach experiences will
help the U.S. institutions recruit and retain a diverse and globally engaged
cadre of undergraduates. At a state level, the project supports university
efforts to build partnerships with communities, businesses, state government and
other educational entities that will help align science education and research
with pressing social and economic challenges within the state.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of the project will provide: (1) a better
understanding of the direct and indirect role of humans, climate, and fire
feedbacks on ecosystem processes that operate at different temporal and spatial
scales; (2) information on the historical range of variability of fire
conditions necessary to assess current fire activity, risk and hazard in
different settings, relative to that of the late 20th century; (3) development
of new approaches that link historical with modern fire science and empirical
with modeled reconstructions; and (4) training for current and future
international fire scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. institutions
partnering in this project include Montana State University at Bozeman, the
University of Idaho, the University of Colorado at Boulder, and the USDA Forest
Service's Missoula Fire Sciences Laboratory (MT). The Australia partners are the
University of Tasmania and Australian National University. The New Zealand
partners are Manaaki Whenua - Landcare Research and the University of
Auckland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering, the Division of Earth Sciences, the
Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences, the Division of Environmental
Biology, the Division of Human Resource Development (Tribal Colleges and
Universities Program) and the Division of Research on Learning in Formal and
Informal Settings.