* 0966125
* IGERT: MultiScale Transport in Environmental and Physiological Systems (MultiSTEPS)
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Pavlos Vlachos, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2017
* USD 3,000,000.00

Transport processes such as fluid motion in biological systems at cellular,
organismal and environmental levels are a key aspect of such challenges as
targeted drug delivery, preventing cancer cell metastasis, and controlling
pathogen spread through the biosphere. The discovery, analysis, and solution of
critical issues in biological transport requires a new generation of truly
interdisciplinary researchers who are educated in both engineering and biology,
who merge these perspectives, and who can communicate effectively with fellow
researchers, policy makers, and the public. The MultiSTEPS Integrative Graduate
Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) program establishes a sustainable
framework of interdisciplinary research and education that will prepare future
leaders of academic and industrial research to collaborate on, analyze and solve
emerging problems in transport that are at the intersection of the engineering
and biological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees advance through a
systematic multi-step process of interdisciplinary coursework, peer interaction,
community development and cross-disciplinary research experiences, including
formal training in ethics and professional development. Training involves cross-
disciplinary education through coursework and teaching experiences, community-
building interactive seminars, interdisciplinary research rotations,
international research opportunities, interaction with industry, and a unique
internal collaborative grant competition among the trainees. Building upon the
resources of Virginia Tech's Center for the Enhancement of Engineering
Diversity, the MultiSTEPS program will recruit and retain a diverse population
of future innovators and equip them with the multidisciplinary intellectual
tools and methods necessary to tackle complex and challenging problems in human
health, and sustainable agricultural and environmental practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.