* 0966530
* IRES in Tropical Plant Pathology with NC State University and the Universidad de Costa Rica
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Margaret Daub, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 03/31/2014
* USD 149,908.00

This International Research Experience for Students (IRES) award supports
student engagement in tropical plant pathology research in Costa Rica. A diverse
group of U.S. undergraduate and graduate students will conduct research on late
blight of potato caused by Phytophthora infestans, black pod of cacao caused by
Phytophthora species, and black Sigatoka disease of banana caused by
Mycosphaerella fijiensis. Specifically, students will conduct microsatellite
analysis of Phytophthora samples, calculate Phytophthora species abundance and
diversity, and assess the production of light-activated toxins by M. fijiensis.
Graduate and undergraduate students will work in pairs with plant pathologists
at the Universidad de Costa Rica, including Dr. Felipe Arauz, Dr. Monica Blanco,
and Dr. Luis Gomez. Students will also be mentored by researchers at Dole's Rio
Frio Farm and CATIE -Tropical Agriculture Research and Higher Education Center.
Prior to the research experience, students will take a course in Tropical Plant
Pathology that includes field-based learning experiences in cacao, banana,
pineapple, tropical root crops, floriculture, and sugarcane fields.

This five-week summer research experience will allow students to solve real-
world problems connected to economically important diseases of tropical crops.
Students will have the opportunity to present their data to a broad community
that includes the Universidad de Costa Rica, a Master's student symposium at NC
State, the Oomycete Molecular Genetics Network, and major industry groups
including the World Cocoa Foundation and Dole Foods. Students will also have the
opportunity to continue their research through independent studies in the fall
semester.