* 0966561
* IRES: U.S.-India Research Program to Promote Improved Quality of Life thru Innovative Applications of Engineering Technologies.
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* P. Raju, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

0966561&lt;br/&gt;Chetan Sankar&lt;br/&gt;Auburn University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This International Research Experience for Students (IRES)
award entitled U.S.-India Research Program to Promote Improved Quality of Life
thru Innovative Applications of Engineering Technologies provides fifteen Auburn
University students a unique opportunity to conduct mechanical engineering
research at the premier Indian Institute of Technology, Madras (IITM) and the
Center for the Development of Advanced Computing (CDAC)- Mohali, India. US PI
Chetan Sankar,AU is an expert in tele-communications technologies and will work
jointly with J.S. Bhatia, Director of CDAC-Mohali, a national R&amp;D laboratory
and pioneer of telemedicine in India. US coPI P.K. Raju, AU will partner with
Professors A. Ramachandraiah and K. Balasubramanian of IITM, all of whom are
Directors of either the acoustics or non-destructive testing labs at their
respective universities. For each of the three award years, five graduate and
undergraduate students will avail themselves of the combined strengths of these
academic/research institutions for a comprehensive international research
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unifying research theme for this IRES
project is the application of three engineering technologies to improve the
quality of life. By using 1)thermal, visual, and acoustic comfort measurement
technologies, student teams will design more comfortable and energy efficient
living spaces, thereby improving the quality of living, 2) using non-destructive
testing technologies, students will develop products to help evaluate the
structural integrity of roads and bridges, thereby improving the quality of
highway infrastructure, and 3) using wireless technologies, student teams will
develop new products that will make possible the delivery of high quality
healthcare through telemedicine applications, thereby improving the quality of
health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is that
Auburn University students will have an intensive research and collaborative
experience with teams of students and researchers in India. The AU students will
work with experienced researchers and industry experts to help them document
their research in papers and case studies that will be published in journals and
presented at conferences. As for broader impacts, the students will develop
personal contacts, new international networks, and deeper insights on global
R&amp;D issues, all of which could have a lasting impact on their continued
interest in international collaborative research. It is also expected that
solutions developed by student teams will eventually be integrated into
products, processes and models that will directly benefit society. Case studies
developed in this project will be integrated into the AU curriculum and will
broaden the impact of the international experience to include students that did
not have the opportunity to directly participate in IRES.