* 0966859
* Unravelling the Molecular Regulation of Mesendodermal Differentiation in Human Embryonic Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* David Muddiman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 07/31/2014
* USD 451,751.00

This NSF award from the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering
program supports work to study the molecular events underlying the
differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) towards the mesendodermal
lineages using an approach that integrates conventional hypothesis-driven
engineering analyses and quantitative proteomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Signaling
mediated by the TGF-beta and Wnt ligands, through the Smad2/3 and beta catenin
proteins respectively, plays an important role in regulating hESC fate. In
particular, Smad2/3 and beta-catenin activity is essential for maintaining the
pluripotent hESC state as well as during differentiation to mesendodermal
lineages (precursors of clinically relevant cell types such as heart, blood).
However, the exact mechanisms through which hESCs interpret Smad2/3 and beta-
catenin signals to remain undifferentiated or initiate differentiation remain
largely unknown. The investigators hypothesize that though Smad2/3 and beta-
catenin signaling is important to maintain the pluripotent state, the activity
of Smads and beta-catenin is restricted through multiple mechanisms in
undifferentiated hESCs. Further, mesendodermal differentiation of hESCs is
associated with inactivation of mechanisms that restrict Smad2/3 and beta-
catenin in undifferentiated hESCs and a concomitant increase in Smad2/3 and beta
catenin activity. This hypothesis will be tested using a combination of
conventional biochemical analyses, targeted quantitative mass spectrometry and
measurements of global protein expression and protein phosphorylation in
undifferentiated hESCs as well as cells differentiating to the mesendodermal
lineage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed experiments will provide
quantitative insight into the biochemical networks that maintain the pluripotent
state of hESCs and trigger mesendodermal differentiation. Pluripotent cells can
revolutionize regenerative medicine and provide a means to produce functional
cell types for drug evaluation. However, clinical application of pluripotent
cells is still in its infancy, largely due to the lack of efficient processes to
differentiate them to desired cell types. A quantitative understanding of the
molecular pathways influencing hESC fate, obtained through analyses such as
those proposed in this project, will greatly help in designing efficient
processes for differentiation of hESCs to clinically relevant cell types.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will also integrate their research with
science and engineering education at multiple levels, from K-12 to graduate
education. A one-hour lecture that seeks to communicate the complex issues
involved in hESC science and technology will be presented at high school camps.
The concepts and findings of the proposed research will also enrich two graduate
courses that have been developed by, and are currently being taught, by the PI
and co-PI. In addition to these courses, undergraduate students will be involved
in research. Participation of women and minority students will be encouraged
through presentations to student groups on campus.