* 0966089
* IGERT: Distributed Renewable Energy: From Science and Technology to Entrepreneurship and Policy
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Lawrence Rothenberg, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2016
* USD 3,200,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
the development of a multidisciplinary graduate training program focused on
distributed renewable energy sources available from the sun. Research will be
focused in the areas of inexpensive and environmentally benign photovoltaic
materials, efficient sunlight capture using nanotechnology and advanced optical
design, hydrogen generation using artificial photosynthesis, and improved fuel
cells using hydrogen-based fuels. Research will also explore the changes in
economic and business models necessitated by distributed energy sources and what
motivates the adoption of renewable energy to facilitate its adoption in the
marketplace. The education and training plans include teaching and fieldwork at
partner African universities, internships in U.S. or European institutions, and
a new curriculum that includes entrepreneurship and social sciences, and makes
students effective communicators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will produce
scientific leaders and entrepreneurs trained in the field of renewable energy
who are ready to initiate major advances leading to sustainable development and
global prosperity, while protecting the environment. Significant activities
include teaching and fieldwork in African universities and involvement of inner
city high schools and the local community. The societal impact of the proposed
effort will be used to foster the recruitment of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics students from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.