* 0966898
* 2010 Crystal Engineering Gordon Research Conference; Waterville Valley Resort, NH; June 6-10, 2010
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Gautam Desiraju, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 12/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In 2010, the Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) series will present the first GRC in the rapidly emerging field
of Crystal Engineering, one of the more contemporary areas of chemical research
today. Crystal Engineering is the design and synthesis of functional solid-state
structures based on a bottom-up approach from smaller building blocks such as
neutral organic molecules and organic or inorganic ions. Crystal Engineering is
developed and structured around three distinct and yet interconnected themes:
(1) the study of intermolecular interactions; (2) the use of these interactions
in a crystal design strategy and, (3) the fine-tuning of crystal structure for
property optimization. The SSMC program provided funds for the 2010 Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) on Crystal Engineering (June 6-10, 2010, Waterville
Valley Resort, NH). The NSF funds will be utilized to provide registration fee
and/or travel support for graduate students, postdocs and/or young faculty
including, but not limited to, women and/or other minorities to participate in
the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystal
Engineering is one of the more contemporary areas of chemical research today and
is central to many fundamental problems that are currently facing society. It is
expected that developments in this rapidly developing field will meet societal
demands that are not currently being addressed by more conventional approaches
to synthetic chemistry and materials science. Examples of areas where Crystal
Engineering can address current societal challenges include the rational design
and construction of hydrogen storage materials and efforts to control drug
polymorphism. The SSMC program provided funds for the 2010 Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on Crystal Engineering (June 6-10, 2010, Waterville Valley
Resort, NH). The NSF funds will be utilized to provide registration fee and/or
travel support for graduate students, postdocs and/or young faculty including,
but not limited to, women and/or other minorities to participate in the
conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;