* 0966683
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Plants in the Environmental Fate  of Growth Promoters and Antibiotics Used in Concentrated Animal Feed  Operations
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Jerald Schnoor, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2014
* USD 249,434.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: The Role of Plants in the Environmental
Fate of Growth Promoters and Antibiotics Used in Concentrated Animal Feed
Operations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigators: Chin, Yu-Ping; Schnoor,
Jerald&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: Ohio State University; University of
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET-0965863;
CBET-0966683&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concentrated animal feed operation (CAFO)
waste and other sources of animal manure used in land applications contain
hormones (natural and administered), synthetic substances that mimic hormonal
activity, and antibiotics. These substances can enter surface waters with runoff
and may have deleterious effects on aquatic ecosystem such as the feminization
of native fish at exceedingly low concentrations (ng/L). While microbial
degradation has been documented to occur and is believed to be the primary
degradation pathway, some of these substances can persist for months after the
application of CAFO waste. Uptake and depuration by plants may be a cost
effective means to intercept hormones, their synthetic analogs, and antibiotics
in these wastes that have been applied to croplands through the use of riparian
buffer strips along surface waterways. Further, evidence show that plants and
sorption to soils can also prevent the introduction of these substances to
groundwater. In this proposal the PIs wish to examine whether economic crop
plants can transform these compounds or merely accumulate them. They will test
the hypotheses that: (1) hormones (synthetic analogs and natural) and
antibiotics can be taken up by plants based upon the physicochemical properties
of these substances; (2) plants can both accumulate and transform these
substances to benign derivatives; and (3) plant uptake and degradation
complement natural attenuation in soils and in combination are an effective
means to passively treat these substances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test these
hypotheses, they will examine the plant uptake and degradation of 17Ã¢-estradiol,
its metabolite estrone, zeranol (a non-hormone growth promoter), and tylosin (an
antibiotic) using soybean plants, a row crop plant; hybrid poplars, a tree that
can be ideally used in riparian buffers; and arrow root, a native non-invasive
aquatic plant. They will assess 1) sorption/desorption characteristics of the
target compounds and how this process will affect their bioavailability to the
plants, 2) whether transformation occurs in the plants, 3) where the compounds
and their metabolites accumulate in plant tissues, and 4) the role of microbial
communities in soils and the rhizosphere in the overall degradation of these
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hormones, their synthetic analogs, and other
pharmaceuticals released to surface waters from CAFO waste pose a threat to
aquatic ecosystems. Even though natural attenuation can degrade many of these
compounds, manure fertilizer can still leach these substances at levels that can
harm aquatic organisms months after land application. Plant uptake and
degradation complements native microbial degradation and in combination may
reduce the concentration of these substances in CAFO waste to less harmful
levels. The proposed work will support the graduate education of two students.
The PIs are also active in disseminating this information to both the scientific
community and the public at large. These include active programs involving K-12
students, the P.I.s, and their research groups. Finally, they will coordinate
their efforts with their respective university extension programs to help farm
communities cope with agricultural waste.