* 0966238
* American Computational Talent Investment for Valuable Access, Training and Experience (ACTIVATE)
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Margaret Goodman, Wittenberg University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 04/30/2015
* USD 597,455.00

The American Computational Talent Investments for Valuable Access, Training, and
Experience (ACTIVATE) Project provides scholarships to students pursuing
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers with an
enhanced incentive for students electing to minor in computational science. The
program builds on successful scholarship and curricular efforts recently piloted
for students developing computationally oriented skills with advanced computing
technologies that complement their major in the STEM fields of chemistry,
biology, biochemistry/molecular biology, physics, mathematics, computer science,
geology, and psychology.

The ACTIVATE Project focuses on increasing access to growing interdisciplinary
STEM programs at the university, particularly in computational science. Designed
to increase the concentration of STEM talent in the region required to meet
local employment opportunities, the program is recruiting students from beyond
Ohio and from Upward Bound programs (both locally and nationally). ACTIVATE
Scholars benefit from program elements developed for the Choose Ohio First
scholarship program, expanding these to create an even more diverse learning
community fostered through faculty mentoring, advising, and career development.

Intellectual Merit: The ACTIVATE Project provides key access to critical
training and experience in STEM applications in computational science, essential
to training the next generation of application creators and scientists using
advanced computer technologies. In addition, the expanded diversity of the STEM
cohort provides the opportunity for the university to assess and refine
strategies for recruiting, preparing, and retaining underrepresented students
pursuing STEM careers.

Broader Impacts: ACTIVATE Scholars serve as role models for increasing the
number of students who may otherwise not consider STEM careers as an option.
Equipped with a strong STEM background, interdisciplinary, liberal arts and
computational preparation, these students are preparing to be leaders in their
fields, and pioneering career pathways for many first time college families
nationally. The ACTIVATE Scholars Project also brings essential geographic,
gender, racial, and economic diversity to a regional cohort of STEM students.
ACTIVATE Scholars work closely with the local Upward Bound program on campus to
further develop STEM interest among underrepresented populations locally. These
activities provide additional insight into methods and approaches to enhance
K-12 outreach efforts.