* 0966101
* Computer Science Leadership and Practice (CS-LEAP) Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Timothy Fossum, SUNY College at Potsdam
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 02/29/2016
* USD 573,370.00

The goal of the Computer Science Leadership and Practice (CS-LEAP) Scholarship
Program is to provide opportunities for community college students who attend
public institutions in New York State to complete a baccalaureate computer
science (CS) degree at the university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The project focuses on recruitment of students from community colleges into the
CS baccalaureate degree program at the university, leveraging articulation
agreements recently in place and building an active recruitment process that
involves partnerships between community colleges and the university. The
specific objectives of the project are to:&lt;br/&gt; (a) provide scholarships
to needy and academically qualified students entering and seeking a
baccalaureate degree in CS, primarily to students who transfer from community
colleges with an Associate of Science degree in CS;&lt;br/&gt; (b) recruit
students into the CS program by building and maintaining articulation agreements
and personal contacts with community colleges that feed into the CS
baccalaureate degree program and by working closely with the Collegiate Science
and Technology Entry Program (CSTEP) at the university that addresses the
shortage of minority and low income students pursuing careers in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields;&lt;br/&gt; (c) nurture
students through their academic pursuits by helping them be successful in their
coursework, meet the CS major requirements, and graduate with a baccalaureate
degree;&lt;br/&gt; (d) integrate students into a culture of professional
practice through internship and other project-based opportunities;&lt;br/&gt;
(e) help students build a sense of community in which they develop personally
and socially; and&lt;br/&gt; (f) give students training and opportunities in
leadership that help them be valued as professionals and as citizens of their
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project is potentially
transformative as it serves as a model for building successful transfer
articulation agreements on a large scale and for establishing active and
productive partnerships between community colleges and four-year institutions.
By partnering with the CSTEP program, this project actively seeks to increase
the participation of underrepresented groups in the CS program at the
university. By offering scholarships to students seeking a CS degree who would
otherwise find it difficult to attend college and to engage in a computing-
related career, this project specifically addresses state and national needs in
computer science-related fields such as software engineering, programming, and
network systems analysis. Graduates in these fields are expected to be in high
demand well into the next decade.