* 0966939
* Collaborative Research:  Shape Effects on Microorganism Removal by Microfiltration and Ultrafiltration Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Shankar Chellam, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 04/30/2016
* USD 172,257.00

This NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work
to examine from both experimental and theoretical viewpoints the effect of
microorganism size and shape on membrane rejection. Microfiltration and
ultrafiltration membranes are increasingly employed in the food processing,
biotechnology, pharmaceutical industries and for environmental separations.
These advanced filtration techniques have gained popularity in municipal water
and wastewater treatment particularly following the 1993 Cryptosporidium
outbreak in Milwaukee, WI. This is the single largest waterborne disease
outbreak in the history of the United States resulting in over 400,000 becoming
ill and 50 deaths. Even though membranes present a virtually complete barrier to
this parasite (conventional filtration techniques do not), viruses and bacteria
can pass through them potentially posing human health risks. MF and UF systems
are also employed during purification and manufacturing of drugs, juices, milk
and other products where sterility is an important consideration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paradoxically, even though microfiltration and
ultrafiltration systems do not generally achieve complete virus and bacteria
removal, the factors governing microorganism transport across them are not well
understood, particularly for non-spherical organisms. This necessitates
conservative membrane design and implementation. Further, previous experimental
and theoretical studies of colloid passage across membranes have focused
predominantly on spherical particles even though rod-shaped bacteria and non-
spherical viruses are frequently encountered in water supplies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work comprehensive theoretical and experimental
investigations will be performed to delineate hindered transport phenomena
contributing to the removal of viruses and bacteria by microfiltration and
ultrafiltration membranes. The focus will be on systematically and rigorously
determining the influence of microorganism aspect ratio and the importance of
axial and rotational Peclet numbers on transport. The filtration of numerous
rod-shaped viruses and bacteria across a range of pore sizes and transmembrane
pressures will be examined using both track-etched membranes with an idealized
pore geometry as well as commercially relevant phase inversion membranes which
have a complex porous structure. A rigorous model that incorporates Brownian
diffusion and particle alignment with the flow will be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the work lie in (i) training a high
school science/math teacher in Clarkson and another at Houston, (ii)
communications with industrial scientists at Millipore Corporation, (iii)
training students to perform interdisciplinary and collaborative research
applying principles from transport phenomena, biotechnology, and environmental
engineering, (iv) supporting undergraduates to conduct research through course
projects and summer research, and (v) disseminating research results in peer-
reviewed publications and conference presentations. We hope to draw participants
from a variety of K-12 institutions across Houston and Potsdam, particularly
those with historically minority student bodies in several of these activities.