* 0966723
* Biomolecular Motor Smart Microarrays: Self-Contained, High-Throughput, Ultrasensitive Multiplexed Biomolecular Sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Pei-Cheng Ku, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 12/31/2013
* USD 359,677.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Biomolecular Motor Smart Microarrays: Self-Contained, High-
Throughput, Ultrasensitive Multiplexed Biomolecular Sensing&lt;br/&gt;PI: Katsuo
Kurabayashi&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Pei-Cheng Ku, Edgar
Meyhofer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, biomolecular motors (BMMs) ?
highly efficient molecular machines that nature has evolved for over millions of
years ? have been employed in miniaturized analysis systems and play important
roles in bionanotechnology applications, such as biosensing, molecular sorting,
fluidic pumping, micromechanical powering, and molecular assembly. They are
compact with a nanometer size, yield robust movement in a fluidic environment,
and are readily fueled by adenosine triphosphate (ATP) containing solution. This
eliminates the need for an external energy source for micro/nanofluidic
actuation. In addition, BMMs efficiently manipulate individual biological
molecules and proteins, making possible the development of a motor protein-based
biosensing system with a nanoscale mass transport/concentration function.
&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by Biosensing/CBET program supports research by
Professors Kurabayashi, Ku, and Meyhofer at the University of Michigan on the
development of a new biosensing chip technology, namely the biomolecular motor
(BMM) smart microarrays, which allows high-throughput, ultrasensitive (at
attomolar concentrations) biosensing for multiplexed on-chip protein binding
assays. Incorporating a BMM-based mass transport/sensing mechanism in a
microfluidic system, the BMM smart microarrays enable autonomous sample handling
that involves specific binding, sorting, transporting, and concentrating of
multiple target analytes via kinesin motor protein-driven microtubules. The
proposed method combines biomolecular motors, photonics and nanofluidics in a
single biosensor to simultaneously transport and concentrate large numbers
(&gt;10) of molecular analytes to specific detectors for ultra-sensitive
quantification.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will have broader impact on
clinical applications such as stratified medicine and personalized medicine
through developing a high-throughput ultra-sensitive multiplexed biomolecular
sensing method. The aimed multiplexed biosensing technology will allow for
monitoring of the early-stage subtle onset of diseases and early warning of
biological threats. The proposed fundamental studies towards combining
bionanotechnology and LED-based solid state lighting technology for
ultrasensitive multiplexed protein sensing can ultimately be extended to enable
the early detection of diseases with a very simple and robust battery-operated
handheld module setting. This may open the door for the development of a new
commercial product for point-of-care applications under an environment of
limited resources. The fundamental knowledge gained from this research will be
assimilated the PIs? graduate courses on nanobiomechanics, MEMS, and
photoelectronic device technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
involved graduate and undergraduate students will be trained to obtain
integrated knowledge and skills in MEMS technology, micro/nano manufacturing,
biophysics, biochemistry, and photonics, in collaboration with researchers
across several fields. The students? communication and networking skills will
grow through their presentations at national/international MEMS and
Nanotechnology conferences, and research will be incorporated in the PIs?
interdisciplinary graduate courses in MEMS and Nanomanufacturing. Summer interns
from underrepresented groups will be actively recruited to this project through
the National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network (NNIN) Research Experience
for Undergraduates Program (REU) supported by the NSF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research represents transformative potential because
it (1) presents the first technique that demonstrates the use of BMM-based
nanoscale mass transport and biosensing for multiplexed biosensing; and (2)
provides a new approach to realizing robust, cost-effective, simple point-of-
care clinical diagnostics with advanced scientific knowledge on controlling BMMs
within a man-made engineering structure and on obtaining weak biofluorescent
signals at a high signal-to-noise ratio for low-concentration samples.