* 0966824
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Homotopical Methods in Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Charles Weibel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 12/31/2014
* USD 395,932.00

The Principal Investigators will join in a collaborative effort to investigate
fundamental questions in algebraic geometry using modern homotopical techniques;
a unifying thread in these questions is the importance of various classes of
invariants ranging from purely algebro-geometric to purely topological. First,
the PIs propose to investigate the structure of morphism spaces between real
algebraic varieties, especially unstable and stable homotopy types of spaces of
"real algebraic" morphisms. Second, the PIs will examine the cohomology of
various discrete and arithmetic groups, including algebraic versions of homotopy
invariance for cohomology and the related Friedlander-Milnor conjecture. Third,
the PIs propose to investigate invariants of singularities arising from methods
involving the cdh-topology, continuing the recent flurry of activity in this
subject. Finally, motivated by comparisons between algebro-geometric and
topological invariants, the PIs will investigate semi-topological or morphic
invariants of algebraic varieties, which lie partway between the worlds of
algebraic geometry and topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry, one of
the oldest branches of mathematics, has at its heart the goal of studying the
structure of solutions to systems of polynomial equations; these collections of
solutions are called algebraic varieties. Homotopy theory, sometimes called
rubber sheet geometry, attempts to study those aspects of geometric objects that
are independent of the way they are pulled or twisted; one way to do this is to
attach "invariants," e.g., numbers (or more general algebraic structures), to
these objects. Algebraic varieties arising from equations with real or complex
coefficients can be studied by means of homotopy theory, and the invariants that
arise are necessarily somewhat restricted. The goal of this project is to study
classical questions in algebraic geometry using invariants of algebraic
varieties arising from homotopy theory. A major aim of this project is to convey
some of the enthusiasm, techniques, and mathematical goals of the principal
investigators to the next generation of mathematicians represented by graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. Methods to recruit and involve early career
mathematicians will include the organization of a large international
conference, the running of several workshops, the sharing of travel funds, and
activities involving visitors from other institutions.