* 0966524
* Multiobjective Optimization Strategies for the Design of Sustainable Biofuel Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Ignacio Grossmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2014
* USD 343,285.00

0966524&lt;br/&gt;Grossmann &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable supply of energy
has become one of the major challenges in this century. Liquid biofuels provide
one of the options for fossil fuel replacement in the short to medium term
because they can use the existing infrastructure of vehicles and distribution
with small modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop novel and advanced process systems engineering tools for addressing the
problem of optimal design of biofuel plants under multiple criteria. The PI will
undertake the following research tasks: a) Investigate superstructure
optimization models to synthesize new flowsheet structures of biofuel plants; b)
Develop simultaneous optimization models for the minimization of energy and
freshwater consumption; c) Develop stochastic programming models to account for
uncertainties in the feedstock; d) Develop bi-criterion optimization models to
account for economics and life cycle analysis; e) Develop targeting models to
determine maximum profit, minimum energy use, minimum freshwater consumption and
minimum environmental impact. In order to achieve these objectives he intends to
focus on the design of lignocellulosic bioethanol plants as the major case
study. Other biofuels such as biodiesel will also be
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
design of biofuel plants a major contribution will be process synthesis models
to systematically consider many design alternatives under a superstructure
optimization framework. Aside from the capability of accounting for
uncertainties in the feedstock, and of optimizing both profit and environmental
impact using life cycle analysis under a bicriterion optimization framework, of
significance will be targets for maximum profit, minimum energy use, minimum
freshwater use and minimum environmental impact, which should provide useful
indicators about the viability and desirability of these designs. In the area of
process synthesis the simultaneous incorporation of water management (or water
networks) together with heat integration in the optimization of the
superstructure will also be studied as well as the development of solution
methods of bi-criterion disjunctive optimization problems under uncertainty, a
problem that has not been addressed before. These design capabilities will be
demonstrated with a major case study, the design of lignocellulosic bioethanol
plants. In terms of transformative research, perhaps the most significant aspect
will be the development of modern and comprehensive synthesis and optimization
tools for the design of biofuel plants, which have not had the benefit of being
subjected to more systematic and thorough optimizations as have their
petrochemical counterparts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A potential impact of the research in practice is
the collaborations with Amyris and Cargill, both of whom will provide realistic
data and case studies beyond the lignocellulosic ethanol case study, to help
calibrate these design methodologies. The work will provide useful design
concepts and tools that will improve the economic and environmental performance
of biofuel plants, particularly in regard to energy and water usage, as
suggested by preliminary results. These design capabilities should also help
policy makers consider the best process designs when making comparisons among
competing technologies. At the graduate level the PI intends to incorporate the
findings of this research in a core graduate course on Process Systems
Engineering. At the undergraduate level the PI intends to use as a senior design
project the design of cellulosic ethanol. The results will be published as a
CACHE Design case study, which will have wide distribution through CAChE as has
been the case of previous design case studies, three of which the PI prepared.
The preparation of the design case study for CACHE will be performed by two
undergraduate students at Carnegie Mellon University. Another dimension of the
project will be its dissemination through outreach activities with high schools
in the Pittsburgh area. These activities, which will be performed through the
Steinbrenner Institute for Environmental Education at Carnegie Mellon, will
involve the PI and the graduate student visiting Several high schools to explain
the concepts of renewable biofuels and integrated process water networks.