* 0966846
* Collaborative Research: Investigating and Improving the Production of Butanol by C. Pasteurianum for the Value-Added Conversion of Biodiesel-Derived Crude Glycerol
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Carmen Scholz, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 03/31/2014
* USD 193,985.00

0966846/0966818&lt;br/&gt;Taconi/Bothun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the price of
crude oil continues to reach record highs, biorefining becomes a necessary
option for renewable fuels and chemical production. However, robust and
versatile microorganisms for bioconversion that can utilize multiple feedstocks
are currently lacking. Better engineered microorganisms designed to function
within an integrated biorefining system are required to significantly reduce
petroleum utilization and develop a diverse portfolio of biomass-based processes
that can generate comparable alternatives for a wide range of petroleum
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilization of biodiesel-derived crude glycerol
for the production of butanol represents a tangible approach to improving the
sustainability of the biofuels industry in general and is critical for the
growth and stability of the biodiesel industry in particular. Furthermore,
utilizing crude glycerol as an alternative to corn-derived feedstocks will
provide much-needed diversity and flexibility to an emerging biorefining
industry limited by the price and availability of corn. Butanol is a key
biorefinery platform chemical and has significant advantages as a renewable
transportation fuel. The potential to generate higher yields using an
essentially no-cost feedstock strengthens the technical and economic feasibility
for industrial-scale butanol fermentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to quantify metabolism
and tolerance in Clostridium pasteurianum and to engineer this bacterium to
improve the value-added conversion of biodiesel-derived crude glycerol using
anaerobic fermentation. This project will focus on fundamental research to
understand and improve the metabolic pathways that control glycerol utilization
and substrate formation from both extracellular and intracellular approaches.
The proposed research has three objectives. The first objective is
to&lt;br/&gt;elucidate the cellular response of C. pasteurianum to both
substrate and product toxicity. The second objective is to evaluate cell
membrane structure and stability in response to increasing concentrations of
substrate impurities and butanol. And the third objective is to metabolically
engineer C. pasteurianum to increase butanol
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is innovative because it proposes
an alternative pathway to glycerol fermentation, where metabolic engineering
approaches are used to knock down the genes in the reductive pathway as opposed
to up-regulation of genes in the oxidative pathway. The research is potentially
transformative because it opens up new approaches for metabolic engineering of
microorganisms to convert crude glycerol byproducts from biorefinery operations
to liquid transportation fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project provides opportunities to
educate students and other educators about alternative energy, renewable
resources, and biorefining. The education plan will develop the technical and
laboratory expertise for graduate and undergraduate students to prepare them for
careers in the biofuels industry, which is currently experiencing substantial
growth. Various outreach activities are planned, including the development of a
seminars and demonstrations to educate K-12 students, teachers, and community
members about biofuels production and utilization. Education efforts will also
focus on the recruitment of students from underrepresented groups through
activities that will target the inclusion of these students. These educational
and outreach activities will stimulate broad interest in science and
engineering, and inspire K-12 students to pursue higher education and careers in
engineering and energy industries. The proposed outreach activities also include
a web based wiki site and summer exchange program that will facilitate
collaboration among graduate and undergraduate students in the two research
groups.