* 0967049
* Low Noise Suspensions and Readout Systems for Advanced LIGO and Its Enhancements
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Stanley Whitcomb, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2014
* USD 620,866.00

This award supports the research program of Professor Vladimir Braginsky and his
group at the Moscow State University (MSU) in Moscow, Russia. Braginsky and his
group are members of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) and they propose to
continue research on topics of great interest to the LIGO project to which the
group has made outstanding contributions over the years. They will perform both
experimental and theoretical research in two main areas of great interest to the
LIGO project. The experimental portion of their research will focus on: 1)
identifying and measuring the excess noise (noise of non-thermal origin) due to
mirror coatings, electric charging of the mirrors, and interaction of mirrors
and the surrounding structures; 2) in-depth searches for new unknown sources of
noise of nonlinear origin; and 3) methods for modeling and controlling dynamic
instabilities that can appear in the interferometers due to coupling of their
high-Q mechanical and optical degrees of freedom caused by the high optical
power in the interferometer arms. They will also continue theoretical and
experimental investigations of novel optical topologies as well as new methods
of quantum measurements that might be applied in the future to Advanced LIGO to
allow operation at sensitivities below the Standard Quantum Limit. While most of
the research will be carried out at MSU, Braginsky and his colleagues will be in
frequent close contact with LIGO Laboratory and LSC members through visits and
regular reports.&amp;#8232;&amp;#8232;Progress in the supported research program
will contribute to the success of Advanced LIGO in opening the new gravitational
wave window on the universe. The members of the MSU group are committed to
combining first-rate education with their research. The faculty members in the
group will continue to incorporate LIGO concepts and research results into their
technical lectures for students and for colleagues working in other fields of
science; they will continue to involve undergraduate and graduate students in
their theoretical and experimental research; and they will continue to give
public lectures about LIGO and the LSC's research, including lectures aimed at
high school students.