* 0967393
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Atlas of Lie Groups and Representations: Unitary Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* John Stembridge, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 81,583.00

This project has two primary goals. The first is to solve the problem of the
unitary dual: to describe the irreducible unitary representations of real
reductive Lie groups. The primary tool is an algorithm to compute the unitary
dual of any given group, which we are implementing inside the "atlas" software.
We plan to use this information to prove results about the unitary dual,
beginning with the unitarity of Arthur's unipotent representations. The second
primary goal is to make information about representation theory of real groups
accessible to non-specialists, via the software, a web site, public workshops,
and other means. The atlas software is freely available on the atlas web site,
and will continue to be maintained there indefinitely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
idea of using symmetry to study problems in mathematics and science dates back
to Fourier's work on heat nearly two hundred years ago. In the hands of Hermann
Weyl, Eugene Wigner, and Andre Weil, symmetry has come to play a central role in
quantum mechanics and in number theory. Lie groups, named after the Norwegian
mathematician Sophus Lie, are the mathematical objects underlying symmetry.
Representation theory studies all of the ways a given symmetry, or Lie group,
can manifest itself. The problem of understanding all "unitary" representations
(in which the symmetry operations preserve lengths) is one of the most important
unsolved problems in the subject, and has potential applications in many areas;
for example, it is an abstract version of the question, "what quantum mechanical
systems can admit a certain kind of symmetry?"