* 0967291
* Modeling, Simulation, and Control of Globular Protein Crystallization Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Gerassimos Orkoulas, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 202,900.00

0967291 Orkoulas

Proteins play a key role as therapeutics in a number of diseases and protein
crystallization is a central activity in the pharmaceutical industry.
Specifically, the production of highly-ordered, high-quality protein crystals
through batch crystallization processes is vital in devising proteins for
therapeutic purposes. However, despite extensive experimental and computational
work on understanding protein structure and function, there is a lack of a
systematic framework that relies on a fundamental understanding of the
nucleation and growth mechanisms of protein crystals at the microscopic level
and utilizes such information to model and operate protein batch crystallization
processes at the macroscopic level.

Intellectual Merit:

Motivated by the above considerations, a hierarchical and computationally
tractable approach is planned to: (a) elucidate the phase diagrams and
understand the physics of crystallization of globular proteins at the
microscopic level, (b) deduce microscopically consistent crystal nucleation and
growth rate laws, and (c) utilize the previous knowledge to model and control
batch protein crystallization processes at the macroscopic level. The previous
objectives will be achieved by the following specific projects: (1) The
equilibrium protein phase diagrams will be determined via coarse-graining
techniques, Monte Carlo simulations, and finite-size scaling theory. The
simulations will be implemented according to the methodology of spatial
updating. Crystal nucleation will be studied by a combination of Monte Carlo and
molecular dynamics simulations. (2) The results of part (1) will be used to: (i)
study the growth of protein crystals via molecular dynamics and kinetic Monte
Carlo simulations, and (ii) derive microscopically consistent rate laws. (3) The
nucleation and growth rates of parts (1) and (2) will be used to model batch
protein crystallizers through population and mass and energy balances. These
models will be used in conjunction with stochastic model predictive control
methodologies that account for model uncertainty to achieve a desired crystal
size distribution at the end of the batch protein crystallization process. This
modeling effort will be tested and validated against available experimental
data. The PI plans to pursue interaction and collaboration with industry to
actively share the research results. The integration of the research into
education will be achieved through: (a) The development of elective courses on:
(i) molecular/multiscale modeling and simulation, and (ii) applied mathematics
and numerical analysis. The algorithmic advances of the work will also be
incorporated into these courses. (b) The involvement of undergraduate students
in research and the recruitment of qualified college students (including
students from minority and under-represented groups) into the graduate chemical
engineering program at UCLA via internships.

Broader Impact:

This work will provide a basic understanding of the factors that affect protein
phase separation and crystallization and will benefit a wide range of
pharmaceutical companies and products. In addition, it will provide a practical
framework to simulate, model, and control globular protein crystallization
processes. The research program will be integrated into the chemical engineering
curriculum and is well-suited for the training of both graduate and
undergraduate students in the area of molecular and multiscale modeling and
simulation.