* 0967175
* Molecular Physics of the Electrical Double Layers in Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Rui Qiao, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 180,401.00

0967175 Qiao

Ionic liquids are a new class of electrolytes with many potentially high impact
properties such as wide electrochemical windows, low vapor pressure, and
excellent thermal stability. These properties offer distinct advantages in
electrochemical applications such as solar cells and supercapacitors. In these
potential applications, the electrical double layers (EDLs) at the interfaces of
electrodes and ionic liquids play a critical role in determining the system
performance. However, the knowledge on these EDLs is very limited: many
fundamental issues such as the capacitance potential correlation and the
capacitance of EDLs in ultrasmall nanopores are poorly understood at present.
Such a limited understanding renders the design and optimization of electro-
chemical systems using ionic liquids as electrolyte difficult, and thus prevents
the potential of ionic liquids from being fully exploited. Therefore, it is
critical to improve our understanding of the EDLs in ionic liquids. The
objective of this research is to investigate the electrical double layers (EDLs)
in ionic liquids using molecular dynamics simulations. Specifically, the PI will
first study the EDLs at the interfaces of ionic liquids and planar electrodes to
delineate how their structure and capacitance are affected by the
electrical/physicochemical properties of electrodes and ions. The EDLs in ionic
liquids-filled sub-nanometer pores will then be studied to elucidate the
synergistic effects of nano-confinement and surface curvature on the structure
and capacitance of EDLs in these pores.

Intellectual Merit: In the study of planar EDLs, a new picture for the EDLs in
ionic liquids, i.e., the Ion-ion and ion-electrode correlations play a key role
in determining the EDL structure, is proposed. This picture represents a
paradigm shift from the prevalent EDL models, and is supported by compelling
preliminary data. Guided by this new idea, the PI?fs simulation design and data
analysis differ distinctly from those in prior research and are expected to lead
to new insights into the dependence of EDL structure on the nature of ions and
on the polarization/chemistry of electrodes. With this, the PI will elucidate
the mechanism of the diverse capacitance?]potential relations and surprising ion
specificity of EDL observed in previous experiments, which defy existing EDL
models. In the study of EDLs in sub-nanometer pores, by doing simulations in
pores with precisely defined geometry and by simultaneously computing the
microstructure and capacitance of the EDLs, the PI's group will, for the first
time, self-consistently test the prior hypotheses on effects of confinement and
surface curvature on EDL capacitance in sub-nanometer pores, and elucidate the
underlying mechanisms of the test result. Together, these researches will
greatly advance the fundamental understanding of the EDLs in ionic liquids and
make a firm step towards building the knowledge base for the rational design of
electrochemical systems using ionic liquids as working electrolytes.

Broader Impacts: The project will be tied intimately with the educational
activities at Clemson University. Students participating in this project will be
exposed to diverse fields such as physical chemistry, atomistic modeling and
computational methods. Undergraduate students will be involved in the research
through the Honors Research Program in the PI's home department. Various
resources, e.g., the minority recruitment programs at Clemson University, will
be utilized to recruit students from underrepresented groups to participate in
this project. Research results will be developed into posters/movies to
introduce electrical energy storage to K-12 students. Research will be
disseminated through journal publications and presentations in professional
conferences. A website centering on the fundamental physics of the EDLs in ionic
liquids and their role in electrochemical systems will be developed and
maintained. The website will be advertised to the target audience via formal and
informal channels.