* 0967236
* Influence of Biogeochemical Conditions on the Stability and Fate of Cr(III) Species in Contaminated Harbor Sediments
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Edward Bouwer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2015
* USD 376,695.00

Bouwer, Edward&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0967236&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
focuses on determining the fate of trivalent chromium, Cr(III), in contaminated
harbor sediments. Years of navigational, maritime, and industrial activities
have left a legacy of sediment contamination in the coastal bays and harbors
across the U.S. The complex mixture of contaminants found in sediments, of which
metals are a major component, causes toxicity to benthic organisms, aquatic
life, and eventually to humans by bioaccumulation in the food web. Cr is one
such metal which commonly occurs in contaminated sediments. The trivalent form
of Cr, Cr(III), is relatively less toxic, and less mobile than the hexavalent
form Cr(VI), which is a potent human carcinogen. Under reducing environmental
conditions Cr(VI) is reduced to Cr(III), whereas under oxidizing conditions
Cr(III) is oxidized to toxic Cr(VI) by naturally occurring hydrous manganese
oxides, Mn(III,IV) (hydr)oxides. The PIs proposed research will fill important
knowledge gaps regarding Cr speciation and behavior of Cr(III) in contaminated
sediments by conducting controlled laboratory studies using contaminated
sediments from various locations around the Baltimore Harbor, the field site for
their research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of their research is to
obtain a systematic understanding of the biogeochemical processes influencing Cr
speciation and fate in contaminated sediments. Their preliminary results reveal
that Cr in Baltimore Harbor sediments is predominantly precipitated Cr(III)
Cr(OH)3(s) and CrxFe1-x(OH)3(s), and Mn is predominantly as reducible Mn(III,IV)
hydroxides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results along with the ones from our
preliminary spike experiments support their hypothesis that resuspension of
sediments through bioturbation, flood events, dredging, and anthropogenic
activities could make conditions conducive to Cr(VI) formation via Cr(III)
oxidation by Mn(III,IV) (hydr)oxides. The proposed experimental work will take
advantage of their HPLC-ICP-MS analytical technique developed to achieve direct
speciation of Cr at trace environmental concentrations in bulk sediments. The
proposed work involves the collection and characterization of sediment cores to
obtain chronological and depth information of metal accumulation and redox
conditions. Using surficial sediments, the first set of batch experiments will
examine the Cr(III) oxidizing capacity of the Mn(III,IV) (hydr)oxides present in
sediments by spiking sediment suspensions with aqueous Cr(III) under aerobic and
anaerobic conditions. Included here are the reaction conditions of varying
aqueous Cr(III) concentrations, sediment loading, and pH. Since Cr(III) solids
limit its solubility under the near-neutral pH conditions of the sediments, the
second set of experiments will study the reaction chemistry of Cr(OH)3(s) and
CrxFe1-x(OH)3(s) spiked into the sediments under aerobic and anaerobic
conditions. A third set of experiments will examine the reactive state of
Cr(III) present in the sediments by spiking the aerobic and anaerobic sediment
suspensions with laboratory synthesized Mn(III,IV) (hydr)oxides containing
varying Mn(III) content birnessite, manganite, and pyrolusite under varying
conditions of Mn(III,IV) (hydr)oxide surface area loading, and sediment loading.
This set of experiments will give additional insights into the importance of
Mn(III) or Mn(IV) species in Cr(III) oxidation. Microbes influence the
bioavailability of metals and hence, a fourth set of experiments will examine
the influence of Mn-oxidizing microbes in mediating Cr(III) oxidation in
sediments by producing biogenic Mn(III,IV) (hydr)oxides. The experimental
results from each research task will be synthesized through modeling efforts,
and these models will serve as predictive tools to assess risks and provide
guidance for remedial options on metal-contaminated sediment
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this proposed work will aid the
Maryland Department of the Environment(MDE) and other government agencies in
establishing TMDLs for Cr and similarly other metals in contaminated sediments.
The PI has continued his collaboration with the Baltimore Polytechnic Institute
High School Mentoring Program, which brings underprivileged and/or minority high
school students to explore scientific research at Johns Hopkins University
(JHU). Additionally, the PI continually serves as a faculty mentor in the Women
in Science and Engineering (WISE) program, which is designed to foster
representation of women in science and engineering fields by providing research
experience, guidance, and mentoring to female high school juniors. The proposed
project will also help continue the PIs active role in the Research Experience
for Teachers (RET) program at JHU, in which teachers from Baltimore City public
high schools pursue research projects over the summer under the PIs supervision.
Such collaborations will enable the Ph.D. and undergraduate students involved in
this project to engage in educational outreach activities, gain valuable
experiences in mentoring and teaching, and instill a greater sense of social
responsibility.