* 0967221
* Student Design Projects for People with Disabilities at Duke University
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Kevin Caves, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2016
* USD 124,869.00

PI: Bohs, Laurence N. and Caves, Kevin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0967221&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support for the Devices for
People with Disabilities program in the Department of Biomedical Engineering at
Duke University, in which students design and build custom devices for people
with disabilities. The main objectives of this program are to enhance
engineering education, improve the quality of life of persons with disabilities,
and serve the community. Students will participate in a creative, real-world
design experience as they develop one-of-a-kind assistive, recreational, and
therapeutic devices. In the process, they will learn formal engineering design
methods, gain exposure to ethical issues in engineering, improve communication
skills and raise their awareness of disability issues 70 projects will be
designed and delivered with support from this grant, involving approximately 250
student designers, a substantial annual increase over the past grant period. The
client feedback process initiated during the last three years will be expanded
to include quantitative measures based on the Quebec User Evaluation of
Satisfaction with assistive Technology (QUEST). New assessment tools will be
developed to maximize the impact of student experiences and to improve feedback
between students and clients. Students will create professional-quality videos
of their projects, which will be incorporated into the course web site to
provide a thorough demonstration of project operation and to increase
dissemination of their designs. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed
Activity &lt;br/&gt;The PI and course instructors have over 40 combined years of
experience in rehabilitation engineering and teaching student design. During the
past 13 years, they have supervised over 250 students in completing more than
100 projects for clients with disabilities in the Raleigh-Durham regional area.
Strengths of this program include the record of success in delivering the
proposed number of projects, and the focus on follow-up support to keep devices
in service after delivery. Prototyping facilities at Duke University have
improved substantially during the past grant period, with a new student machine
shop and full-time machinist dedicated to student projects in the Pratt School
of Engineering. These facilities will enhance the students' hands-on
experiences, giving them greater ownership of their projects and applied
knowledge on methods of fabrication. Outcomes from the proposed projects will be
novel devices meeting needs of persons with disabilities not met by commercial
products. The overall program will establish and strengthen ties between the
university, the local community, and individuals working in the fields of
assistive technology and rehabilitation both regionally and nationally.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the Proposed Activity &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activity will train undergraduate students in a formal design procedure as
applied to real-world, open-ended design problems. Students will incorporate
universal design methods wherever possible to maximize the applicability of
their designs. Persons with disabilities will be integrated into the activities
both by being clients for projects, and also by sharing their experiences with
students during in-class discussions. Students will disseminate the results of
their work to the larger community through: 1) presentations at the annual RESNA
conference; 2) presentations at the regional Assistive Technology Expo
conference; and 3) project descriptions in the annual NSF publication on Student
Design Projects to Aid Persons with Disabilities. In addition, students building
projects for local partner OE Enterprises will enter the design competition for
the NISH National Scholar Award for Workplace Innovation and Design. The
proposed work will benefit society by providing custom devices for the project
clients, creating and disseminating designs applicable to other persons with
disabilities, and by inspiring students to serve humanity in their careers.
Student projects will be selected from numerous contacts in the
Durham/Raleigh/Chapel Hill area, including occupational and physical therapists,
special education teachers, medical doctors, and local rehabilitation centers
and community organizations. Because projects will be drawn from many sources,
the client pool will encompass a broad range of persons with disabilities. A
particular focus in this grant period will be to work with therapists in the
Durham schools to identify minority students with disabilities who will benefit
from custom assistive technology.