* 0967282
* Inertial jets from cavity collapse &amp; granular impact
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Wendy Zhang, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 249,999.00

The theoretical/simulational research focuses on liquid and granular jets that
impact at a free surface. For liquid flow, the research will examine the jet
formed upon collapse of a cavity. The work will focus on the generic situation
where the dynamics is not axisymmetric but instead fully three-dimensional. For
granular flow, the research will focus on the ejecta sheet formed when a densely
packed granular jet collides with a solid target.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In both problems, numerous small-scale
deviations are present in the initial state giving rise to jetting. In jetting
from a collapsing cavity, recent studies revealed that the shape of the
interface which first forms into a jet is generically fully three-dimensional,
characterized by strong azimuthal distortions. In granular impact, each non-
cohesive grain in the jet collides with the target and introduces a small
disturbance to the mean motion. Intuitively one would expect that these
deviations would prevent jetting and create a disordered response. The strongly
distorted cavity should break up into a shower of air bubbles instead of forming
a strong central jet. The granular jet, upon colliding with the target, should
break up into a diffuse spray instead of forming a thin ejecta sheet with a
well-defined ejection angle. The counter-intuitive outcomes in both cases
connect them to a central puzzle in fluid dynamics. Under some circumstances,
strong forcing appears to act in such a way as to organize the dynamics,
producing a coherent structure (a central jet or a thin ejecta sheet) out of a
disordered background. Insights from research into these two particular
examples, which are novel, conceptually simple, and experimentally accessible
can potentially transform our understanding of wide class of phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Collapse-induced jets are believed to
cause erosion of turbines in submarines, failure in steam turbines as well as
wave-damage on shore breaks. Spray and atomization technologies rely on the
formation of thin, fast moving jets that break-up into many droplets.
Microfluidic devices that rely on collapse-induced jets to cleave bubbles with
precision are being developed. Snow avalanches, or rock falls, propagating at
high speeds can end up ejecting a great deal of materials upwards when they
encounter an obstacle. On a slower scale, the craters formed by raindrop impact
in a heavy downpour can be an important mechanism for soil erosion. Finally,
many drugs and food products are processed as streams of particles. The proposed
research also provides an excellent education for graduate students. It combines
close collaboration between theory and experiment. Undergraduates will be
recruited to work on both the experimental and simulation aspects of the project
as part of the University of Chicago?s Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program. Results from the research will also be incorporated into the
curriculum of two elective courses (one undergraduate / one graduate) that the
PI has developed.