* 0967816
* Collaborative Research: On Wind Turbine Loads Assessment for Fatigue and Extreme Failure Limit States in Contrasting Atmospheric Stability Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Lance Manuel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 159,470.00

0967816 / 0967482&lt;br/&gt;Manuel / Basu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
last decade, wind energy has witnessed faster growth than all other renewable
energy sectors, with over 25% annual growth. While this is encouraging news,
there are also three technical challenges facing wind energy. First, models used
in the design process for simulating turbulence do not cover the range of
atmospheric conditions likely to introduce critical events (e.g., high shear
across a turbine rotor), especially in the Great Plains region. Second, wind
turbines in service are aging, and failures, especially due to fatigue of
composite materials used for blades, demand attention. Finally, refinements in
design philosophy and practice are needed that are informed by state-of-the-art
capabilities in atmospheric boundary layer modeling and stochastic wind turbine
aeroelastic response simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research seeks to extend the
design paradigm for wind turbines to the reliability-based assessment of
performance against fatigue and extreme limit states. Specifically, turbine
loads will be evaluated under various suites of inflow turbulence flow fields
generated with spatial structure that reflects a range of atmospheric stability
conditions. The proposed work plan will focus on development of four dimensional
synthetic turbulence time series based on tuning-free large-eddy simulations
along with mesoscale model forecasts. These simulated flows will feed into
aeroelastic models of utility-scale wind turbines whose response statistics will
be developed using extensive time-domain simulations representing varying inflow
conditions over the long term. Load extreme values will be analyzed in
evaluating ultimate limit states, whereas cumulative damage and life assessment
will be analyzed in evaluating the fatigue limit states. Refinements to current
design specifications (e.g. by the International Electrotechnical Commission)
will be proposed based on findings from this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is innovative and potentially transformative because it will use
realistic atmospheric flows as the inflow conditions to the wind turbine
simulation. Consequently, the proposed research will uniquely enable the
simulation of wind turbine performance under realistic field
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and outreach activities are centered
on wind energy. The education plan will provide opportunities for students to
develop skills in state-of-the-art computational techniques at the interface of
atmospheric science and wind energy technology. Summer internship opportunities
with Sandia National Laboratories in wind energy technology will be provided for
undergraduate and graduate students. At the K-12 level, the PIs have established
relationships with teachers at local school districts in Central and West Texas
to create the Run on the Wind/Engineering a Clean Tomorrow summer camp.