* 0967598
* A Theory-Based Electroporation Method for Optimized Molecular Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Jeffrey Zahn, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 407,500.00

0967598&lt;br/&gt;Shreiber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electroporation is a means to
access the cytoplasm of a cell for delivery of molecules, while simultaneously
maintaining viability and preserving functionality. In this technique, an
electric field, which can be applied in vitro or in vivo, transiently
permeabilizes the cell membrane, through which biologically active molecules can
enter the cell, such as DNA, RNA, and amino acids. Applications of
electroporation include gene transfection, cancer therapies, and stem cell
differentiation. Despite extensive research, and an improved understanding of
the mechanisms of pore formation, electroporation methods still suffer from
limited efficiency and excessive cell damage. We believe that a fundamental lack
of understanding of the mechanisms that govern molecular transport following
electroporation is the root cause for these shortfalls. We propose that
molecular transport in electroporation is controlled by electrokinetic
mechanisms that increase transport rates and cause accumulation of molecular
species within the cell, and not merely diffusion through opened pores. The
important role of electrokinetics is supported by scaling analyses based on
electrohydrodynamic theory and our numerical simulations, as well as
experimental results by previous researchers. Based on these studies, we believe
that electrokinetically-mediated transport during electroporation can be
exploited to improve efficiency and cell viability by increasing transport into
the cell while minimizing cell permeabilization. In this proposal, we build on
our previous work to design protocols and microdevices based on principles of
electrokinetic transport specifically for electroporating cells. Accordingly,
the Specific Aims of this proposal are:&lt;br/&gt;Aim 1: To rationally split the
applied electric field during electroporation into two phases - a
'permeabilizing' phase and a 'transport' phase - to maximize both molecular
delivery and cell viability In typical electroporation, a single pulse is
delivered to form pores in the cell membrane and to drive transport into or out
of the cell. However, the field strength necessary for permeabilization is
significantly greater than that required for effective transport of ions and
macromolecules. Similarly, whereas a long pulse duration at field strengths
necessary for electroporation can significantly damage cells, the same duration
at low field strengths may enhance delivery by increasing transport time. Based
on our analyses,&lt;br/&gt;we will build a two-stage electroporation device that
delivers separate pulses for electroporation and electrokinetically- mediated
transport. We will confirm that the transport is mediated electrokinetically by
demonstrating dependence of accumulation on the ratio of intracellular to
extracellular conductivity and distinct accumulation of positively and
negatively charged species, and use these theory-driven experiments to optimize
a parameter space for maximum delivery and cell viability.&lt;br/&gt;Aim 2: To
miniaturize the two-stage device for high efficiency and throughput delivery to
single cells. In many applications, delivery of single genes or combinations of
genes to individual or populations of cells is desired for elucidation of
signaling mechanisms. Delivery to individual cells is typically done with
micropipette injection of DNA, which maintains a high degree of efficacy, but
suffers from limited throughput and automation problems; conversely, delivery to
cells in suspension via electroporation exposes the&lt;br/&gt;cells to a varying
electric field with associated variability in efficacy and viability. By
combining the theorydriven protocols with microfluidics, we will develop high-
throughput devices for efficient transfection of cell populations. We will
integrate our two-stage field delivery protocols into a microfluidic on-chip
electroporation device for fast and efficient delivery to single cells. We will
benchmark efficiency and viability capabilities against results from cells in
suspension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed work
includes: 1. This work will be the first to definitively demonstrate
electrokinetic-mediated transport via electroporation in living cells. 2.
Specific protocols based on our modeling framework will be designed for
substantial improvement in efficient and effective delivery to living cells. 3.
Combining our customized protocols with microfluidics enhances the capabilities
of electroporation technology and serves as a proof-of-principle device for
mutli-plexed high-throughput devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the proposed work includes: 1. The development of cost effective, reproducible,
safe, and efficient electroporation devices and protocols, built on sound,
fundamental scientific and engineering principles; for both biological research
and clinical applications both arenas have great potential to benefit human
health and welfare. 2. The proposed interdisciplinary research will be
integrated into an educational effort directed toward students in Biomedical and
Mechanical Engineering, as well as an outreach effort aimed at encouraging
under-represented students to the study of the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. 3. The results of the work will be broadly
disseminated through the Engineering and Experimental Biology communities via
presentations at professional meetings, including ASME, BMES, and FASEB, and
submission to prestigious journals, such as the Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
Biophysical Journal, Lab-on-a-chip, and Biotechnology &amp; Bioengineering,
among others.