* 0967473
* A New Mechanism for Heterogeneous Nucleation in Boiling Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Renwei Mei, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 04/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

0967473&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Klausner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
addresses the onset of boiling involving surfaces that are extremely smooth,
with geometrical features on the order of nanometers. Experimental observation
has shown that the onset of boiling using such surfaces occurs at superheats
much lower than expected and on the same order as for rough surfaces. This
observation of somewhat anomalous behavior calls the traditional view of
heterogeneous nucleation as emanating from trapped vapor in small surface
crevices and cavities, into question. The proposed research seeks to explain,
from a fundamental basis, this apparent anomaly. A combined experimental and
analytical approach is taken. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: It is
hypothesized that the high surface energy associated with free electron flow at
metallic surfaces contributes to the work of formation of a critical nucleus,
thus reducing the thermal energy required to initiate vapor bubble incipience.
Density functional theory will be used to develop a mathematical framework to
compute the incipient superheat while an experimental facility will be employed
to measure incipience phenomena for a variety of atomically smooth surface/fluid
combinations. The experimental investigation will be extended to measure the
incipient superheat for the same surfaces fabricated with nano-sized features
embedded within micron sized cavities. The degree to which these features
promote or inhibit incipience will be determined. Once the heterogeneous
incipient mechanism for nano-smooth surfaces is well understood, the production
and suppression of nucleation sites at low to moderate superheats will be
investigated. Finally, a computational platform will be developed to simulate
and predict the detailed transient thermal field within the solid heating
surface, and the local temperature field will be used in conjunction with the
incipience criteria to determine whether nucleation sites are produced or
suppressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Boiling is a basic heat
transfer process that is ubiquitous across an extremely wide spectrum of
manufacturing, energy generation and water production processes.
&lt;br/&gt;University of Florida electronic education delivery platforms will be
used to broadly disseminate new knowledge that evolves from the research via
distance learning. Short courses for industry will be offered and the research
results will be incorporated into these courses.