* 0967062
* Computational Modeling and Design of Cytochrome P450 Reactivity and Substrate Specificity
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Costas Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 06/30/2014
* USD 394,905.00

0967062 Maranas

Enzymes are versatile structures tuned by nature to selectively carry on a vast
array of catalytic functions. Their potential to provide solutions to challenges
in biomass treatment, biofuels production, biosensing, wastewater and
environmental pollutants treatment has long been recognized. However, many of
these enzymes suffer from poor stability under the desired reaction conditions,
or have inadequate catalytic activity, or a lack of specificity for non-native
substrate molecules. The rational design of enzymes for improved or novel
catalytic activity remains an open challenge because catalytic efficiency
depends on the nature of the molecules to be reacted, and reflects a balance of
active site access and binding with improved transition state stabilization.
High throughput experimentation will not work here due to the difficulty and
cost of screening and the enormity of the combinatorial design space.

The trio of PIs, Costas Maranas, Patrick Cirino and Michael Janik, all at
Pennsylvania State University, seek to address these shortcomings in a
systematic fashion, by first developing a multi-scale computational work-flow to
design enzymes for improved activity and specificity and then experimentally
validating the computational redesign of the enzymes. Ultimately the methodology
will be used to design mutant P450 BM-3 monooxygenase enzymes which are
functionally expressed at high levels in E. coli and are used for hydroxylation
of small alkanes for alcoholic biofuels. Their target substrates are ethane and
propane, with methane the ultimate goal.

The most far-reaching results for this program would be to devise an enzyme that
works on methane to produce methanol. Even the development of enzymes capable of
rapid and selective oxidation of C1-C3 alkanes could aid in the efficient
utilization of remote gas resources or low value refinery gas streams for fuel
and chemical generation. The potential is for a new integrated paradigm for
enzyme redesign where hypotheses generated by the computational workflow are
used to guide the experiment and experimental results serve to correct and
complete the computational base.

The educational and outreach efforts will couple the REU approach with attempts
to use existing University programs titled SROP, WISER and MURI, all of which
are research ?based programs to inspire women and minorities to experience
engineering research early in their careers. The PIs plan to include this work
in Penn State?s program titled International Genetically Engineered Machines, or
IGEM. This program targets high school and undergraduates with hands-on exposure
to synthetic biology.