* 0967949
* Fiber Lasers for Coherent Raman Microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Frank Wise, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 04/30/2015
* USD 357,008.00

0967949&lt;br/&gt;Wise&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coherent anti-Stokes Raman
scattering (CARS) microscopy is a sensitive and label-free nonlinear imaging
technique that is attracting much interest. The technique requires an excitation
source that provides two temporally-synchronized and wavelength-tunable
picosecond light pulses. Existing sources of such pulses are complicated,
expensive, and require trained operators, and these features create a major
barrier to prospective users of CARS microscopy. A group from Cornell University
will develop fiber-based light sources that promise to be integrated, stable,
compact, and user-friendly. These will facilitate the expansion of CARS and
related microscopy techniques beyond specialized research laboratories. The
Cornell group will collaborate in the development with a group from Harvard
University that is a leader in CARS microscopy. The generation of high-energy
and wavelength-tunable picosecond pulses from an all-fiber source is a major
challenge. New understanding of ultrafast nonlinear pulse propagation, and new
ways to control ultrashort light pulses, will have to be developed in order to
demonstrate the proposed capabilities. This will be converted into designs of
short-pulse oscillators, amplifiers, and frequency-conversion stages. The
development of such instruments is central to the fiber optics and ultrafast
optics communities.