* 0967915
* Gas Expanded Lubricants:  Smart Fluids for Improving Efficiency of Wind Turbines
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Paul Allaire, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 12/31/2014
* USD 305,784.00

0967915 Clarens

The goal of this research is to develop the fundamental knowledge base needed to
deliver gas-expanded lubricants (GELs) for improved efficiency in gears and
bearings of next-generation wind turbines. GELs are binary mixtures of synthetic
lubricants and dissolved liquid carbon dioxide maintained at moderate pressure.
The properties of these lubricating fluids can be dynamically adjusted by
controlling mixture composition, and consequently can help reduce operating
inefficiencies for wind turbines that are subject to dynamically changing loads.
Reliable and adaptive lubricant systems are necessary for turbines to be made
larger or to be installed in inaccessible or offshore sites. The proposed
research proposed will build the foundation of chemical understanding that is
necessary to select proper components and process operating conditions needed
for optimal performance and minimum environmental impact. Preliminary modeling
results suggest that GELs could reduce power losses in a fluid film bearing by
over 20%.

Intellectual Merit

This study will measure the mechanical and thermal characteristics of GELs under
relevant conditions and evaluate their behavior in a modified rotor test bed.
The proposed study is broken down into five tasks: 1) Study the high pressure
phase behavior of lubricants and carbon dioxide; 2) Measure the rheology of GELs
under relevant pressure and temperature conditions; 3) Evaluate the thermal
characteristics of GELs relative to straight lubricants; 4) Develop an
experimental testbed to measure bearing performance using GELs; 5) Create a life
cycle model of GEL delivery to establish large-scale feasibility.

This research is potentially transformative because it represents a completely
new approach to wind turbine lubrication that has considerable promise to make
significant improvements in increasing the energy efficiency for electric power
generation from wind energy. The proposed research has the potential to advance
fundamental understanding of the tribology of high-pressure liquid/gas mixtures,
their phase behavior, and flow properties. Specifically, the research plan seeks
to reveal the effect of two important lubricant parameters, viscosity and
density, in predicting stiffness and shear forces in rotating machinery. An
understanding of these relationships will be developed for a family of bio-based
synthetic lubricant chemistries. The results will be validated experimentally
using a specially modified test rig that mimics the nonlinear loadings typical
of real wind turbines. This new understanding will be summarized in a set of
design guidelines and tools which can be easily used by the wind industry. The
results of this work will have clear implications for wind turbine manufacturers
and supporting industries trying to improve turbine life and reduce the
generation cost of wind electricity.

Broader Impacts

The education activities will contribute to a larger effort to develop a green
energy education programs in the state of Virginia. The recent boom in
manufacturing and service sectors associated with sustainable technologies such
as wind energy suggests that training programs must be implemented to provide
skills for people hoping to work in these areas. The PIs have partnered with
Southwest Virginia Higher Education Center to provide a course in wind turbine
fundamentals and maintenance to augment existing curricula for both university
and community college students.

Research outcomes will be transferred to industry via the Rotating Machinery and
Controls (ROMAC) university-industry cooperative program at the University of
Virginia (UVa) and its forty industrial partners, including GE, Rolls Royce
Energy, and Praxair.