* 0967750
* Ultra-high-throughput Biosensing of microorganisms for efficient biofuel production
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2012
* Manuel Marquez, YNano LLC
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 04/30/2012
* USD 84,095.00

0967750 Marquez

This project proposes to develop a novel biosensing-metrological method to
identify improved microbial systems for the improvement of feedstock utilization
to produce fermentable sugars from renewable plant materials, and for the
conversion of those sugars into advanced biofuels. The world is facing a serious
global energy crisis that demands the urgent development of alternative energy
sources. The creation of a renewable biofuels industry is a promising option
that has the great potential to reduce our dependence on foreign oil and
mitigate the threat of climate change. A sustainable biofuels industry requires
organisms that efficiently convert either plant-derived sugars or solar energy
directly into commercially-relevant liquid fuels; fortunately advances in
synthetic biology and biomolecular engineering provide the potential for
microorganisms to be tailored to convert simple sugars and sunlight into fuels
at industrial scales.

These biomolecular engineering tools demand the generation and screening of
large populations of variants containing different combinations of mutations,
genes, and metabolic pathways. However, the success of these methods is
currently limited by the high cost and low speed of current screening
technologies. The research objective is to apply some recent advances in drop-
based microfluidic technology to develop a general platform for quantifying
important traits of microorganisms for biofuel production at extremely high-
throughput. This method uses picoliter aqueous drops dispersed in inert oil as
growth and measurement vessels for single organisms, which could enable
measurements of millions of cells per hour with high sensitivity and dynamic
range. This research is at the frontier of physical and biological sciences, and
therefore has intellectual merit in both fields. The proposed research has the
potential to offer an improvement over existing technologies of >103 in speed
and >107 in cost. Improvements of this scale are rare in technological
developments, with the only clear example being the semiconductor industry over
the past 30 years, where million-fold increases in semiconductor fabrication has
allowed entirely new applications for microprocessors. In the same way, it is
believed that the advances here will have broad impact, and enable qualitatively
new paths scientific inquiry. Furthermore, the potential increases in technology
could bypass one of the major bottlenecks in the biofuels industry, which has
far-reaching impacts socially, ecologically and politically.