* 0967511
* Human-Computer Interaction Doctoral Research Consortium at ACM CHI 2010: Human  Factors in Computing Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Mary Beth Rosson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2010
* USD 30,000.00

This is funding to support a doctoral research consortium (workshop) of
approximately 15 promising graduate students from the United States and abroad,
along with a panel of about 6 distinguished research faculty mentors. The event
will take place in conjunction with the ACM 2010 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI 2010), which will be held April 10-15 in Atlanta, and is
sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on
Human-Computer Interaction (SIGCHI). This is the leading international forum for
the presentation and discussion of human-computer interaction (HCI) research and
practice, and is attended by approximately 2,500 HCI professionals from around
the world. Research reports published in the CHI Conference Proceedings and the
CHI Extended Abstracts are heavily-refereed and widely cited; they are among the
most scientifically respected and impactful research publications in the field
of HCI. More information about the conference is available at
http://www.chi2010.org.

The Doctoral Consortium is a research-focused meeting that has taken place
annually at the CHI conference since 1986, and has helped to launch the careers
of many outstanding HCI researchers. Goals of the workshop include building a
cohort group of new researchers who will then have a network of colleagues
spread out across the world, guiding the work of new researchers by having
experts in the research field give them advice, and making it possible for
promising new entrants to the field to attend their research conference. Student
participants will make formal presentations of their research during the
workshop, and will receive feedback from the faculty panel. The feedback is
geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work is
positioned relative to other human-computer interaction research, whether their
topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. Student participants will present their
work to the doctoral consortium on April 10-11, with follow up activities
planned during the technical program of the conference. Extended abstracts of
the students' work will be published in the CHI 2010 Extended Abstracts, which
has wide print and electronic distribution. SIGCHI's conference management
committee will evaluate the doctoral consortium, and the results will be made
available to the organizers of future consortia. The CHI doctoral consortia have
been highly successful in providing a forum for the initial socialization into
the field of young doctoral scholars; many of today's leading HCI researchers
participated as students in earlier consortia.

Broader Impacts: The annual CHI doctoral consortia traditionally bring together
the best of the next generation of HCI researchers, allowing them to create a
social network both among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical
stage in their professional development. Because the students and faculty
constitute a diverse group across a variety of dimensions, including
nationality/cultural and scientific discipline, the students' horizons are
broadened to the future benefit of the field. In an effort to further broaden
the impact of the event, the organizers have undertaken to use NSF funds to
support participation by no more than one student from any one institution. They
will try explicitly to identify and include the broadest possible group of
highly-qualified participants, and in particular will consider gender in the
participant selection process with a target of a 50/50 split.