* 0967257
* Chip-scale ultrashort pulsed lasers for two-photon fluorescence imaging and sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* James Harris, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 495,001.00

0967257&lt;br/&gt;Schnitzer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The applicants plan to create
mode-locked, ultrashort-pulsed lasers that are made in a monolithic manner on a
single semiconductor wafer using photonic crystal technology. In the long run,
the resulting lasers could reshape how life scientists, educators and students
use nonlinear optical microscopy. For researchers, large-scale or distributed
two-photon imaging systems could provide wholly new capabilities for inspecting
the biological world or screening large libraries of specimens by the combined
use of many microscopes in parallel. The lasers will also find immediate usage
in their own neuroscience research, for visualizing neuronal dynamics in awake
behaving mice. In combination with microfabricated scanning mirrors, the chip-
scale lasers will allow us to make tiny two-photon microscopes such that each
mouse carries its own microscope on its cranium The research will be a
collaboration between two Stanford labs of complementary expertise. James Harris
is a pioneer in the use of molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) techniques for growing
semiconductor optical devices. Mark Schnitzer is deeply experienced in the
design and construction of two-photon microscopes and their usages for brain
imaging. As a proof-of-principle demonstration, the two groups will design,
build, test, and refine 10 tiny two-photon microscopes based on chip-scale
lasers.