* 0967861
* Developing the Path Toward Realizing the Full Potential of II-VI Based Photovoltaic Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Don Morel, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2015
* USD 299,706.00

0967861&lt;br/&gt;Ferekides&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manufacturing costs for thin film cadmium telluride-
based (CdTe) photovoltaic (PV) modules are currently below $1 per watt, which is
less than 50% the cost of crystalline silicon PV. Consequently, CdTe-based PV
systems have reached grid parity in many locations. However, in order for this
cost-effective PV technology to become a significant producer of electricity for
the future, the solar energy conversion efficiency of the device must be
advanced beyond the current level of 16%. Furthermore, material utilization must
be improved in order to reduce tellurium loading, which is a limited resource.
This research will focus on improving the fundamental understanding of
polycrystalline CdTe thin films as the basis to improve the efficiency of CdTe
solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, CdTe thin film solar cells have
been fabricated using empirical optimization of simple deposition technologies
and heat treatments. A key device characteristic, the doping level in the
absorber material, has never been intentionally controlled or tuned. Doping
levels in CdTe solar cells are the result of several impurities introduced at
various processing steps during the solar cell fabrication process. This
research will focus on the deposition of polycrystalline CdTe films by an
atmospheric pressure vapor transport process that allows for control of the
deposition conditions. This process will controllably dope the thin films, and
therefore provides a means to determine the p-type doping levels required to
advance the PV efficiency towards the practical limit of
20%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is innovative because it will
use a vapor elemental deposition technique to control the doping and defect
formation process. The research is potentially transformative because it
identifies the fundamental breakthroughs needed to make CdTe solar cells with
efficiency superior to silicon PV but with lower
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving the efficiencies of CdTe solar cells will
lead to lower manufacturing costs and allow cleanly-generated power to penetrate
electricity markets around the world, including many poor and underdeveloped
nations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed education activities will train
students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels in the fast growing field
of photovoltaics, which currently has a significant shortage of engineers.
Existing REU programs will be used to drive the education and outreach
activities. Specifically, all REU students, in addition to their research
activities, will also serve as Ambassadors for Solar PV, where they will conduct
an annual Solar Energy Workshop which hosts local elementary school students for
a half day and gets them involved in hands-on solar energy activities. The REU
students will also assist with the development of a series of modules that will
be used in the Electronic Materials and Semiconductor Device courses. These
modules will serve as the lab component for these courses, and are intended to
expose all undergraduate students in electrical engineering at University of
South Florida to photovoltaics concepts. Research on II-VI compound
semiconductor PV devices will be integrated into required courses of the
electrical engineering curriculum that will reach 150 students per year.