* 0967814
* NEW ASYMMETRIC ORGANOBORANE CONVERSIONS VIA 9-BORABICYCLO[3.3.2]DECANES
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2009,02/28/2013
* John Soderquist, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2013
* USD 372,400.00

This project will continue work on the development of methods for the asymmetric
formation of C-C bonds through organoborane reactions employing the stable and
robust 9-borabicyclo[3.3.2]decanes (BBDs). While a wide variety of asymmetric
organoborane conversions are known, prior to the development of the BBDs, the
air-sensitivity and thermal instability of the available trialkylborane reagents
has limited the discovery of new reagents and reactions. The present studies
will focus on the invention of new organoborane chemistry based upon the
recyclable and selective BBDs. The rates and enantioselectivities of the
reactions of new 10-substituted BBDs will be compared to those of the reagents
that have been previously examined.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor John A. Soderquist of the Department of Chemistry at
the University of Puerto Rico. Professor Soderquist's research efforts revolve
around the development of new asymmetric organoborane conversions for the
selective formation of C-C bonds. Such chemistry will contribute to
environmentally benign methods for chemical synthesis as all of the organoborane
reagents are recyclable through simple procedures. Successful development of the
methodology will have an impact on synthesis in the pharmaceutical and
agricultural industries.