* 0967672
* Buoyancy Driven Turbulence Beyond Self-Similar Equilibrium
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2010,01/31/2013
* Arindam Banerjee, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 01/31/2013
* USD 292,387.00

0967672 Banerjee

Self similarity is an important concept that arises in the study of turbulent
flows, in which an assumption is often made that memory of initial conditions
(ICs) are lost at late time and the turbulence develops to a equilibrium (i.e.
self similar) state. However, recent studies have indicated that only special
turbulent flows are truly self similar. Experiments and computations in buoyancy
driven turbulence have indicated that late time turbulence can be affected by
ICs seeded into the flow and memory of these ICs are not lost.

This presents a remarkable opportunity to predict and design late time buoyancy
driven turbulence that leaves behind the fully developed equilibrium concept,
and embrace late time turbulence through prescribed ICs that either enhance, or
suppress, or maintain turbulence intensity/structure in these flows. The
objective of the proposed research program is to evaluate late-time signatures
of ICs that will result in a better understanding of mix dominated buoyancy
problems with widespread applications in heat exchangers, chemical reactors,
climate dynamics, pollutant dispersion, inertial confinement fusion, and,
astrophysical flows.

The research includes experiments and simulations. The experimental thrust will
involve a novel two wheel high acceleration experiment that uses controlled ICs
to experimentally study the late time turbulent material (molecular) mixing for
RT flows. High fidelity diagnostics which include a combined fast-Particle
Imaging Velocimetry/Planar Laser Induced Fluorescence (f-PIV/PLIF). This will
provide detailed data of ICs in each experiment, and field measurements of flow
velocities, statistical probability density functions of density, velocity
fluctuations and associated turbulence correlations and cross correlations. In
addition, implicit Large Eddy Simulations (ILES) are planned to cross-couple
with the experiment via validation and verification (V&V) of the simulation and
therefore provide additional detailed data sets to study the late-time effect of
designed ICs.

Intellectual Merits:

The intellectual merits of the proposed work involve usage of the experimental
and computational data sets to: (a) examine the role of ICs to control the
molecular mixing dynamics; (b) provide valuable information on active control of
turbulent mixing as occurs in various applications of such flows. In addition,
the proposed research is expected to result in new discoveries about the mixing
process which can also be used to extend turbulence theory beyond the
traditional ideas of Kolmogorov which is related to the existence of inertial
range dynamics and small scale universality.

Broader Impacts:

The proposed research extends well beyond our interest in buoyancy driven flows
and incorporates the possibility of systematically designing initial and
boundary conditions for passive control of late time turbulence. On the
educational front, it will help support two graduate students and will introduce
students to cutting edge research ideas in a graduate level course on Turbulent
Flows. Undergraduate researchers will be included through the Missouri S&T-OURE
(Opportunities for Undergraduate Research Experience) program. The students who
will perform the bulk of this research will be actively recruited from
underrepresented groups (women and minority) at Missouri S&T through the Women
in Science & Engineering (WISE) program on campus. In addition, active
collaboration with Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) will aid in the
potential impact of this work and is expected to result in future research
opportunities for graduate students upon completion of their degrees.