* 0967377
* Relating stimulus space geometry and topology to neural network activity and connectivity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Vladimir Itskov, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 88,905.00

This project seeks to deepen our understanding of how the brain creates
representations of stimulus spaces by studying how relationships between
external stimuli can be inferred from the neural activity (spikes) and
connectivity of a recurrent network. In doing so, this research will bring
together two complementary perspectives on what controls neural activity in
sensory systems: receptive fields and neural network dynamics. In joint work
with Carina Curto, we have developed a novel theoretical approach that enables
building stimulus spaces directly from neural activity, thus circumventing
knowledge of network connectivity and of receptive fields that may be difficult
to communicate from one area of the brain to another. This is achieved using
some elegant ideas from algebraic topology and algebraic geometry that are
largely unknown to neuroscientists, and opens up a new avenue for the analysis
of the structure and function of recurrent neural networks. By investigating
compatibility conditions between patterns of activity emerging from recurrent
neural networks and experimentally observed receptive fields, this project will
find constraints on recurrent network connectivity, ultimately generating
experimentally testable predictions. The theoretical framework will also be
translated into novel data analysis tools that will be useful for in analyzing
large-scale electrophysiological recordings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central
question in neuroscience is to understand how the brain creates representations
of the external world. Although a great deal of experimental work has uncovered
correlations between neural activity and sensory stimuli, there is very little
understanding of how the brain encodes relationships between distinct stimuli of
similar type. This research develops a novel theoretical framework to
investigate this question by studying the interplay between stimulus encoding
and the structure of recurrent neural circuits, typical of mammalian brain areas
such as neocortex and hippocampus. The findings will yield new insight into the
role of neural circuits in learning and memory, and of how the brain organizes
knowledge. Progress in the basic understanding of neural circuits is essential
for improving our understanding of learning disabilities and diseases (such as
epilepsy and schizophrenia) that are believed to be related to the malfunction
of neural circuits.