* 0967023
* Wave-Structure Interaction of Floating Wind Turbines - A Combined Numerical and Experimental Investigation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Qiang Zhu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 05/31/2014
* USD 324,102.00

0967023&lt;br/&gt;Zhu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Floating wind turbines are novel
renewable energy devices designed to operate in deep waters (&gt;60 m), where
most of the offshore wind energy resource is found. These floating turbines are
structurally different from other existing offshore systems, and their
structural stability in offshore conditions has not been extensively tested.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research effort will make use of an experimental facility for
earthquake engineering and state-of-the-art computational methods to study the
dynamic structural responses of floating wind turbines in ocean waves. Two
models, a frequency-domain model and a nonlinear time-domain model, will be
developed to study the fluid-structure interaction problem. For simulations of
wave-body interaction, the first model uses a linear boundary element model,
while the second model applies a fully-nonlinear mixed-Eularian-Lagragian
method. Both models include a comprehensive, fully-nonlinear dynamic model of
the mooring system and a FEM model of the structural responses. The two-model
approach enables the study of both long-term responses of the system (e.g. for
fatigue studies) and transient response due to large waves (e.g. rogue waves).
The research plan will focus on three areas: long-term structural response in
wave fields, wave-structure resonances, and responses to large waves. For the
model verification studies, full-scale shake table experiments will be carried
out on a 65 kW system, and the recorded structural responses will be compared
with model predictions. The models will then be used to predict the performance
of a scaled-up 5 MW system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is potentially
transformative because it will provide new tools to evaluate the feasibility of
current designs for floating wind turbines. This research could also be used to
guide the development of future deep-water offshore wind
farms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
unique aspect of this work is that it uses earthquake engineering tools,
specifically the Large High-Performance Outdoor Shake Table at University of
California - San Diego, to study offshore wind energy
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to training of undergraduate and
graduate students directly involved in the research effort, learning materials
based on their research will be incorporated into existing undergraduate and
graduate structural and fluids mechanics courses. Other activities include using
the Large High-Performance Outdoor Shake Table at University of California at
San Diego as a demonstration to reach out to K-12 students from under-
represented groups on topics related to renewable energy. Websites for this
facility will be updated to include the floating wind turbine.