* 0967531
* Turbulent Drag Reduction using Superhydrophobic Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Jonathan Rothstein, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 07/31/2013
* USD 287,500.00

0967531&lt;br/&gt;Rothstein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has the objective
to develop and apply an innovative new passive technique for producing
significant drag reduction in the turbulent flows. By treating a solid surface
to make it superhydrophobic it is possible to dramatically affect how this solid
surface interacts with a flowing liquid. Preliminary experiments have shown that
superhydrophobic surfaces can be utilized to reduce drag in laminar flows
through microchannels by up to 40%. The new research is aimed to show through
the proposed experiments that these surfaces can also be used to delay the
transition to turbulence and produce substantial drag reduction in both internal
and external turbulent flows. The development of the proposed technology could
have a profound effect on a huge variety of existing technologies, resulting in
benefits ranging from a reduction in the pressure drop in pipe flows to an
increase in range and speed of ships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superhydrophobic surfaces are engineered by taking
materials with micron or nanoscale surfaces roughness and chemically treating
them to make them hydrophobic. Because of the hydrophobicity of these microscale
and nanoscale protrusions, when water is brought in contact with a
superhydrophobic surface, it does not fully wet the surface. Instead, it remains
in contact with only the peaks of the surface topology resulting in a shear free
air water interface. The PI has shown through direct velocity measurements and
comparison to numerical simulations and analytical theory that drag reduction in
laminar flows results from the reduction in the effective surface area of the
solid in contact with the flowing fluid and the presence of this shearfree air
water interface. By inducing an effective slip, reducing the effective surface
area and reducing the wall shear stress in a flow, these super-hydrophobic
surfaces should also produce considerable drag reduction in turbulent flows. The
preliminary experiments show upwards of 50% drag reduction in turbulent channel
flows, however the work was narrowly focused and limited. With a wealth of
design space still to be explored this number could increase substantially. This
technique represents a new passive approach to turbulent drag reduction that
does not require any modification of the transported fluid or active control by
the device only the development and use of hydrophobic micro and nanopatterned
surfaces. Various patterns and superhydrophobic materials will be tested to
maximize turbulent drag reduction using durable, long-lived and easily applied
superhydrophobic surfaces. These surfaces will be investigated in a number of
different flows including channel flow, flow past a flat plate and flow past a
number of different blunt and streamlined objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
proposal we will i) explore a number of different designs of superhydrophobic
surfaces to attempt to better understand the origins and scaling or turbulent
drag reduction, ii) extend the turbulent drag reduction measurements to high
Reynolds numbers to investigate if the superhydrophobic drag reduction phenomena
is a transition effect or robust at higher speeds, iii) investigate the
importance of air-water interface shape and deflection and iv) investigate the
impact of superhydrophobic surfaces on the flow past blunt or streamlined bodies
where stagnation points are present and separation is
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research program bridges fundamental experimental wetting phenomena and
fluid dynamics with commercial and industrial applications where drag reduction
could save significant amount of money, reduce the countrys dependence on fossil
fuels and dramatically reduce the CO2 footprint of commercial and military
shipping. The results from this research program should lead to a whole new way
of thinking about turbulent drag reduction. The project has several educational
components including involvement of undergraduates in the research, K-12
outreach and the recruitment of students from underrepresented groups through
the NEAGEP centered at UMASS.