* 0967037
* SPLITT-based detection and monitoring of engineered nanomaterials in aquatic systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* William Johnson, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 439,603.00

This research will develop methods for the detection and monitoring of
engineered nanomaterials in aquatic systems. Advanced low-invasive fractionation
techniques will be refined to fractionate across the nanoscale (e.g. between 2
and 450 nm). Elemental distributions, size and charge distributions, as well as
isotopic signatures and morphology, will be explored among various sources of
engineered and other nanomaterials. Critical steps in the research include
developing a new analytical methodology (SPLITT) that splits elements into
dissolved versus particulate fractions. Research will explore to what extent
SPLITT fractionates nanomaterials that have equilibrated with aquatic media. It
will also examine the optimal fields for different nanomaterial sources, and to
what extent composition, size, and charge distributions affects differentiation:
(a) between natural and incidental/engineered nanomaterials and (b) among
various sources of a nanoparticle class. The research will determine to what
extent existing manufacturing processes produce nanomaterials with distinct
isotopic signatures relative to natural and incidental nanomaterials and among
various sources of a nanoparticle class. Broader impacts of this work include
significant outreach to students and teachers at the K-12 level. It also
supports an investigator at an institution in an EPSCOR state.