* 0967559
* Magnetically-Driven Orientation of Multiphase Polymer Systems: A Ligand-Functionalized, Magnetic Nanoparticle Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Richard Spontak, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 04/30/2014
* USD 299,992.00

Proposal Number: 0967559&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Richard
Spontak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in dispersing inorganic nanoparticles
(NPs) in polymeric matrices continues to increase as a viable and facile means
by which to enhance the mechanical, optical, electrical, and magnetic properties
of organic polymers. While many studies have focused on using the (co)polymer
matrix to spatially modulate the NPs, the overarching objective of the present
proposal is to demonstrate the feasibility of using field aligned surface
functionalized magnetic nanoparticles (NPs) to direct phase orientation and
therefore generate new multiphase polymer morphologies with potentially new
anisotropic properties. The effects of magnetic NP chains formed in homogeneous
polymer mixtures by externally applied, uniform magnetic fields, on the
nano/microstructure during (micro)phase separation will be explored in two
systems: polymer blends and block copolymers composed of polystyrene and
poly(methyl methacrylate) (PS/PMMA). We hypothesize that, due to the formation
of NP chains along the field direction, the blends will form highly elongated
phase domains or possibly layers instead of conventional spheroidal domains,
whereas the lamellae in the copolymer will align with the NPs to form large
grain sizes (with a reduced number of defects). The NP surfaces with native long
chained aliphatic functional groups are expected to agglomerate at the interface
in both systems and thus serve as stabilizing sites. This prediction will be
verified using magnetic (Co and Fe3O4) NPs under magnetic fields of up to 20 kOe
to induce formation of linear NP chains. These NP chains, responsible for
observed ferrofluid behavior, are predicted to template formation of the
interface through their pinning behavior. To explore a different regime of
thermodynamic behavior, NPs will be functionalized with oligostyrene (OS) or
oligo(methyl methacrylate) (OMMA) to impart selective solubility in one of the
polymer species. The field aligned nano/microstructures will be compared for
magnetic NP chain formation at the interface versus within one of the
(micro)domains. Binary core Au/Fe3O4 NPs will also be prepared. Owing to the
distinct Au and Fe3O4 surface chemistries, each half will be independently
functionalized one half with OPS, and the other with OMMA, to form Janus NPs.
The possibility of altering interfaces with oriented Au/Fe3O4 NPs will be
explored. Multiscale molecular dynamics simulations complementing experiments
will be performed to (i) provide a theoretical framework of the dynamics of NP
chain formation and (ii) guide experimental design by establishing operational
thresholds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will significantly enhance the current understanding of the
role that NPs can serve to pin or align phase boundaries in heterogeneous
polymer systems. Use of magnetic-field aligned NP chains to template formation
of oriented lamellar phase boundaries will be of interest for further studies
and applications, since there exists a great need to achieve greater control
over morphological orientation in multiphase polymer
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
from the proposed research will be incorporated into two courses at NCSU. In
addition to enriching the undergraduate and graduate curriculum through student
participation, we plan outreach programs to local students at the K-12 levels
through the Kenan Fellows Program at NCSU. The PIs will endeavor to attract
underrepresented and minority students from the RISE (incoming freshman
students) and Pack Promise (low income students provided with tuition wavers,
research positions, and academic support) programs at NC State. The PIs have
successful experience recruiting exemplary students from such student groups.