* 0967069
* Study of Protein Translocation Using Microfluidic Electroporative Flow Cytometry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Robert Geahlen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 340,000.00

Technologies based on data from single cells within a large population, most
notably flow cytometry, have been successfully applied to study biological
problems associated with dynamics in the protein expression level. In
comparison, the determination of protein translocation within cells (i.e.
movement of a protein between the cytoplasm and plasma membrane, or between the
nucleus and cytoplasm) has been only carried out by bulk sample methods such as
fractionation/Western blotting or imaging of a low number of cells. Protein
translocation has fundamental importance in biology and medicine. Although the
vast majority of proteins are synthesized in the cytoplasm, 20% proteins are
located in non-cytoplasmic aqueous spaces and additional 25-30% of the proteins
are located within a membrane. Studying protein translocation is critical for
understanding signal transduction and regulation pathways in cells and the
disease processes that they are involved in. Translocation does not involve
change in the protein expression level therefore is undetectable by conventional
flow cytometry. Thus high throughput techniques for detecting protein
translocation in single cells are in great demand for generating mechanistic
insights into a lot of important biological processes. &lt;br/&gt;In this
project, our overall goal is to develop a new high throughput technique, which
we refer to as microfluidic electroporative flow cytometry (EFC), to detect the
protein translocation at the single cell level and study the kinetics of
translocation processes. Microfluidic EFC combines electroporation (the
application of an external electrical field to breach the cell membrane barrier)
with flow cytometry. Our preliminary data indicate that the release of a protein
from cells into surrounding solution during electroporation is dependent on its
subcellular location. By recording the loss in the protein amount due to
electroporation for a single cell, we will be able to determine whether
translocation occurs. Using this approach we will test two model proteins that
are biologically important: a kinase Syk which translocates from the cytoplasm
to the plasma membrane and a transcription factor NF-kappaB which transports
from the cytoplasm to the nucleus upon stimulation. We will demonstrate
detection of these two different types of translocations at the single cell
level. Furthermore we will use microfluidic EFC to generate data on the kinetics
of these processes under different stimulation conditions. We will provide
cross-platform validation of the technology by comparing the results to those
obtained using traditional methods such as fractionation/western blotting and
confocal fluorescence microscopy. As the integrated educational activities, we
will train undergraduate and graduate students in interdisciplinary settings
with emphasis on women and underrepresented minority students and disseminate
the knowledge to high school students and the general public.