* 0967722
* High-Efficiency Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells Based on Ordered TiO2 Nanotube Arrays
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Di Gao, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 04/30/2014
* USD 276,626.00

0967722&lt;br/&gt;Gao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs)
have potential for low-cost solar electricity production. Anodes of current DSCs
use sintered mesoporous films of TiO2 nanoparticles. Although the disordered
pore structure of such films provides a high surface area for dye adsorption,
the short electron lifetime and long pathway electron transport in these
materials have limited the improvement of the solar energy conversion efficiency
of DSCs. Anodes based on ordered ZnO nanowires have shown promise to overcome
these constraints. However, ZnO material properties are not as good as TiO2 for
DSC photoanodes. Previous attempts at fabricating TiO2 nanotube photoanodes by
anodizing bulk titanium produced opaque films, which required a backside
illumination configuration and resulted in nearly 20% of incident photon loss.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will use a facile method for synthesis of vertically-aligned TiO2
nanotube arrays directly on transparent conductive oxide (TCO) surfaces. DSCs
fabricated with these TiO2 nanotubes have to potential to significantly
outperform ZnO nanowire-based devices, because the electron lifetime in TiO2
nanotubes is more than ten times longer than that either in ZnO nanowires or in
sintered TiO2 nanoparticles. The proposed research will take advantage of the
significantly extended electron lifetime and improved accessibility of ordered
TiO2 nanotube array photoanodes to develop high efficiency DSCs. This
configuration will also facilitate the use of a solid-state electrolyte to
overcome the packaging challenges with liquid electrolyte based DSCs.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has five objectives. The first objective is to
synthesize ultra-long ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays directly on TCO. The second
objective is to fabricate DSCs with thickened sensitized films enabled by the
ultra-long ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays. The remaining objectives are to explore
alternative redox mediators in DSCs, fabricate TiO2 nanotube DSCs with a solid-
state electrolyte, and sensitize DSCs with quantum dots.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is potentially transformative because it
provides a new approach to make the fundamental improvements in charge transport
needed to break through the efficiency barriers of DSC devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three education and
outreach activities are proposed. The first activity is the training graduate
and undergraduate students through hands-on research. The second activity
focuses on the development of an international field study module for
undergraduate students that provides an international perspective to sustainable
engineering through a collaboration with Tsinghua University in China. The third
activity focuses on outreach to minority pre-college students through 1)
development of high-school course unit on "Sustainability and Innovation", and
2) hands-on science workshops in collaboration with Baldwin High School and
Westinghouse High School in Pittsburgh, PA.