* 0967038
* Integrable Structure of Random Spectra Derived from Diophantine Geometry
* NONE,NONE
* 08/16/2009,06/30/2012
* Christopher Sinclair, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2012
* USD 60,234.00

Abstract Sinclair

The proposed research aims to expand our knowledge of random matrix ensembles
with two species of eigenvalues. Among the ensembles to be studied are real
asymmetric ensembles and ensembles of cosquare matrices. The latter ensembles
consist of matrices whose eigenvalues are complex and satisfy an invariance
property with respect to the unit circle. This invariance property is analogous
to that of complex conjugation in real asymmetric ensembles, and the unit circle
replaces the real line as an exceptional set in the study of eigenvalue
statistics. Of particular interest is the study of the integrable structure of
cosquare ensembles. Recent work by the PI on the integrable structure of real
asymmetric ensembles suggests that cosquare ensembles have an analogous
integrable structure. This discovery will further our understanding of ensembles
with two (or more) different species of eigenvalues. Specific topics to be
investigated include the joint eigenvalue density, a closed form for ensemble
averages and correlation functions, as well as the limit law for the spectral
radius (as the size of the matrices increases) and asymptotic results for the
proportion of eigenvalues of unit modulus. The proposed research also aims to
apply these results to Diophantine problems via the investigation of ensembles
which arise naturally from heights of polynomials. The connection between
polynomials and cosquare ensembles stems from the fact that the set
characteristic polynomials of cosquare matrices is identical to the set of monic
self-inversive polynomials. The latter arise naturally in the study of integer
polynomials of small height.

An additional goal is the study of the integrable structure of Hermitian
ensembles whose inverse temperature parameter (beta) is a square integer. Random
matrix theory is a branch of mathematics which has application to fields as
varied as physics, neuroscience, wireless communication and the study of prime
numbers. This ubiquity arises via ?universal? mathematical models which are
naturally applicable in many diverse contexts. The study of these universal
models not only leads to new discoveries in their areas of application, but also
leads to surprising connections between seemingly disparate areas of science and
engineering. Random matrix theory is but one example of the pursuit of abstract
mathematical knowledge leading to advances in applied sciences. The goal of the
proposed research is the investigation of two particular universal models and
their application to the study of the integers. One of these universal models
also has applications in the study of random networks, dynamics and cortical
electric activity; the proposed research will potentially further our
understanding of these fields. The other proposed model is new and has
application to the study of integers; past precedents suggest that this
universal model will find eventual application in a wider variety of contexts.