* 0967620
* Particles on Curved Liquid Interfaces: Geometry, Mechanics, and Self-Assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Anthony Dinsmore, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 03/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

This Particles on Curved Interfaces: Geometry, Mechanics, and Self Assembly

The adsorption of solid like particles on soft interfaces is ubiquitous in man-
made systems as well as in the biological world. The versatility of these
phenomena range from Pickering emulsions drops that are covered by a dense
colloidal suspension, to proteins that reside on cellular membranes.
Understanding the interactions between particles and interfaces and the mutual
forces between particles themselves is crucial for developing effective self
assembly methods and for controlling the stability of particle laden emulsions.
A variety of physical mechanisms are believed to affect these interactions, from
surface tension and contact line pinning to electrostatics and van-der-Waals
forces. If particles are adsorbed on a curved interface, their mechanics may
also be significantly influenced by the surface geometry. Such geometry induced
effects have not been addressed in detail, and the purpose of this proposal is
to commence their systematic study. Focusing on simple yet nontrivial
geometries, we propose experimental and theoretical studies aimed at
illuminating universal aspects of the mechanics of particles on curved surfaces.

Intellectual Merit:

(i) We will study the conditions under which the binding energy of solid
particles to curved surfaces depends only on the local interfacial curvatures
near the adsorbed particle.

(ii) We will study the geometry induced interactions among a few particles on a
curved interface. We will develop a set of experiments to test the curvature
dependent interactions. In particular, we will explore whether such forces can
underlie the puzzling long range attraction that often exists between adsorbed
particles.

(iii) We will characterize the behavior of adsorbed particles under
nonequilibrium surface flows. We will address flow geometries that allow
comparison between geometryinduced forces and the viscous stresses associated
with nonequilibrium flow.

(iv) We will address basic problems related to the behavior of a dense
suspension of adsorbed particles. In particular, we will explore whether the
presence of many adsorbed particles can affect the stability of curved
interfaces, and what is the nature of interactions between adsorbed particles in
dense suspension.

Broad Impact:

(i) The proposed research will provide training for a graduate student and one
or more undergraduate students in a variety of experimental and analytic
methods, and the opportunity to combine both perspectives within the same
project.

(ii) Both PI's are leading a number of educational projects, intended for
graduate and undergraduate students in UMass Amherst and elsewhere. A new
component of the proposal is the development of outreach programs for regional
high school students and teachers, which will impart awareness, excitement, and
active exposure to ongoing research in soft matter physics. An emphasis will be
given to participation of students and teachers from low income and
underrepresented communities.

(iii) Understanding the basic principles underlying geometry induced forces will
yield transformative results, that could be used to exploring new approaches to
directed assembly of particles, and to controlled, particle stabilized
(Pickering) emulsification.

(iv) Finally, the proposal seeks to explore the most basic geometry induced
effects by focusing on simple (axially symmetric) interfaces and solid
(spherical) particles. The results of the proposed studies will spur a fruitful
line of research that will address the manifestations of geometry induced
interactions in more complicated systems, characterized by flexible particles
(e.g., proteins), other types of surfaces (e.g., with bending modulus), and
complicated surface geometries and particle shapes.