* 0967491
* 2010 Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Conference, May 31, 2010 - June 1, 2010; University of Notre Dame, Notre, IN
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2011
* Edward Maginn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2011
* USD 6,200.00

0967491 Maginn

Intellectual Merit:

Funds are provided to help support the Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical
Mechanics (MTSM) Conference, to be held on the campus of the University of Notre
Dame, May 31, 2010 -June 1, 2010. NSF Funds will be used to help partially
defray registration costs for undergraduates, graduate students postdocs and
faculty participants. The MTSM Conference will be a venue where the latest
research in computational, theoretical and experimental thermodynamics and
statistical mechanics is shared. The meeting draws participants from a huge
section of the United States, and attendees range from established senior
faculty members to undergraduates and new graduate students. Sharing research
results and interacting on a deep personal level with other researchers is
necessary to advance science and engineering, especially now that electronic
communication has made many interactions with colleagues shallow and fleeting.
Short, intense and focused meetings are especially useful for younger
researchers, who can use these meetings to establish contacts and build
collaborations with other researchers. The MTSM Conference has successfully
helped build research collaborations among several groups in the Midwest region
over the years, and it is anticipated that the 2010 edition will continue this
tradition.

Broader Impacts:

For twenty years, the Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics
Conference has been successful in facilitating meaningful field specific
discussions and longstanding collaborations among researchers in thermodynamics
and statistical mechanics. Part of the historical success of the meeting is the
annual attempt to keep costs at a minimum by holding bare bones meetings at
universities throughout the Midwest region. This proposal, combined with funds
committed by Notre Dames College of Engineering and Graduate School, will
provide funding to help defray meeting expenses and maximize participation. The
opportunity to attend the MTSM meeting is especially important for early career
scientists (undergraduates, graduate students, and newer faculty members) who
will be able to participate in a focused meeting as a way to stimulate
creativity and develop sustained collaborative relationships with colleagues
working on related projects. In contrast to big national meetings or high
profile meetings like Gordon Research Conferences, the 2010 MTSM meeting will be
tailored to enable these kinds of personal and mentoring interactions. Four
younger faculty members will give invited talks to their peers, 45 graduate
students will be able to participate, with roughly 29 contributed talks, and a
new feature will enable 15 undergraduate researchers to participate in a poster
session and preview talk session where they will be given 5 minutes to highlight
their work. Finally, up to 16 additional faculty members will attend, most
serving as audience participants and mentors for the students in their group and
others. These faculty members will represent a diverse set of colleges and
universities, including some primarily undergraduate institutions, and a range
of experience levels. This diversity is intentional. It provides an important
forum for widening the research conversation in thermodynamics and statistical
mechanics by including researchers from the point when their scientific
interests are just beginning to the point where they can reflect back on a full
career. NSF support for MTSM will enable students who might not have the means
to attend such a conference to participate. A special workshop on applying to
graduate school and how to apply for fellowships will also be offered to the
undergraduate researchers.