* 0967348
* GOALI - Fundamental Studies of Microstructure and Property Development in Novel Latex Coatings
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2010,12/31/2014
* Alon McCormick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 12/31/2014
* USD 316,029.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research explores
the fundamentals of microstructure and property development in coatings created
from engineered latex particles developed at Arkema, Inc. Arkema is a leading
supplier of specialty chemicals that are used in the coatings industry and has
been an innovator in the development of synthetic routes to new latex particles.
The University of Minnesota has developed advanced techniques to monitor
structure and property development in situ during drying and via time sectioning
methods in which the coating is frozen at different stages of structure
development and then examined in the frozen state by cryogenic scanning electron
microscopy (cryoSEM). The overall aim of the research is to advance the
understanding of the film formation and structure development in latex coatings
using model systems that are industrially relevant and well suited to
fundamental research. Two novel latex systems will be explored in this research:
(1) block copolymer latex and (2) fluoropolymer acrylic latex. The block
copolymer latex consists of nanostructured particles with a combination of hard
and soft blocks in a microphase separated nanostructure. The role of this
nanostructure on film formation is not understood. The objective of this part of
the research is to connect the nanostructure of block copolymer latex particles
with the film formation process and the final structure of the coating. Model
block copolymer latex with a range of chemistries and morphologies will be
synthesized at Arkema. CryoSEM will be used to track the development of
structure during film formation so that connections to nanostructure can be
made. The stages in structure development, from discrete particles through
compaction and deformation to the final coalesced film, will be imaged in frozen
specimens. AFM studies will complement the research. With the fluoropolymer-
acrylic latex, the main objective is to characterize film formation and relate
the structure development to stress and cracking. Understanding and controlling
cracking is important to the application of latex materials. Arkema will provide
model materials formulated with and without a coalescing aid. CryoSEM studies
will be carried out in parallel with measurements of weight loss and stress
development and observations of cracking in order to determine the origin of the
stress that causes cracking and the role of the latex particle structure on the
phenomenon. The second objective is to use a broader set of particles to explore
connections between particle and process parameters on cracking, and ultimately
to develop strategies to mitigate cracks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will impact the fields of coating
processing, colloidal science, materials characterization, and particle
mechanics. The results will broadly apply to other latex materials, feeding a
growing effort in industry to replace solvent based polymer coatings with water-
based latex coatings. The research will help to advance the scientific
understanding so that companies can meet the challenges they face as they seek
to improve the environment. The impact of the research will extend to multiple
groups of students. First, the research will help the career development of the
graduate student as well as the undergraduate researchers, who will join the
effort in the summers. These students will learn not only from the research
itself but also from the interactions with academic and industrial scientists.
Second, the graduate students in the home department of the academic PIs will
have the opportunity to participate in an industrial roundtable that involves
the Arkema PIs. Third, a new experiment will be designed for an undergraduate
course in Materials Processing. The students will design coating formulations to
make a Cool Roof? using the fluoropolymer acrylic latex. Lastly, the PIs will
develop a learning module that introduces K-12 students to engineering concepts,
an important topic in light of recent changes to the science standards in the
State of Minnesota. The module will also be built on basic concepts in film
formation and will include engineering of a Cool Roof. A high school science
teacher will join the team to help with the research and the development of the
learning module. The Arkema Foundation will make the learning module available
through its summer program for science teachers.