* 0967176
* Municipal wastewater treatment and the proliferation of antibiotic resistance
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Timothy LaPara, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 05/31/2014
* USD 400,763.00

Proposal Title: Municipal wastewater treatment and the proliferation of
antibiotic resistance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: LaPara,
Timothy&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET-0967176&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Antibiotics
have profoundly impacted medical practice, as these drugs can successfully
eradicate most bacterial infections. While the medical community now recognizes
the growing problem of antibiotic resistance, effective solutions are currently
lacking and there is an urgent need to find new approaches to help solve the
problem of broadly disseminated antibiotic resistant bacteria. This research
proposal focuses on the importance of municipal wastewater and municipal
wastewater treatment on the proliferation of antibiotic resistance. Even though
municipal wastewater has been clearly and repeatedly shown to contain antibiotic
resistant bacteria, the scientific community has generally failed to recognize
municipal wastewater as a principal reservoir of antibiotic resistance. There
are two primary routes by which antibiotic resistant bacteria can leave a
municipal wastewater treatment facility: (1) with the treated effluent, and (2)
with the residual wastewater solids. Of these two routes, residual wastewater
solids are much more likely to be important for the spread of resistance ? and
thus the primary focus of this proposal. The proposed research will provide
seminal knowledge, allowing design engineers to select technologies that will
optimize pathogen inactivation, the elimination of antibiotic resistant
bacteria, the reduction of antibiotic resistance genes, and the stabilization of
wastewater solids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will test two
hypotheses concerning the ecology of antibiotic resistance: (1) municipal
wastewater treatment facilities can be intentionally designed to inactivate
antibiotic resistant bacteria and to eliminate the genetic determinants that
encode resistance, and (2) municipal wastewater treatment facilities are a
source of antibiotic resistant bacteria because the conditions intentionally
designed by environmental engineers to treat municipal wastewater are
simultaneously (albeit unintentionally) conducive for horizontal gene transfer.
The first hypothesis will be tested by quantifying the reductions of genes
encoding antibiotic resistance in anaerobic digestors and other unit operations
used to treat residual wastewater solids (Objective 1) and by determining the
fate of genes encoding antibiotic resistance when treated wastewater solids are
applied to agricultural soils (Objective 2). The second hypothesis will be
tested by elucidating the rates of horizontal gene transfer and characterizing
the genes that are horizontally transferred within the aeration tanks and
anaerobic digestors of several municipal wastewater treatment facilities
(Objective 3). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will have broad
impacts that extend beyond the scientific research. The most pertinent of these
broader impacts will focus on developing future scientists and engineers whose
professional efforts will benefit society. The proposed project will directly
support the education of a doctoral student at the University of Minnesota. In
addition, the principal investigators will leverage the proposed project to
augment the educational experience of two formal lecture/laboratory courses
offered by the University of Minnesota. Similarly, the principal investigators
will leverage the proposed project to mentor undergraduate students that will be
financially supported the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program
at the University of Minnesota. These REU programs have been particularly
successful at recruiting students from underrepresented groups to the University
of Minnesota, thus likely providing another broader impact as defined by the
National Science Foundation. Finally, the results of the proposed research will
be broadly disseminated to the peer-reviewed technical literature, various
agencies who operate municipal wastewater treatment facilities throughout the
state of Minnesota, and to Minnesota State legislators.