* 0967293
* Electrified jets in the presence of a co-flowing liquid - A route to fine emulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Alberto Fernandez-Nieves, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 06/30/2014
* USD 250,000.00

The precision manipulation of streams of fluids with microfluidic devices is
revolutionizing many fluid-based technologies. In particular, microfluidics
offers unprecedented possibilities for controlled mixing of components to
generate drops as templates for novel materials. However, despite the promise of
these small-scale devices, the droplets and particle sizes that can be produced
are rarely smaller than ~10 micrometers in diameter; this excludes materials in
the colloidal domain of great fundamental and technological value. The objective
of this project is to effectively couple hydrodynamic and electric forces to
generate, in steady-state, drops with sizes that can be tuned from well below to
well above the micron scale. The intellectual merit resides in understanding and
experimentally controlling the mechanism by which drops are generated in
capillary-based microfluidic devices in the presence of electric fields. In
particular, this research will elucidate how electric fields affect drop
formation in co-flowing liquid streams, where one liquid is injected through a
capillary tube into another immiscible liquid, and focus on the fundamental
fluid mechanics controlling the process. The project involves the study of jet
formation under the action of electric fields and the study of the hydrodynamic
stability of these jets against the growth of both varicose, axisymmetric
perturbations and off-axis, lateral instabilities. The broader impact of the
project is provided by the use of this fundamental knowledge to generate
monodisperse emulsions with an unprecedented tunability of the drop size; this
is industrially relevant, as drops are used in many everyday products, including
food, cosmetic, heath and personal care products. Through the involvement of
industrial partners we will additionally enhance the education of undergraduate
students, who will not only learn how to use technologically relevant
instrumentation and acquire a deep fundamental understanding of the relevant
fluid mechanics involved in drop formation processes, but who will also broaden
their training with these interactions. Additionally, the visual appeal of the
research we plan to conduct will aid the preparation of new courses and
lectures.