* 0967937
* Enhancing Protein Stability and Function by Confinement in Nanoporous Materials: Fundamental Understanding Using Experiments and Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Shekhar Garde, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/28/2015
* USD 381,654.00

0967937&lt;br/&gt;Coppens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural changes of proteins
adsorbed on the concave surface of nanoporous silica and othermaterials will be
studied to understand how and why confinement affects their catalytic activity
and thermal stability. Preliminary experimental investigations on high surface
area, ordered nanoporous materials to be considerably extended in this project
demonstrate the possibility to adsorb large quantities of several prototypical
proteins at a high rate. Most significantly, a considerably increased enzymatic
activity and stability was observed, apparently induced by strong interactions
between the protein and a solid support whose pores are barely broader than the
protein molecules. In order to understand such confinement of the investigators
will carry out a systematic program of molecular simulations and calculations
based on statistical mechanics, which focuses on systems of increasing
complexity from homo and hetero polymers to proteins used in the experimental
effort. This understanding is a prerequisite to designing a broad spectrum of
applications from healthcare to catalysis, separations, sensing, and controlled
release.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Proteins frequently undergo
structural changes when confined to nanopores, or tethered to a surface. These
changes, which positively or negatively impact enzyme activity and stability,
depend on the support protein pair and the properties of the medium, and remain
poorly understood. Development and implementation of statistical mechanical
theory aided by high performance computing helps us to gain fundamental
understanding on how local curvature, as well as electrostatics, hydrophobicity
and hydration influence protein structure, stability and activity in constrained
environments. Detailed experimentation on well characterized, carefully
synthesized nanoporous materials, with designed pore surface properties,
completes the picture obtained by studies on protein adsorption on convex
nanostructures, such as nanoparticles and nanotubes. This molecular insight can
be incorporated into chemical engineering models of adsorption, diffusion and
reaction. Progress on the synthesis of well structured nanomaterials allows
validation of theoretical work, but it will also allow leveraging this knowledge
to the synthesis of hybrid materials with rationally designed protein support
interactions, and offer insights useful to biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Fundamental insights gained by
this study on protein confinement in nanoporous materials readily translate to
the rational design and synthesis of hybrid nanomaterials that have
transformative impact on technological applications varying from enzymatic
catalysis and sensors to high throughput, selective (bio-) separations via
chromatography and membranes for the production of therapeutics, and biomedical
applications. The quantity of (expensive) protein could be reduced, its activity
controlled, its stability increased, and recovery facilitated. In addition, this
research program offers an enriching educational experience for graduate and
undergraduate students. Concepts will be integrated in thermodynamics and
reaction engineering classes. Women and underrepresented minorities will be
specifically targeted for research participation. The New Visions METS program
will be used to involve high school students and attract them to studies in
science and engineering. Several female undergraduate students and a high school
student were already involved in preliminary work. International exchanges will
be strengthened, including collaboration with Dr. Ajayan Vinu at the National
Institute of Materials Science (NIMS) in Tsukuba, Japan, in particular for
experiments. The Japan Science and Technology Foundation already funded a
semester of research at NIMS for one of the PI's graduate students on
preliminary experiments in the area of this proposal. The ongoing Molecularium
movie project, of which the co-PI is anexecutive producer, brings the world of
atoms and molecules to life in an animation on the Big Screen, including a
recent IMAX production, based on real molecular simulations