* 0967163
* Using triclosan and polyhalogenated dibenzo-p-dioxins to elucidate the importance of natural and anthropogenic sources of OH-PBDEs in fresh and estuarine waters
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2010,12/31/2014
* William Arnold, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2014
* USD 372,364.00

Arnold&lt;br/&gt;0967163&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work from the PI's
laboratories suggests that concomitant with the decrease of combustion-derived
dioxins, there may be an increase in dioxins derived from surprising non-
combustion sources: transformations of the antimicrobial triclosan (and its
chlorinated derivatives) and hydroxylated polybrominated diphenyl ethers (OH-
PBDEs). OH-PBDEs are degradation products of polybrominated diphenyl ether
(PBDE) flame retardants, but also arise from natural sources in marine systems.
This work will continue their study of the environmental chemistry of triclosan
and hydroxylated polybrominated diphenylethers (OH-PBDEs), with the ultimate
goal of assessing the environmental significance of the dioxins formed from
these compounds. The objective of this proposal is to determine the importance
of anthropogenic and natural halohydroxydiphenyl ethers as sources of
halogenated dibenzo-p-dioxins using a combination of laboratory experiments and
field measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will be the first to
combine laboratory photolysis experiments, wastewater analyses, and sediment
analyses to develop and use a set of chemical markers that will reveal whether
OH-PBDEs, and the PBDDs formed via OH-PBDE photolysis, arise from natural or
anthropogenic sources in both freshwater and estuarine/marine environments.
Laboratory experiments and analysis of wastewater samples will reveal
appropriate OH-PBDE and PBDD markers for anthropogenic sources. The studies on
triclosan and triclosan-derived dioxin levels and trends will provide another
set of anthropogenic markers to which OH-PBDEs and their associated PBDDs will
be compared in sediments and sediment cores. The knowledge gained from this
research will allow assessment of sources and prediction of concentrations of
PBDDs and PCDDs that are derived from halohydroxydiphenyl ethers present in
wastewater. The importance of natural and anthropogenic sources will also be
determined, for they will identify the "chemical fingerprints" associated with
these origins of the targeted compounds. This information is critical if
regulation of halohydroxydiphenyl ethers or additional wastewater treatment is
deemed necessary. Only with this proposed combination of laboratory and field
measurements can it be verified that wastewater treatment facilities serve as a
pseudo-continuous source of halogenated dioxins to surface waters via the
release and subsequent photolysis of triclosan and OH-PBDEs. Thus, the proposed
research will advance our understanding of the threats posed by wastewater
derived micro-contaminants. This knowledge is especially important for the
targeted chemicals, for both the parent compounds and expected daughter products
are known to bioaccumulate, persist in sediments, and have adverse biological
effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad societal benefits of this work will be
to provide a complete assessment of the potential threat to aquatic ecosystems
posed by halohydroxydiphenyl ethers and the dioxins produced via their
photolysis and to determine the role of natural and anthropogenic sources of
these compounds. They will broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
science and engineering by participating in the University of Minnesota
Institute of Technology Exploring Careers program, a one-week non-residential
summer program for 9th-11th grade girls and students from underrepresented
groups and by supporting undergraduate researchers from a local women?s
undergraduate institution (St. Benedict?s College). They will establish research
infrastructure and an international partnership through the collaborative,
interdisciplinary and multi-institutional nature of the project. Lastly, they
will broadly disseminate the results of the proposed research via an interactive
activity at the Science Museum of Minnesota, outreach activities of the San
Francisco Estuary Institute, and via publications and conference presentations.