* 0967707
* Biologically-mediated, simultaneous removal of nitrate and arsenic from drinking water sources
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Jess Brown, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 04/30/2014
* USD 355,823.00

Proposal Title: Biologically-mediated, simultaneous removal of nitrate and
arsenic from drinking water sources&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigators: Raskin, Lutgarde&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET-0967707&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contamination
of groundwater with various oxy-anionic pollutants has been a major concern in
the context of providing safe drinking water throughout the world. Regulatory
pressures have resulted in the development of technologies suitable for the
treatment of individual contaminants. However, the co-existence of multiple
contaminants makes it imperative to develop treatment systems that provide
simultaneous removal of as many contaminants as possible. The proposed research
will develop a novel technology for the biologically-mediated, simultaneous
removal of two contaminants that frequently co-occur in groundwater, i.e.,
nitrate and arsenic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological treatment of drinking
water is gaining in popularity as multiple contaminants often can be converted
to innocuous compounds in a single reactor. The proposed research will develop a
system consisting of two fixed-bed biologically active carbon (BAC) bioreactors
operated in series for the simultaneous removal of nitrate and arsenic
(arsenate, As(V)). These contaminants can serve as electron acceptors for
microorganisms when an electron donor (e.g., acetate) is provided. Denitrifying
bacteria convert nitrate to dinitrogen gas and arsenate can be converted by
arsenate reducing bacteria to arsenite (As(III)), which can be removed by
sorption to iron sulfides. Iron sulfides are generated by the reduction of
sulfate by sulfate reducing bacteria in the presence of ferrous iron (Fe(II)).
Iron and sulfate are present in groundwater thus providing all necessary
components to make these reactions take place. If ferric iron (Fe(III)) is the
predominant form of iron, iron reducing bacteria can reduce Fe(III) to Fe(II),
thus ensuring the Fe(II) form exists to interact with the sulfides produced.
Iron sulfide sequesters arsenite very efficiently, and protects against
reductive mobilization, which is possible when other forms of adsorbed arsenic
are disposed in landfills. &lt;br/&gt;The PIs hypothesize that the microbial
communities that will develop in the fixed-bed BAC bioreactors will be capable
of reducing dissolved oxygen, ferric iron, nitrate, arsenate, and sulfate in a
sequential manner. Regular backwashing of the reactors will remove excess
biomass and occasional backwashing will allow collection of arsenic solids
(sulfides laden with arsenic) deposited in the reactor. Three objectives with
associated tasks were developed: (i) a bench-scale, fixed bed BAC bioreactor
system will be operated to study the mechanisms responsible for contaminant
removal in detail. The microbial community and the produced solids will be
characterized and the relationship between microbial community activity and the
characteristics of the deposited solids will be studied. (ii) The system will be
optimized for efficient and sustained removal of nitrate and arsenic to below
detection. (iii) Post-treatment of the effluent and stability of produced solids
will be evaluated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a one-step treatment
system with a small footprint that can remove multiple contaminants, is
affordable and simple to operate, and produces limited and safely disposable
waste is highly desirable for developed and developing countries trying to
expand drinking water sources. The link with a U.S. engineering firm ensures
that the results will be applied in practice in developed countries. Researchers
of the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan, who have
extensive experience working with rural communities in Nepal, will help them
explore the practical difficulties and willingness of arsenic-affected rural
people of Nepal to adopt the proposed treatment technology. Additional broader
impacts from this work include the integration of research results into existing
courses taught by the PIs and into activities associated with existing K-12
outreach programs that will be continued with this project.