* 0967732
* Adaptive User-Guided Assistive Listening System
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Vincent Amuso, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2014
* USD 300,867.00

PI: Borkholder, D. A., Amuso, V. J., Eddins, D. A.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0967732&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal is to test
the hypothesis that an assistive listening system with dynamic, user-controlled
directional characteristics will improve communication for the hearing impaired
significantly relative to traditional fixed-directional systems. The proposed
study will remove barriers to the delivery of acoustic information to people who
are deaf or hard of hearing, enhancing their participation in education, work,
and social settings, and improving their quality of life. Interfering speech,
reverberation, and temporally-fluctuating background noise have a profound
impact on speech perception for the hearing impaired. Directional microphone
arrays have been shown to improve key metrics of speech intelligibility,
especially for the hearing impaired, but minimal user guidance capabilities
limit achievable benefits in multi-talker situations. It is widely accepted that
current personal assistive listening systems are inadequate in small-group,
multi-talker settings. The proposed research will explore user controlled
directivity coupled with speaker identification algorithms and tracking
techniques from the radar and infrared tracking communities to enable an
advanced user-guided assistive listening system. Acoustic beamforming and
parallel processing offer opportunities for users to control a focal acoustic
zone while attenuating noise sources outside of this zone. A hybrid pattern
recognition scheme incorporating several techniques for parameter extraction and
speaker identification will allow robust dynamic identification of speakers in
multi-talker situations. Target tracking algorithm will dynamically steer the
acoustic focal zone as the talker moves through the meeting area, relieving the
listener of the burden of manual tracking. A user interface will provide spatial
information for each identified talker, allowing the listener to independently
select the desired talker, or manually steer the acoustic beam to a desired
location. The study will involve exploration of the most effective parameters
for user-control, algorithms for phased-array beamforming, speaker
identification, and target tracking for this acoustic application, and
quantitative hypothesis testing with hearing impaired listeners in controlled
environments. This will be a collaborative effort between the Rochester
Institute of Technology College of Engineering, College of Science, the National
Technical Institute for the Deaf, the International Center for Hearing and
Speech Research, and the University of Rochester - Medical Center Department of
Otolaryngology. The research will involve engineering graduate students, AALANA
and women undergraduate students, and hearing impaired individuals from NTID,
allowing a unique opportunity to foster an appreciation of technology to aid
persons with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of
the proposed research lies in the integration of technologies and approaches
from different fields to address a critical need of the hearing impaired, and
testing the hypothesis that a shift from technology-control to user-control of
parameters enhances communication By incorporating speaker identification with
target tracking and user-guidance of an acoustic focal zone, the technology is
expected to outperform current state-of-the-art assistive listening systems in
the small group, multi-talker circumstance in terms of speech intelligibility
metrics. The investigators bring a distinctive combination of expertise in the
areas of biomedical systems, radar, psychoacoustics and assistive listening
devices, providing a unique opportunity for interdisciplinary innovation in
technology to aid the hearing impaired.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will improve the ability of hard-of-hearing individuals to
participate in education, work and social settings by enabling a presently
unavailable level of user control critical for the multitalker situation. It
will enhance education opportunities for the hearing impaired and may allow more
students to enter the STEM disciplines. Demonstration that user control of
assistive listening device parameters enhances communication could have a
profound impact on the philosophy and approaches for other assistive listening
devices such as hearing aids and cochlear implants. The proposed activities
integrate research with education for graduate and undergraduate engineering
students, under-represented minorities, and hearing impaired individuals. The
results will be broadly disseminated to the engineering and disability
communities through conferences and journals, and will leverage the expertise of
Center on Access Technology for integration into the educational mission of this
and other universities.