* 0967546
* Improving the Environmental Sustainability of Shrimp Aquaculture Systems Through Microbial Resource Management
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* Lutgarde Maria Raskin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2014
* USD 310,053.00

This research seeks to answer several questions pertaining to development of
indoor shrimp aquaculture in the United States. Aquaculture is a rapidly growing
food production system that is a potential solution to overfishing and fisheries
depletion worldwide. Two competing systems for indoor shrimp culture,
recirculating aquaculture systems (RAS) and bio-floc systems (BFS), will be
evaluated and compared using lab-scale systems. Techniques will include advanced
molecular biology and stable isotope methods and will address the following
questions: Will the promotion of a more diverse microbial community of
nitrifiers create a more stable RAS? Can the waste produced on RAS biofilters be
recycled back into the production tanks to improve feed utilization efficiency?
Will the performance of BFS be improved by manipulating solids retention times?
How susceptible are shrimp raised in the two systems to an opportunistic
bacterial pathogen? Additionally, a comprehensive cost benefit analysis using
life cycle assessment will be performed. The research outcomes are anticipated
to enhance the competitiveness of American shrimp aquaculture. Under represented
group students will be involved in the research.