* 0967512
* Controlling Protein Release via Intermolecular Hybridization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Tai-Hsi Fan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 06/30/2013
* USD 322,839.00

0967512&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein drugs hold great promise for
the treatment of various human diseases. However, efficient and safe delivery of
protein drugs is a long-standing challenge in the field of drug delivery. Many
protein delivery systems still suffer from problems including the rapid release
of protein drugs, the inefficiency of controlling the release of multiple
proteins, and the involvement of toxic molecules and/or harsh conditions during
the preparation of protein delivery systems. This project is proposed to address
these issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits:&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of the proposed research are to thoroughly understand the mechanisms of
complementary oligonucleotide-mediated protein-aptamer dissociation, and based
on this understanding, to develop a novel protein delivery method using nucleic
acid aptamers, complementary oligonucleotides, and alginate hydrogels. Our novel
hypotheses are: 1) aptamers can efficiently entrap one or multiple proteins in
the alginate matrix because of their high binding affinity and specificity; 2)
complementary oligonucleotides can be used as a molecular trigger to modulate
protein release via hybridization with the aptamers; and 3) proteins can
maintain a high level of bioactivity due to the mild procedure for hydrogel
preparation and the protection by the aptamers. To test these hypotheses,
preliminary studies have been carried out, showing that complementary
oligonucleotides are capable of accelerating protein-aptamer dissociation.
Encouraged by the compelling preliminary results, we will perform three tasks
involving both experiments and mathematical modeling. The tasks are: 1) to
investigate complementary oligonucleotide-mediated protein-aptamer dissociation,
2) to investigate the release of proteins from hydrogels in the presence or
absence of complementary oligonucleotides, and 3) to develop a mathematical
model to simulate the protein release process. We anticipate the outcomes of
this study will be a deeper understanding of molecular recognition and a
transformative method for protein delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The success of the proposed research will make several broad
scientific and economical impacts. First, it will open a new avenue for the
development of drug delivery systems. Second, it will enrich the knowledge of
molecular recognition and provide valuable information for nucleic acid
research. Third, the success of protein delivery will tremendously improve the
treatments of various human diseases and save billions of dollars in healthcare
costs. The broader impacts of this program will also be evident in our strong
commitment to education and human resource development, which will have direct
impacts on graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students. First, this project will
provide students with a unique intellectual environment to learn drug delivery,
hydrogel synthesis, biomolecular engineering, kinetic analysis, cell
characterization, and mathematical modeling. All participating students
will&lt;br/&gt;have modularized scientific questions to study and will discuss
their research findings in regular group meetings. The students will be able to
not only acquire hands-on research skills, but also learn analytical,
communication, collaboration, and innovation skills. In addition, the PI will
incorporate the results acquired from the proposed research into the Drug
Delivery course that&lt;br/&gt;is offered to both graduate and senior
undergraduate students every spring semester. Second, we will initiate a new
outreach program by collaborating with local high schools to teach the concepts
of biomedical engineering in the Advanced Biology course. The results acquired
by the participating students will be presented to high school students during
the visits. In addition,&lt;br/&gt;we will continuously participate in the
established outreach programs at UConn. These outreach efforts will raise high
school students' interests in science and engineering and facilitate the
development of a viable, sustainable science and engineering workforce. Third,
the students' research findings will be widely disseminated through publications
in peer-refereed journals and presentations at national/international
conferences.