* 0967140
* PIRE: Science at the Triple Point Between Mathematics, Mechanics and Materials Science
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Richard James, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2017
* USD 4,999,900.00

Many contemporary problems in new advanced materials relate to variation in
length, time scales, and variations inherent in their fabrication and function.
Resolution of these problems requires predictive theories for these complex
systems that in turn require advances in mathematics. In this PIRE project an
international network of prominent mathematicians from four U.S. institutions,
five European institutions, and a multinational industrial partner, will build
on decades of collaboration and training at the interface of mathematics and
materials sciences that have yielded many achievements at the forefront of
sophisticated new mathematics and simulation methods. The project will focus on
four principal research areas: 1. Pattern formation from energy minimization, 2.
Challenges in atomistic to continuum modelling and computing, 3. Prediction of
hysteresis (systems that have "memory" such that effects of stimuli are
temporally delayed), and 4. Pattern dynamics and development of material
microstructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. and European students will benefit
from internationalized education and research training within a PIRE framework
promotes new patterns in research collaboration and education that includes
cultural dimensions. Advanced graduate courses will be developed and shared
across the network providing a truly internationalized curriculum and universal
access to the best materials-relevant mathematics topics. U.S. graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows will be immersed in intensive multi-advisor mentoring
models strengthening their interdisciplinary and global research skills.
Interested graduate students will be able to partake in an international
industrial research internship. In addition, annual workshops and summer schools
will extend the research to a much wider community of students and postdoctoral
fellows outside the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will help to
internationalize US institutions by linking them in a vibrant international
network of applied mathematicians who integrate research relevant to materials
science with a coherent program for training the next generation of globally-
engaged scientific leaders in fast-developing areas of mathematics. The
complementary strengths and expertise of the team will push the frontiers of
applied analysis and clear the pathway for new applications in materials
research. The U.S. will gain expertise and strength in the field of calculus of
variations, essential to the first principal research area, through its base at
two of the European research centers. Working with European partners will help
unify and extend U.S. expertise in the modelling, computation, and analysis on
problems arising in materials science. Advances in pattern dynamics research at
several nodes of the network have revealed new modelling and analysis
opportunities with the potential to be leveraged by this award.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators on this PIRE project include four U.S.
institutions: Carnegie Mellon University (PA), California Institute of
Technology, New York University, and University of Minnesota; five European
institutions: University of Antwerp (Belgium), University of Bonn (Germany), Max
Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences (Germany), International School
for Advanced Studies (SISSA)(Italy), and University of Oxford (UK); and an
industrial partner: Robert Bosch GmbH (Germany and USA).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's Office of International
Science and Engineering and the Division of Mathematical Sciences.