* 0967466
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Understanding Perovskite-Based NO Oxidation Catalysts via Coupled Experimental and Computational Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Chang Kim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 399,250.00

0967466&lt;br/&gt;Thompson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems where lean combustion
processes are carried out in excess air offer significant fuel efficiency
benefits that can contribute to reductions of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
However, an important byproduct of lean combustion is NOx (x = 1, 2). While
cost-effective technologies have been demonstrated for the remediation of NOx
produced at stationary sources, solutions for the aftertreatment of NOx produced
by mobile sources including diesel powered vehicles remains a major challenge.
One of the most significant aspects is that Platinum-containing catalysts are
the most effective catalysts for this operation, and the amount of platinum
required makes these catalysts prohibitively expensive. In this proposal which
calls for collaboration between PIs Thompson from University of Michigan and
Schneider from University of Notre Dame, an industrial partner, General Motors,
is added to make it a GOALI proposal as well as a Collaborative one. The intent
is to resolve why catalytic activity of about the same magnitude as platinum has
been observed with a non-precious metal containing perovskite catalyst
originally observed by General Motors scientists, and to determine if rugged,
inexpensive catalysts can be demonstrated which could in fact replace platinum.
This would be a significant change in our understanding of reactions that are
catalyzed by platinum, and on a more practical level, would open up the area of
diesel-powered vehicles with the improved efficiencies and reduced GHG emissions
expected, as less-expensive catalytic after-treatments or mufflers could be
available. The program involves the two universities and the industrial partner
at many points of contact and in various phases of the work. Students will
benefit from the collaboration and from the contact with industry. In addition
the PIs will leverage existing education and outreach programs on the campuses
to both interest and educate society about the issue and benefits from success
in the project.