* 0967536
* Biological Principles and Metrics for Sustainable Industrial Network Design
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Marc Weissburg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2014
* USD 309,928.00

This project focuses on applying bio-inspired principles to industrial resource
networks and to creating relationships and metrics for design. This project is
envisioned as a comprehensive, interdisciplinary approach to an investigation of
biological network efficiencies and translation of the pertinent mechanisms into
models for industrial resource networks. The research is focused on reducing the
environmental burden and cost associated with human activities involving
industrial networks. The intention is provide substantive quantifiable metrics
for the design of networks within the industrial domain. The project goal, to
achieve a fundamental understanding of why the application of ecological
principles and patterns leads to environmentally superior industrial resource
networks, is grounded in specific tasks that progressively build the foundation
of knowledge, culminating in verification through robust industrial case
studies. The impact of the reduction of environmental burden through bio-
inspired design of industrial networks promises to be significant. The use of
case studies will enhance outreach to industrial sectors with win-win examples
of industrial ecology. The project is designed to systematically build on
established relationships including industrial partnerships and educational
programs that bring together biology students and engineers and others.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bruce K. Hamilton&lt;br/&gt;2/24/10