* 0967906
* Profit Control: A New Paradigm in Control System Design
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Donald Chmielewski, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 261,570.00

Chmielewski 0967906

Intellectual Merit: Since the inception of feedback control, there has always
been a strong, but vague, relationship between control system performance (in a
regulatory sense) and the time-averaged profit of the plant (which is a function
of nominal operating conditions). The transformative concept underlying Profit
Control is the simple notion of quantifying this relationship, which will enable
control system design while simultaneously maximizing plant profit. Such an
approach represents a paradigm shift in controller synthesis, in that the
generated controllers will be tailored not only to the dynamics of the plant but
also to the specific economic situation.

The project objectives are twofold. First, the PI will extend the theoretical
foundation of the scheme to include the following disturbance classes: non-
stationary (or steady-state) disturbances, model uncertainty and peak-to-peak
measures. The result will be a unified approach that simultaneously addresses
the new disturbance classes as well as the original stochastic (or H2)
disturbances. The entire scheme will be guided by a measure of economic
performance common to the Real-Time Optimization (RTO) literature: the notion of
minimizing the backed-off operating point from that suggested by the RTO.

The second objective is to apply Profit Control to systems from a variety of
disciplines. These include; the multi-product, multi-echelon supply chain
problem (management science), a fluidized catalytic cracking unit (chemical
processes), and the power system of a hybrid electric vehicle (electrical
systems). These application studies will illustrate the broad and applicability
of this approach.

Broader Impact: The broader aspects of the project are threefold;
multidisciplinary interaction, student outreach and software dissemination. Due
to the broad spectrum of topics covered, achievement of the primary project
objectives will require multidisciplinary input. As such, collaborations with
individuals from outside the field have been scheduled. The PI is planning to
recruit both graduate and undergraduate students of all backgrounds, genders and
ethnicities. Toward broad dissemination of the technology, a software tool aimed
at those versed in control theory, but non-experts in linear matrix inequalities
and branch-and-bound calculations, will be developed and freely distributed via
the internet.