* 0967845
* Resuspension of E. coli in sediment laden streams
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Michelle Soupir, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 05/31/2014
* USD 372,624.00

Soupir, Michelle&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0967845&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes
laboratory experiments to measure resuspension of E. coli from a sediment bed
and field experiments to test the resuspension relationships developed from the
laboratory results. Even though previous work suggests that sediment disturbance
can account for the majority of total fecal contamination, standard water
quality models do not include resuspension of fecal bacteria as a source. The PI
previously showed that including interactions between the sediment and the water
column can improve predictions of microbial concentrations, but because most
models that include resuspension of bacteria either specify a resuspension rate
or calibrate as a function of only discharge, better ways to predict
resuspension are needed. The main benefit of the proposed work is the ability to
identify, control, and isolate the parameters affecting resuspension so that
relationships to predict resuspension can be developed and tested.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the proposed work are to (1) measure the
resuspension of E. coli in controlled laboratory experiments, (2) develop
relationships to predict resuspension of attached and unattached E. coli as a
function of properties of the flow and sediment, and (3) assess the
relationships with data collected in the field. They hypothesize that (a) the
resuspension rate of attached E. coli will be proportional to the resuspension
rate of sediment because the attached fraction in the water column will be the
same as that in the sediment bed and (b) resuspension of unattached E. coli will
occur at lower shear stresses than for attached E. coli. These hypotheses are
encapsulated in a physically based, quantitative framework proposed to predict
resuspension. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
research comes from the ability to isolate and control important parameters
affecting resuspension. Laboratory experiments with flow over three types of
sediment will provide the first measurements of E. coli resuspension in which
flow rates and sediment properties are varied systematically. Data from the
laboratory experiments will be used to test and develop physically based
relationships to predict resuspension of E. coli as a function of properties of
the flow, sediment, and organisms. To test the formulas derived from laboratory
experiments in the field, resuspension rates computed from a mass balance
applied to a reach of Squaw Creek in Ames, IA will be compared to the
predictions. The resulting physically based relationships will be important for
reducing the parameterization of water quality models, and the laboratory
experiments will provide information over a range of conditions that will help
to guide the application of our results in water quality modeling. Preliminary
results, as well as previous work on sediment resuspension, show that the flume
experiments will be useful for studying resuspension of E. coli.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include training a graduate student
and undergraduate student; conducting outreach to schools; mentoring a new
assistant professor; helping the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, which is
responsible for developing total maximum daily loads, to incorporate the
research results into watershed scale water quality models to develop more
realistic load allocations; and collaborating with the Ames Water and Pollution
Control District, which is considering adding disinfection to the wastewater
treatment plant in Ames, Iowa. Careful measurements and improved models of the
fate and transport of E. coli in streams will improve predictions of conditions
where a risk to human health is likely and the implementation of land management
practices to reduce bacterial pollution in the nation?s water bodies.