* 0967381
* Collaborative Research: Design of Templated Ceramic Materials for Separation and Purification of Complex Carbohydrates
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Barbara Knutson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 04/30/2014
* USD 301,130.00

Complex carbohydrates play many integral roles in biological systems.
Biologically active polysaccharides (glycans) interact with proteins on the
outside of cells, and are involved in controlling communication, adhesion, and
transport of material between cells. The need to isolate and purify specific
carbohydrates for use as drugs has emerged from the realization that
carbohydrates are central to many cell functions and disease states, ranging
from cold sores to cancer. However, the technology to synthesize and purify
specific carbohydrates is falling behind the ability of glycobiologists to
identify the structure and function of carbohydrates.

This project will develop microphase directed molecular imprinting (MDMI) of
sol-gel ceramic materials to design selective, stable materials for the
separation and purification of complex carbohydrates based on recognition of the
glycan building blocks of glucose, glucosamine, and glucuronic acid. In MDMI,
imprinting sites are anchored on the surface of self assembled surfactant
micelles, and sol-gel polymerization of metal oxide precursors and organically
modified silanes create a material complementary to the imprinting sites. The
micelles reduce the need for solvents during processing, stabilize the material
during drying, and serve as well-defined pore templates that can be removed
after curing to make the imprinted sites accessible. A well designed MDMI
process is hypothesized to produce materials that selectively adsorb the complex
carbohydrate for which the imprinting sites were designed.

This collaborative project employs the expertise of chemical and materials
engineering and synthetic chemistry to focus synergistically on three critical
aspects of the development of the MDMI process for molecules with acidic
(glucuronic acid) and basic (glucosamine) functionality. The first aim addresses
control of the interactions between material precursors and imprinting molecule
to create a perfect binding pocket. The second aim addresses the design and
predictive synthesis of a high porosity, accessible matrix to support the
imprinted sites based on knowledge of surfactant phase behavior and
interactions. The third aim addresses the synthesis of the imprinting molecules
themselves specifically, molecules that effectively play dual roles as pore
templates and molecular imprinting sites. Each one of these aims begins from
easily accessible experimental systems and builds in complexity as milestones
are reached toward the ultimate goal of imprinting complex polysaccharides.

The molecular imprinting of ceramics through dual-use pore templating/molecular
imprinting molecules is potentially transformative to the development of high
performance adsorbents for the separation of functional polysaccharides. By
combining the synthetic versatility of sol-gel materials and the selectivity of
molecular imprinting, the proposed work will establish approaches to customizing
ceramics through the knowledge of imprinting and carbohydrate binding
mechanisms. Mimicry of the highly selective lock and key interaction between
glycans and proteins within synthetic sol-gel matrices will be developed for the
isolation of biologically relevant polysaccharides.

Success of this project will enhance our knowledge of the role of carbohydrates
in biological function, expand the commercial potential of these molecules, and
develop personnel capable of leading the field of complex carbohydrate
separations. The successful development of MDMI for saccharide-imprinted
materials will advance synthetic saccharide purification, and also the recovery
of valuable agricultural products and plant based drug discovery, and eventually
provide for improved platforms for carbohydrate sensors and enzyme mimicking
catalysts. The proposed project will highlight the critical role of
bioseparations and develop outreach materials, research experiences, and
curriculum that expand the impact of a new undergraduate Biopharmaceutical
Engineering Certificate program at the University of Kentucky to graduate level
education.