* 0967166
* Development of High Performance Cathode for Intermediate-Temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells via Impregnation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Fanglin (Frank) Chen, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2014
* USD 232,248.00

0967166&lt;br/&gt;Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs)
operating at intermediate temperatures (500-600oC) could have tremendous
advantages: (1) reduced cost of the SOFC systems since inexpensive metals can be
used for interconnects, heat exchangers, and structural components and (2)
improved durability since oxidation, corrosion, chemical interdiffusion, thermal
stress and creep deformation will be reduced at reduced operating temperatures.
However, at reduced operating temperatures, SOFC resistance increases rapidly
and is often dominated by the cathode interfacial polarization resistance
between the electrolyte and the cathode. Accordingly, the SOFC resistance could
be substantially reduced by developing novel cathode materials and/or unique
microstructures to lower the interfacial polarization
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the different perovskite-type cathode
materials for SOFCs, cobaltite has the highest surface oxygen exchange
coefficient, oxide ion conductivity as well as electronic conductivity at
intermediate temperatures. However, the functionality of cobaltite as a cathode
in SOFC is limited since cobaltite has a much higher thermal expansion
coefficient compared with the other cell components and has high chemical
reactivity with the state-of-the-art YSZ (yttria stabilized zirconia)
electrolyte. In order to overcome the barriers of thermal expansion mismatch as
well as chemical interdiffusion at high cathode fabrication temperatures, novel
cathode architectures have been developed by the PI, using a composite of the
cobaltite catalyst deposited on the surface of the porous electrolyte frame
through impregnation. The objectives of this project are to demonstrate the
feasibility of the novel cathode architecture using a highly ionic conductive
porous cathode frame coated with a catalytically active cathode via
impregnation, to study the correlation of the microstructure features of the
cathode with the cathode electrochemical performance, to compare the
electrochemical activity and gain insight into rational design of more efficient
cathode microstructure, and to analyze the transport properties and the rate-
limiting step governing the novel cathode
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits of the project are to
develop a fundamental understanding of the working mechanism of the novel
cathode architecture, to correlate the different features of the novel cathode
microstructure with the cathode performance, to determine the transport
properties and rate-limiting step for oxygen reduction on the nanostructured
cathode catalyst in order to optimize the microstructure features of the
cathode, to assess the long-term durability of the novel cathode architecture,
and to apply the novel cathode structure to improve the performance and
durability of the solid oxide fuel cells at reduced temperatures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Utilization of the novel cathode is
expected to bring breakthrough enhancement of the performance and durability of
the solid oxide fuel cells at reduced operating temperatures. This will
contribute to the rapid transition of this technology into the marketplace to
improve energy conversion efficiency and greatly reduce emissions. By active
dissemination of the novel cathode architecture, it will offer the scientific
community a technique to effectively utilize cobaltite as a high performing
cathode material. This project will also have a significant impact on the
curriculum development at the University of South Carolina by exposing students
to materials science-related solid oxide fuel cell research. Underrepresented
student support is emphasized. Outreach to high school students and the general
public to promote interest and awareness of the fuel cell technology is
highlighted. The training of the graduate and undergraduate students and the
outreach activities will help transfer the solid oxide fuel cell technology to
US industry, thus enhancing its global competitiveness.