* 0967365
* Pattern formation in self-organized surface confined peptides
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Raymond Tu, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 319,999.00

0967365 Tu

Intellectual Merit:

The objective of this proposal is to elucidate the fundamental aspects of
selfassembly and pattern formation of well defined sheet forming peptides
confined at interfaces. Our approach involves three steps. (1) It is proposed to
design and synthesize simple periodic peptide sequences, yielding surface active
â-strands that self organize into aggregates to form patterns as a function of
the peptide sequence. Rational peptide design allows us to systematically
explore the role of hydrophobicity, electrostatics and molecular size on pattern
formation. (2) It is proposed to directly address the assembly phenomena using a
set of interfacial characterization tools. Multiple length scales can be
examined, including molecular length scales, using CD and ATR-FTIR, and at
supramolecular length scales, using brewster angle microscopy, fluorescence
microscopy and ellipsometry. (3) It is proposed to use two dimensional equations
of state that define both the phase behavior and the critical surface
concentrations of nascent aggregates at the interface. Subsequently, we can
apply these parameters to predict the dimensions of pattern formation.

Broader Impact:

Rationally designed peptides and polypeptides are rapidly becoming useful
components in nanostructured materials for applications ranging from drug
delivery to energy storage. If successful, the PI's believe that the proposed
research will yield fundamental understanding of biomolecular assembly under
confinement, and these ideas can be directly applied in hybrid materials design.

CCNY's mission is to provide quality undergraduate and graduate education in a
broad range of fields to a highly diverse student body, which is 34% Hispanic,
24% black, 17% Asian and 11% white, classifying our college as a Minority
Serving Institution. The PI is dedicated to this mandate that asks for a
multiplicity of subject matters to be taught to students of varying backgrounds
without sacrificing quality of research or education. In addition to graduate
training, undergraduate and high school research support for this work will be
coordinated through two mechanisms. (1) NSF has funded NUE, REU and PREM
programs at CCNY to provide research experiences for both undergraduate and high
school students. (2) The PI has led the CCNY-HSMSE Peer-Learning Program for the
last three years. This program provides an opportunity for undergraduates and
high school students to engage in engineering and science in the classroom and
lab. The PIs have successfully developed this mechanism that allows
undergraduate and high school students to explore fundamental engineering and
science questions in an engaging setting where peer learning results in common
ground to enhance the learning experience.