* 0967789
* Interdigitated Heterojunctions with Self-Aligned Conducting Polymer Nanowires for High Efficiency Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2013
* Yi Luo, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 327,614.00

0967789&lt;br/&gt;Luo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic polymer based photovoltaic
(PV) cells are a sustainable and potentially cost-effective device platform for
the conversion of solar energy to electricity. However, the solar energy
conversion efficiency of current polymeric solar PV devices is still only around
6%. A fundamental issue that limits the performance of polymeric solar cells is
the disparity in achieving high efficiencies for light absorption, exciton
dissociation, and free electron diffusion towards the
cathode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research, self-aligned, electrochemically grown, conducting polymer nanowires
will be used to create an ordered, inter-digitated, donor-acceptor
heterojunction that has the potential to substantially increase photovoltaic
efficiency. The first objective is to understand the growth of self-aligned
conducting polymer nanowires and nano-porous polymers by an electrochemical
deposition process, in order to control nanowire dimension and density. The
second objective is to optically and electrically characterize these materials,
and then establish a correlation between growth conditions and nanowire
properties. The third objective is to fabricate and test a conducting polymer,
nanowire based, interdigitated heterojunction photovoltaic device. These studies
are expected to establish fundamental relationships between device performance
parameters and material / device preparation conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is potentially transformative
because it seeks to develop a new approach for the fabrication of low-cost,
high-efficiency polymeric photovoltaic devices. Furthermore, the proposed
research has the potential to improve basic understanding of nanoscale material
growth mechanisms for conducting polymers, and therefore has the potential to
open up new opportunities for organic optoelectronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed education
and outreach activities focus on course development and training of high school
teachers. Research outcomes will be integrated a course on optoelectronic and
nanoelectronic devices at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). The principal
investigator will use the Leonard Gelfand Center for Service Learning and
Outreach at CMU to deliver a training/education program for high school teachers
in nanoscience, where they will receive hands-on experience in nanoscence and
learn how to bring these concepts into the classroom. Teachers will receive
training/education credit hours.