* 0967458
* Collaborative Research: Molecular Modeling and Experimental Investigation of Structure and Dynamics of Confined Ionic Liquids and Their Mixtures with Gases
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Edward Maginn, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 247,300.00

0967458&lt;br/&gt;Maginn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to elucidate the
fundamental aspects of self assembly and pattern formation of well defined sheet
forming peptides confined at interfaces. Our approach involves three steps. (1)
It is proposed to design and synthesize simple periodic peptide sequences,
yielding surface active Ã¢ strands that self organize into aggregates to form
patterns as a function of the peptide sequence. Rational peptide design allows
us to systematically explore the role of hydrophobicity, electrostatics and
molecular size on pattern formation. (2) ) It is proposed to directly address
the assembly phenomena using a set of interfacial characterization tools.
Multiple length scales can be examined, including molecular length scales, using
CD and ATR-FTIR, and at supramolecular length scales, using brewster angle
microscopy, fluorescence microscopy and ellipsometry. (3) It is proposed to use
two dimensional equations of state that define both the phase behavior and the
critical surface concentrations of nascent aggregates at the interface.
Subsequently, we can apply these parameters to predict the dimensions of pattern
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rationally
designed peptides and polypeptides are rapidly becoming useful components in
nanostructured materials for applications ranging from drug delivery to energy
storage. If successful, the PIs believe that the proposed research will yield
fundamental understanding of biomolecular assembly under confinement, and these
ideas can be directly applied in hybrid materials
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCNY's mission is to provide quality undergraduate
and graduate education in a broad range of fields to a highly diverse student
body, which is 34% Hispanic, 24% black, 17% Asian and 11% white, classifying our
college as a Minority Serving Institution. The PI is dedicated to this mandate
that asks for a multiplicity of subject matters to be taught to students of
varying backgrounds without sacrificing quality of research or education. In
addition to graduate training, undergraduate and high school research support
for this work will be coordinated through two mechanisms. (1) NSF has funded
NUE, REU and PREM programs at CCNY to provide research experiences for both
undergraduate and high school students. (2) The PI has led the CCNY-HSMSE Peer-
Learning Program for the last three years. This program provides an opportunity
for undergraduates and high school students to engage in engineering and science
in the classroom and lab. The PIs have successfully developed this mechanism
that allows undergraduate and high school students to explore fundamental
engineering and science questions in an engaging setting where peer learning
results in common ground to enhance the learning experience.