* 0967170
* A Novel Adaptive Transactional Virtual Reality-based Assistive Technology for Autism Intervention
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Nilanjan Sarkar, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2014
* USD 316,500.00

PI: Sarkar N. &amp; Warren, Z.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0967170&lt;br/&gt;
This interdisciplinary project proposes fundamental, transformative technology
improvements to assist children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). The
objective is to develop a novel affect and attention sensitive virtual reality
-based assistive technology for ASD intervention. Social communication and
social information processing are thought to represent core domains of
impairment in children with ASD. The proposed research will develop technologies
capable of targeting individual deficit by flexibly and adaptively responding to
subtle affective and attentive changes in individuals with ASD during social
paradigms and create VR-based ASD intervention technology that can present
itself as a realistic and powerful intervention platform.&lt;br/&gt; The
individual, familial, and societal impact associated with ASD is enormous.
Therefore, an important direction for research on ASD is the identification and
development of technology that can make application of effective intensive
treatment more accessible and cost effective. To address this need, this project
will combine VR-based technology with affective computing using physiological
signals and attention inference through eye gaze measurement to develop a new
paradigm for autism intervention that will appreciably transform the ability to
understand and tailor interventions to the specific vulnerabilities of children
with ASD. The project will develop an assistive technology that will result in
an affect and attention sensitive system for detecting, adaptively responding
to, and optimizing levels of social interaction for children with ASD during VR
interactions. The system is scalable and adaptable to a broad range of
intervention strategies, providing flexibility in design and
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research
advances the design and authoring of adaptive virtual environments for use with
a challenged population of children. It has the potential to significantly
contribute new computational methods for affective computing, particularly
affective computing mediated by physiologic signal processing. Primarily, the
project will develop new framework to design virtual environments for social
interaction that intelligently combine both affective and attentive information
into adaptive and controllable response systems. The proposed activity also
represents a new technology that will fundamentally advance the engineering
knowledge of human-computer interactions as well as the understanding of the
mechanisms that underlie the presumed core social impairments, and associated
interventions, with ASD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Emerging research
suggests as many as 1 in 150 children are diagnosed with an autism spectrum
disorder and ASD related care costs the nation over $35 billion annually. The
low-cost and highly deployable technologies developed in this proposal could
have significant impact on this population. They may also create a completely
new technological intervention methodology for children with ASD. This research
may further a technology that can enable all core components of effective
intervention at only a fraction of the cost of typical intervention programs,
while at the same time increasing the ability of the intervention provider to
systematically control and promote intervention related skills targeting
individual deficit. The educational activities will train and mentor
undergraduate and graduate students in the proposed research, and develop one
module in a one-credit seminar course targeted to engineering freshman class.
The outreach activities will include offering research opportunities to high
school students, especially among groups currently underrepresented in STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) fields, and providing high
school teachers with research experience during summer in the design and
research evaluation of advanced technologies for autism intervention. Outreach
objectives will also involve usability testing to elicit feedback from
behavioral professionals and children with ASD. This project represents an
opportunity to leverage a unique collaboration that brings cutting-edge
engineering, psychology, and clinical knowledge to the development of a
pragmatic and efficacious assistive intervention technology addressing core
symptoms of ASD.