* 0967130
* Disinfectant-Induced Antibiotic Resistance:  Relevance, Mechanisms and Practical Considerations
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Spyros Pavlostathis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2013
* USD 405,042.00

Pavlostathis, Spyros&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0967130&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resistance to
antibiotics is becoming one of the most pressing problems for human and
environmental health. Recently, resistance to vancomycin, the ?last resort?
antibiotic, was reported, indicating that we are quickly running out of means to
fight against bacterial infectious diseases. Biocides and disinfectants, on the
other hand, are biologically active agents, whose use in homes, hospitals,
industrial or agricultural facilities remains essentially unconstrained.
Consequently, disinfectants are frequently co-occurring with antibiotics in the
environment or the clinic and their concentrations are typically higher than
that of antibiotics. Because they are ubiquitous and can induce broad resistance
capabilities like efflux pump resistance, disinfectants may represent a more
important threat to the future of antibiotics than the antibiotics themselves
according to a recent report by the American Academy of Microbiology, which
states ?It is entirely possible that disinfectants have contributed to the rise
of some of the very serious problems in resistance that we face today with the
bacteria?. The goal of this research is to provide new quantitative insights
into the effects of a widely used class of disinfectants, the quaternary
ammonium compounds (QACs), on the emergence and proliferation of antibiotic
resistance (AbR). Further, QACs represent an important hazard themselves because
they are persistent, especially under anaerobic conditions, and hence, toxic to
aquatic life and non-target organisms in the environment. QACs are strongly
sorbed onto sludge, sediments, clays, and minerals and sorption generally
outcompetes biodegradation in aerobic environmental media, leading to the
transfer of QACs to anoxic/anaerobic compartments. The fate of QACs in
anoxic/anaerobic systems is not well understood; but it has important practical
implications for remedying QAC toxicity and the co-selected AbR. Therefore,
another goal of this project is to better understand the conditions and genetic
determinants that lead to QAC biodegradation under aerobic and anaerobic
conditions in both engineered and natural systems. The proposed research builds
upon preliminary evidence that indicates QAC-driven proliferation of AbR.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is potentially transformative. As
stated above, the links between AbR and the biotransformation of antimicrobial
agents (QACs in this case) under anoxic/anaerobic conditions have not been
systematically assessed to date. This study should result in significant new
insights into these links, which may apply broadly to other classes of AbR-
causing agents, both anthropogenic and natural, potentially resulting in a
paradigm shift as to the causes of AbR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QACs pose
significant risks to human and environmental health. The proposed research will
elucidate the biotransformation of selected QACs and their potential for co-
selection of AbR determinants in biological systems representing both engineered
and natural systems. The results of this study will provide a better
understanding of the importance of QACs as environmental hazards and facilitate
the development of strategies to mitigate their adverse effects and to aid
industry, as well as state and federal regulatory agencies in the development of
sound policies and risk assessment strategies. Findings will be disseminated via
reports to NSF and our personal websites, and by publishing in peer-reviewed
journals and presenting at meetings of professional societies. Student training
is an integral part of the proposed project, occurring in both the classroom and
research laboratory. Two PhD students, one majoring in Environmental Engineering
and one in Environmental Microbiology, will be supported and cross trained. This
research will support an active educational component targeting undergraduate
students from different disciplines. Each year, we will conduct the HGT-U
(Hosting Ga-Tech Undergraduates) Exchange Program developed by the PI and co-PI.
They will recruit outstanding and ethnically diverse students from the
environmental engineering and biology undergraduate programs who will engage in
research related to the proposed research project. They will also support 2
undergraduates per year and will recruit an additional 4 students per year who
will receive independent research credits so that a total of 18 (9 biology and 9
engineering) students will be trained over the course of the 3-year project. The
success of the HGT-U exchange program will be determined by following students
as they progress through their undergraduate education. Assessment criteria will
include tracking academic achievement in the student's science and engineering
courses compared to peers, choice of electives, and participation in engineering
and scientific meetings and conferences.