* 0967474
* Partially-premixed bluff-body flame dynamics and acoustic coupling in vitiated flows
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Baki Cetegen, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 325,000.00

0967474&lt;br/&gt;Renfro&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many combustion systems, flames are required to be
stabilized in flows with velocities higher than the flame speed. Bluff-bodies
can be placed in the flow to create a low speed region to enable flame
stabilization. Bluff-body stabilized flames are used in many applications
including afterburners for aircraft engines. In afterburner flames several
additional features complicate a comprehensive understanding of the flame
stabilization process: (1) the flow is pre-heated due to combustion within the
engine so that the temperature and oxygen levels affect the flame, (2) fuel is
added to the flow close to the flame so that is does not have time to fully mix,
and (3) the afterburner is enclosed in a duct open at one end (the jet exit) so
that acoustic resonance can cause oscillations in the flame. Previous research
has primarily studied flame stabilization without these
complications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will use a recently
constructed combustor rig at the University of Connecticut that provides high
speed flows with elevated temperatures and reduced oxygen levels to simulate
conditions in an aircraft engine. The rig is capable of creating bluff-body
stabilized flames with control over the temperature, oxygen level, fuel/air
mixing, and acoustic level to address each of these three complications
separately. The flames are stabilized within a test section with windows that
permit laser-based measurements and imaging of the flame. Measurements of the
flame and flow field will be made via particle imaging velocimetry and planar
laser induced fluorescence. In addition, high-speed imaging of unsteady flames
will be accomplished with the support of Pratt &amp; Whitney through equipment
and personnel exchange. These measurements recover the local velocity and flame
shape so that the cause of flame de-stabilization can be quantitatively
examined. These measurements will be applied as the three chosen features of
aircraft afterburner flames are parametrically varied. The resulting experiments
are anticipated to provide a more complete and quantitative description of the
flame stabilization process for bluff-body flames than presently available. The
quantitative data sets from numerous cases will be made publicly available. The
results of this study are directly applicable to aircraft afterburners, but will
also be broadly applicable to new combustor designs with alternative fuels,
which may require enhanced bluffbody stabilization for fuel flexible
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will lead to a better fundamental understanding of flame
propagation in flows with non uniform fuel/air mixing including the effects of
elevated temperature and reduced oxygen level. This has direct impact on the
design of devices such as afterburners for aircraft engines, but also expands
understanding of basic flame behavior in flows that could be broadly applicable
to improved combustor design for new fuels. The project will support two
graduate students and one undergraduate student each year, and will provide
opportunities for these students to be trained in a broad range of optical
measurement techniques. The students and PIs will collaborate directly with
Pratt &amp; Whitney on the selections of test conditions and analysis of
afterburner data to provide good coupling between the results from the studies
in the UConn rig and larger full scale tests. Graduate students will have the
opportunity for internships at P&amp;W. The data sets measured in this program
will be shared broadly to provide a basis for future model comparisons.