* 0967172
* Microfluidics to probe partial coalescence in emulsions containing interfacial crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Siva Vanapalli, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 04/30/2014
* USD 275,751.00

0967172&lt;br/&gt;Vanapalli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In applications such as foods
and consumer products, emulsions are often employed because of their remarkable
ability to form a wide variety of materials ranging from low-viscosity fluids,
to gels to highly elastic pastes. In some of these applications emulsions
containing crystallizable oils are tempered and sheared to form bicontinuous
gels by exploiting a phenomenon known as partial coalescence. Unlike coalescence
in liquid droplets, partial coalescence occurs when the interfacial crystals of
semi-crystalline droplets penetrate neighboring droplets. The mechanical
strength of the crystalline network linking the droplets is capable of
overcoming the Laplace pressure and maintains the integrity of the non-spherical
aggregates. Despite prior investigations, partial coalescence remains a poorly
understood convolution of two non-equilibrium and stochastic phenomena -
nucleation and aggregation in emulsions. Emerging technologies such as topical
drugs and phase change materials also rely on partial coalescence. Thus,
fundamental understanding of partial coalescence in oil-in-water emulsions would
broadly impact the technological development in these applications. Currently
partial coalescence has confounded scientific understanding because of
polydispersity in emulsions, shear and additives such as surfactants - all of
which affect both the nucleation rates and the probability of partial
coalescence. In addition, current methods such as X-ray diffraction and
differential scanning calorimetry are top-down approaches and are inadequate to
probe the stochastic nature of nucleation and partial coalescence at the level
of individual droplets. To address these scientific challenges, the
investigators deploy microfluidic technology and direct visualization methods to
(1) Quantify nucleation kinetics in exceptionally monodisperse droplets and test
the validity of current nucleation theories (2) Directly measure the kinetics of
partial coalescence and test the applicability of kinetic theories of
aggregation and (3) Directly quantify the probability of shear-induced
coalescence in crystalline droplets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this work is an integrated experimental effort combining microfluidics
and microscopy to address a technological need to fundamentally understand
nucleation and partial coalescence in emulsions. Novel aspects of the work
include routing droplet traffic in a microfluidic network to control individual
droplet parking in well-defined spots on a microfluidic device. Generating such
large-scale single droplet arrays enables repeated crystallization-melting
cycles to be performed to quantify the heterogeneity in the dynamics of
nucleation. In addition, by manipulating the parking space available for
droplets, the investigators will generate microfluidic doublets and hexagonally-
packed monodisperse droplet arrays for direct visualization of the microscopic
dynamics of partial coalescence. To probe shear-induced coalescence, we will
generate two microfluidic trains of droplets and induce repeated head-on
collisions between individual droplets. The ability to create such large
statistical ensembles and perform measurements at the level of individual
droplets is essential to discriminate the various mechanisms causing nucleation
and will yield a never-before-available picture of the stochastic nature of
nucleation and partial coalescence. Thus, this potentially transformative
research moves beyond current top-down methods by introducing bottom-up
approaches to investigate the non-equilibrium thermodynamics of nucleation and
partial coalescence in emulsions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental
investigation of crystallization and partial coalescence in emulsions will
broadly impact the technology and engineering in areas as diverse as foods,
cosmetics, drug delivery and phase change materials. Furthermore, this study may
catalyze the development of an entirely new class of droplet-based fluidic
devices for rapid assessment of crystallization and emulsion stability. This
work will also impact other engineering areas that rely on fundamental
understanding of emulsion crystallization and stability such as oil recovery.
The educational component of the project includes drawing graduate and
undergraduate students to the visually striking microfluidics research and
providing state-of-the-art training in microfluidics, emulsion science, non-
equilibrium thermodynamics and microscopy. The PI will pursue outreach
activities to high school students by developing a weeklong hands-on-activities
and lectures on the theme "Bubbles on Chips"