* 0967375
* Integrated Single Molecule Color Coding System for Multiplexed Detection of Pathogens
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Jeff Wang, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 340,000.00

Integrated Single Molecule Color Coding System for Multiplexed Detection of
Pathogens

Among the various methods currently used in clinical laboratories for the
detection of bacterial pathogens, the cell culture-based method remains the gold
standard. However, this method may require 24 hours or longer obtaining results
and often has limited sensitivity. Although PCR-based approaches to pathogen
detection have significantly improved sensitivity and shortened detection times
as compared to conventional culture-based systems, the inherent technical
limitation of PCR chemistry precludes sufficient multiplexing capacity for
large-scale pathogen identification and characterization in a single reaction
tube. The project focuses on developing an integrated biosensing system capable
of efficient sample preparation and, subsequently, highly sensitive and
multiplexed detection of bacterial pathogens. The proposed platform has several
unique features. It utilizes the multi-color beam shaped confocal fluorescence
spectroscopic technology to enable sensitive and multiplexed detection of
infectious agents. In addition, the system incorporates a microfluidic chip that
uses magnet-actuated droplets for DNA isolation, probe-target hybridization and
single molecule detection via beam-shaped confocal spectroscopy. The droplet
microfluidic platform allows fluidic manipulations in a pump-less and valve-less
manner without the need for tedious integration of fluidic components and
tubing, thereby greatly enhancing the ease-of-use and throughput of the proposed
pathogen detection system. The proposed project will have immediate broad and
social impact. The proposed biosensing system will enable highly sensitive,
rapid, and broad-based detection of infectious pathogens. Diseases caused by
infectious pathogens are major causes of death, disability, and social and
economic disruption for millions of people globally. Diagnosis forms the basis
for accurately treating diseases, and timely therapeutic intervention is
associated with improved clinical outcome and prognosis. Thus, the development
of a biosensing platform capable of rapid and accurate diagnosis of infectious
pathogens is critical to saving lives. In addition, this research will provide
excellent opportunities for cross-disciplinary training for K-12, undergraduate
and graduate students. High school students will be invited to perform research
in the PI?s lab. Furthermore, the completion of the experimental setup will
improve the infrastructure for training in the area of micro/nano/bio science
and engineering at the Johns Hopkins University.