* 0967821
* An Epigenetic Understanding of Transcriptional Regulation in Chinese Hamster Ovary Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Susan Sharfstein, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 07/31/2014
* USD 437,908.00

This NSF award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering program
supports work to characterize cell lines producing recombinant monoclonal
antibodies with an objective of identifying the characteristics of high
productivity cell lines. Monoclonal antibodies represent a significant fraction
of the recently approved and pipeline biopharmaceuticals, providing critical new
therapies for diseases such as breast cancer and rheumatoid arthritis. However,
cell-line development currently requires screening hundreds to thousands of
clones to identify cell lines exhibiting high levels of specific productivity
and rapid growth rates, limiting the rate at which compounds can be brought into
clinical trials and ultimately, to market. The ability to improve productivity
from a rational approach will improve the rates of bioprocess development, which
will, in turn, improve human health by allowing novel biopharmaceutical products
to reach the market more quickly and inexpensively.

The intellectual merit of this proposal is to analyze the epigenetic differences
(heritable traits that do not involve changes in the DNA sequence) between
highly productive cell lines and culture conditions and lower productivity
systems to understand regulation of transcription. Specifically, we will compare
(i) parental cell clones and their methotrexate-amplified progeny, to identify
epigenetic changes that occur upon gene amplification; (ii) cell clones arising
from independent transfection events, to identify the interactions between
transgene localization and epigenetic modifications, and (iii) butyrate-treated
and untreated cell clones, to identify the epigenetic changes that occur upon
treatment with a histone-deacetylase inhibitor known to increase specific
productivity.

The broader impacts of the proposed work are (i) to provide fundamental
knowledge to the biotechnology and biopharmaceutical industry thus speeding
bioprocess development, which will, in turn, have a significant impact on human
health by allowing novel biopharmaceutical products to reach the market more
quickly and inexpensively; (ii) to train graduate and undergraduate students,
with a particular emphasis on undergraduates from historically minority
institutions, in mammalian cell bioprocessing, meeting a critical need in the
biotechnology/biopharmaceutical industry; (iii) to incorporate the results of
the proposed work into instructional materials for undergraduate and graduate
courses including a new graduate course at the Biomanufacturing Training and
Education Center at NC State; (iv) to continue outreach activities, particularly
focusing on recruiting young women into scientific careers.