* 0967932
* Collaborative Research:  Maximizing Therapeutic DNA Process Productivity
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* Saleem Khan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 04/30/2013
* USD 348,426.00

0967932&lt;br/&gt;Ataai&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA vaccines are becoming
increasingly important as a way to confer immunity. Ultimately, DNA vaccines
should be safer and more effective than traditional vaccines, however,
currently, there are limitations in our ability to produce the necessary DNA. To
meet the demand for DNA vaccines and other DNA products, it would be beneficial
to increase the productivity of production processes. While reducing cost,
faster processing would also enable DNA vaccine producers to more quickly
respond to pathogen mutations and disease outbreaks. The proposed work addresses
this problem. The main idea is when host and plasmid DNA are concurrently
engineered, DNA production increases dramatically, while the host grows quickly
on simple and inexpensive medium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
use a combination of metabolic engineering, proteomics, NMR, bioprocessing, and
mathematical modeling to achieve their goals. The work will extend metabolic
engineering practice from the current foci of small molecules and proteins to
DNA products, which is important in advancing the field of metabolic
engineering. From a more fundamental standpoint, the integration of plasmid DNA
synthesis with host cell metabolism, which is not now well understood, will be
improved. The effect of combining mutations in the control of plasmid
replication is also not yet well explored. The work will reveal the extent to
which the effects are synergistic, which would be of interest to structural
molecular biologists. The impact of redox cofactor balancing will also be
elucidated, which is of current interest to a number of ongoing metabolic
engineering efforts. A successful outcome will accelerate the production of
therapeutic DNA products and facilitate clinical trials. This collaborative
project would provide broad education and training for the graduate and
undergraduate students (including minority students) involved in metabolic
engineering, computation, NMR, proteomics, and the bioprocessing of DNA
products.