* 0967965
* Development of Bioengineered Cyanobacteriochromes for in vivo Fluorescence Tagging
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Susan Spiller, Mills College
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 388,065.00

0967965&lt;br/&gt;Spiller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyanobacteriochromes are a
cyanobacterial family of biliprotein photoreceptors. This bioengineering
proposal promises a small, bright red reporter (about 160 amino acids). Compared
to other red-fluorescent markers, biliprotein reporters will exhibit
substantially improved resistance to photobleaching and low intracellular
toxicity. They plan to optimize the DNA sequence of a mutant cyanobacteriochrome
for mammalian expression, and then to fuse it to mammalian cytoskeleton proteins
for transfection into living cells. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
proposed research is that engineered bright red fluorescent proteins are tools
for in vivo cellular imaging. The goal is to image a red fluorescent-tagged
cytoskeleton during infection so that understanding the infection process will
suggest therapeutic protocols. There are potentially many other uses for a
bright red, small, non-toxic fluorescent tag. &lt;br/&gt;Among the broader
impacts resulting from the activity is the training of undergraduate women in
bioengineering. Mills College's small college atmosphere is an ideal environment
for engaging young women in the excitement of scientific research. Twenty-eight
young women and one man have participated in biophotonics research at Mills
College supported by a sub award from NSF (CBST- UC Davis). All of these
students have entered graduate schools or medical schools.