* 0967829
* Enhanced Electrodes for Proton Conducting Solid Oxide Fuel Cells and Electrolyzers
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2010,02/28/2011
* Steven McIntosh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 02/28/2011
* USD 304,826.00

0967829 McIntosh

Matching supply with demand is a significant issue with the large-scale
deployment of intermittent renewable energy systems such as wind and solar
power. For example, the peak power generated when the wind blows must be matched
to periods of peak demand. This necessitates the development of large and
efficient means of temporary power storage. One attractive option is a high
performance, reversible, and efficient fuel cell/electrolyzer system. This
system would operate in electrolyzer mode to store electrical energy as chemical
energy (hydrogen) during periods of plentiful power generation. Operation can
then be reversed to supply electrical energy during periods of peak demand.

Intellectual Merit

Proton conducting oxides have potential application in efficient high
temperature solid oxide fuel cells and electrolyzers. While the transport
properties of these materials are being studied in increasing detail, there is
currently very limited knowledge regarding the catalytic and electrocatalytic
activity of this class of material. Reduction and oxidation (redox) of surface
oxygen sites by the Mars-van Krevelen mechanism is a central step in catalytic
and electrocatalytic reaction on oxygen ion conducting materials. The central
hypothesis of the proposed research is that an analogous proton-based Mars-van
Krevelen mechanism will be a critical step in the catalytic cycle on proton
conducting oxides. The central route to enhanced activity will be doping of
transition metals both into the oxide lattice and as nanoparticles on the oxide
surface. The hypothesized electrocatalytic mechanism will be validated by
isotopic transient studies and the measured reaction kinetics related to proton
incorporation thermodynamics, transport properties and crystal structure. Proton
conducting solid oxide fuel cells and electrolyzers will be fabricated and
tested to demonstrate the links between electrocatalysis and electrode function.

The demonstration of a proton based Mars-van Krevelen mechanism will provide a
fundamental basis from which the performance of proton conducting oxide
electrodes may be interpreted and enhanced.

Broader Impacts

Replacing oxygen ion conductors with proton conducting oxides can provide a new
direction for heterogeneous catalyst development. The results of this
multidisciplinary study will be disseminated to the catalysis, electrochemistry,
and solid state ionics communities through journal publications and conference
presentations.

Undergraduate students will play an active role in this research through clearly
identified, focused research projects. The importance and potential impact of
ongoing scientific advances in the area of energy and the environment will be
conveyed to the general public via "Energy days" to be held at the University of
Virginia. Faculty and graduate and undergraduate students from across campus
actively engaged in this field will provide technology demonstrations and
discussion points. A focused approach to engaging middle school students will be
developed by expanding a small existing program. The PI, as well as graduate
students in the PI's laboratory, will spend a time at local middle schools
introducing the concept of engineering to students through a series of hands-on
projects. These will be focused on energy and sustainability concepts with
learning outcomes reinforced through classroom education.