* 0967076
* Acquisition of a SurPASS Electrokinetic Analyzer
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2012
* Derick Brown, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 03/31/2012
* USD 86,420.00

Brown, Derek CBET-0967076

This is a proposal for the acquisition of an Anton Paar SurPASS Electrokinetic
Analyzer in support of the PIs NSF sponsored research examining the impacts of
bacterial adhesion on cellular metabolic activity. The working hypothesis for
this research area is that bacteria can take advantage of a link between
cellular bioenergetics and the physiochemical charge regulation effect, which
occurs as a surface containing acid/base functional groups (e.g., the bacterial
cell surface) approaches another surface. As the bacterium approaches the
surface, the charge regulation effect causes the charge and pH at the cell
surface to vary as a function of separation distance. The hypothesis states that
the change in pH at the cell surface can affect the proton motive force that
forms across the bacterial membrane, with a resulting change in cellular ATP
levels. They have had very good success in this research area to date,
demonstrating that adhesion can both enhance and inhibit metabolic activity,
depending on the charge nature of the adhering surface. They are now working
validating the hypothesis by varying the surface charge of the adhering surface
and comparing the experimental results to our model predictions.

To model this system, they require accurate knowledge of the charge properties
of the adhering surface. To date they have been using electrophoretic mobility
(EM) measurements of finely crushed materials. While there are issues with the
use of crushed materials, this approach has allowed them to determine the
electrostatic properties of the adhering surface and use this data to model how
adhesion affects the cellular metabolic activity. In order to both validate
their working hypothesis and to develop materials that give a specific microbial
response (e.g., enhance activity or inhibit biofilm formation), they are now
preparing to examine a wide range of materials that unfortunately don&#697;t
allow themselves to be finely crushed and analyzed via electrophoretic mobility
measurements. In contrast to electrophoretic mobility instruments, which are
designed to work with colloids, the SurPASS Electrokinetic Analyzer is designed
to work with macroscopic solids. By measuring the streaming potential (or
streaming current), the SurPASS provides the zeta potential as the primary
information. Material that can be analyzed include granular media (e.g., sand,
soil, glass and polymer beads), fibers, powders, and planar media (e.g., foils,
membranes, glass and polymer sheets).

The acquisition and use of this instrument will significantly enhance the output
and productivity of the PIs research laboratory by allowing the determination of
the electrostatic properties of macroscopic materials. This information will be
used in the modeling of charge regulated surfaces and will enable experimental
validation of the working hypothesis. Through this mechanism, this instrument
will ultimately provide data that will impact the wide array of research fields
involved with bacterial adhesion and surface colonization.

Additional broader impacts related the acquisition and use of the SurPASS
instrument span both research and education. This instrument will be made
available to researchers at Lehigh University and other universities (most
notably Lafayette College, an undergraduate institution located in nearby
Easton, PA), and it will be used in research experiences of undergraduates and
secondary school teachers.