* 0967988
* Polyethylenimine Redox Polymers for Bioelectrocatalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Daniel Glatzhofer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 329,300.00

0967988&lt;br/&gt;Schmidtke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fuel cells convert chemical
energy directly into electricity through an oxidation reaction at the anode and
a reduction reaction at the cathode. In enzymatic biofuel cells, traditional
fuel cell catalysts (e.g. Pt, Pd, Ru) are replaced by fuel oxidizing enzymes
(e.g. Glucose Oxidase,&lt;br/&gt;Alcohol Dehydrogenase, Fructose Dehydrogenase)
at the anode and oxygen reducing enzymes (e.g. Laccase, Bilirubin Oxidase) at
the cathode. Currently the main limitations of enzymatic biofuel cells are low
power output and limited lifetimes. Principal Investigators David Schmidtke and
Daniel Glatzhofer at the University of Oklahoma, Norman Campus have hypothesized
on the limiting factors. In enzymatic biofuel cells, the redox center of most
enzymes is buried in the protein shell and electrically inaccessible. Thus most
redox enzymes do not normally exchange electrons with an electrode. They propose
to increase the power output of enzymatic biofuel cells by synthesizing redox
polymers that increase the rate of electron transfer (i.e. current flow)between
the redox enzymes and electrodes. These novel PEI-based redox polymers produce
high currents by efficiently collecting and shuttling electrons between the
enzyme¡¦s redox center and the electrode surface. These polymers contain metal
species, ferrocene compounds, linked to the polymer. Tuning the system will
require synthesis of polymers with different lengths of spacer arms. The PIs are
targeting a 20-200 fold improvement in power output.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymatic biofuel cells will not solve the nation¡¦s
energy needs. However, as the demand for portable energy increases, there
develops a need for alternative renewable energy sources. Enzymatic biofuel
cells are an attractive energy conversion technology because they operate at
mild temperatures of20-40?aC and under neutral pH and consume substrates such as
sugars that are readily available in biological systems. Because of their
inherent selectivities, enzyme based anodes and cathodes can operate in the same
compartment without separating membranes thereby reducing size and weight. They
have potential applications for both in vivo (e.g. pacemakers, implantable
sensors) and ex vivo (e.g. remote site sensing, mobile electronics) systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators intend to use their research as a
vehicle to increase the attractiveness of the field to potential students. Their
belief, based on studies, is that a student¡¦s attitude toward science and his
achievement in science improves with hands-on experiences. To help increase the
likelihood that students will continue their studies in science and engineering,
proposed educational activities with research opportunities include Research
Opportunities for Undergraduate students and Summer Research Internships for
Underrepresented Groups, matched with Research Opportunities for Middle School
Teachers.