* 0967134
* Offchip Interconnect Signaling Scheme with Near Zero Simultaneous Switching Noise
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Madhavan Swaminathan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 05/31/2013
* USD 360,001.00

The objective of this research is to develop a signaling scheme that produces
near zero simultaneous switching noise for I/O circuits switching in a package
or printed circuit board. In present packages and printed circuit boards, this
is caused by the cavity resonances produced between the power and ground planes
due to return path discontinuities. The approach is to replace the power planes
using transmission lines that are matched at the source, thereby leading to un-
interrupted current return paths. This approach can be applied to both 2D and 3D
integrated systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Today's electronic
systems use a low impedance power distribution network. Contrary to this
practice, high impedance transmission lines can be used to supply power, thereby
eliminating the need for hundreds of capacitors. Using the proposed
interconnection topology, it is expected that copper wires in the package would
be sufficient to achieve a bandwidth of 1.6TBps or better between multi-core
processors and memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The high-risk, far-
reaching approach investigated in this program is beyond the current focus of
the electronics industry, and thus lends itself to university-based research and
development. The findings from this research and the approaches developed will
be integrated into graduate and undergraduate courses. K-12 students and high
school teachers are expected to participate in research, which provides
engineering exposure and stimulates engineering interest.