* 0968354
* PIRE: LIFE ON A TECTONICALLY-ACTIVE DELTA: CONVERGENCE OF EARTH SCIENCE AND GEOHAZARD RESEARCH IN BANGLADESH WITH EDUCATION AND CAPACITY BUILDING
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2018
* Won Young Kim, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 4,770,178.00

This PIRE project brings together an international team of U.S., Bangladeshi,
Indian, German, and Italian scientists to further our understanding of the
dynamics of the world's largest delta, the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna Delta
(GBMD). This delta, named for the three large rivers that flow into it from the
Himalayan and Burmese Ranges, encompasses most of Bangladesh. In addition to its
size, this delta is notable because it is at the active juncture of three
tectonic plates and receives over one gigaton of sediment annually from the
three large rivers. Only about one-third of this sediment remains in the delta
because the delta is sinking so rapidly. This combination preserves a tremendous
stratigraphic archive of erosional processes in the Himalaya, the river-based
processes that are building the GBMD, the tectonics of the active plate
boundaries it overlies, and the interactions among these processes. This record
is largely unexplored and little is known about the fundamental interactions
between sedimentation and tectonics at this scale. This PIRE team will use a
broad suite of disciplines and techniques to collectively study the sedimentary
and hydrological processes, tectonics, structural geology, and seismology
essential to unravelling GBMD dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIRE team will
first create a record of the stratigraphic architecture of the delta using a
mixture of advanced technical and local manual methods. Core areas of the
project include: 1) defining the tectonic plate boundaries that are buried by
sedimentation; 2) identifying potential sources of future earthquakes; 3)
investigating the relative causes of subsidence rates due to longer term effects
(e.g., sediment loading, tectonics, and compaction) vs. shorter term effects
(e.g., earthquakes and human interventions); 4) investigating rapid channel
switches of the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers; and 5) assembling a
comprehensive, integrated record of delta dynamics by coupling tectonics and
hydrological processes, and by linking long-term steady processes with abrupt,
short-term events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bangladesh is a developing country that
is the size of Iowa, but with a 50-fold greater population of almost 160 million
people. This impoverished nation is extremely vulnerable to natural hazards
related to the dynamism of the delta system. Such hazards include widespread
seasonal flooding, river erosion and channel redirections, permanent land loss
from sea level rise, naturally-occurring arsenic in groundwater, recurrent
cyclones and monsoons, landslides, and huge earthquakes. Because such infrequent
geologic events are poorly understood, there is little long-term planning to
address the timescales at which the dynamic GBMD landscape is changing, leaving
a growing population at risk. Reliable knowledge of geologic processes is
therefore a prerequisite for effective infrastructure design, risk-reduction and
resource optimization in Bangladesh. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIRE project
provides a compelling international education opportunity for all participants
by collaboratively engaging them in research on an important fundamental
problem, the results of which could reduce the impact of future delta-related
hazards. It will train the next generation of U.S. earth and environmental
scientists to work globally via international fieldwork, laboratory experiments
and analysis, and modelling. Graduate students and undergraduates from PIRE
institutions will be able to conduct research in Bangladesh and enroll in
interdisciplinary field courses there; additional research trips and field
schools will be open to students from institutions not directly involved in the
PIRE research efforts. The project will also broaden participation across PIRE
institutions and strengthen the geosciences dimensions of an interdisciplinary
course on water issues in Bangladesh taught at the University of Minnesota.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIRE project will allow the U.S. institutions to build
their capacity for international engagement. It will strengthen and link
longstanding ongoing research involvement in Bangladesh on several campuses. It
will couple the U.S. institutions in an international network of delta experts
in Europe and South Asia. Members of the project will also take advantage of the
unique "Experimental Earthscape" and computational facilities at the National
Center for Earth-surface Dynamics (NCED), an NSF-funded Science and Technology
Center at the University of Minnesota. Linkage to NCED, which supports many
researchers studying the Mississippi River delta, means this PIRE has the
potential to have a large national impact by providing fundamental new insights
into the behavior of delta systems. This award will also help build Bangladeshi
research capacity and infrastructure via the collaboration with the Delta Study
Centre (DSC) and Dhaka University Earth Obseratory (DUEO) at Dhaka University
(DU). The project should help position DSC and DUEO as centers of excellence on
deltaic sedimentary and tectonic processes and establish them as a focal points
for GMBD research with strong faculty, archived sedimentary data, and oversight
of critical seismic and GPS networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborating
institutions in the U.S. are Columbia University (NY), Vanderbilt University
(TN), the University of Minnesota, and City University of New York, Queens
College. Collaborating foreign institutions are the University of Dhaka
(Bangladesh), Bremen University (Germany), Physical Research Laboratory (India),
the Bengal Engineering and Science University (India), and Istituto Nazionale di
Geofisica e Vulcanologia (Italy). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is cofunded
by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of
Earth Sciences.