* 0968258
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Thin Liquid Films: Mathematics and Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Karen Daniels, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2015
* USD 780,951.00

The science of thin liquid films has developed rapidly in recent years, with
applications to coating flows, biofluids, microfluidic engineering, and
medicine. In this project, we will focus on three groups of free-surface flow
problems using a combination of mathematical modeling, analysis and numerical
simulation, coupled to carefully chosen quantitative experiments. The three
areas are: (i) flows driven by surface tension gradients, (ii) the role of
inertia in regimes where lubrication is inadequate to model thin film flow, and
(iii) vibrating thin films. Advances in our understanding of theoretical issues
surrounding modeling these flows, and the exploration of new features of the
flows through experiments will have direct applications to improving control and
reliability of manufacturing processes in high-tech industries and to biomedical
systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The flow of thin liquid layers or films occurs in
contexts including industrial coating flows, microfluidic engineering, and
medicine. In this project, we focus on properties of thin liquid films such as
the role of surface tension in driving flow, and the behavior of thin layers
under rapid vibration. Surface tension is an important mechanism in the dynamics
of mucus layers in the lung, and is central to the treatment of premature
infants by surfactant replacement therapy. The control of thin layer flow,
through the temperature dependence of surface tension or using rapid vibrations,
has the potential to eliminate damaging nonuniformities in industrial coating
processes. Each of these areas and applications pose substantial scientific
challenges that will be met with a collaborative effort between mathematicians
and physicists, exploring theoretical and experimental methods in tandem. The
project includes graduate and undergraduate student training in an
interdisciplinary research program that will develop coordinated advanced skills
in physics, engineering, and applied mathematics.