* 0968546
* SoCS:  Biotracker - Melding Human and Machine Intelligence to Create Large-scale Collaborative Systems
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Jennifer Preece, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 797,873.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;This project will make use of a novel system that will
serve to accelerate the documentation of millions of currently unknown species.
It will involve the use of mobile phones and the internet, which together make
it feasible for thousands (if not millions) of people to collaborate on large-
scale projects of tremendous social importance. In this project, data on
biodiversity will be collected by citizen-scientists using mobile phones. There
are approximately two million known species of organisms in the world and
potentially millions more are still undocumented. Without help, professional
biologists will be unable to faithfully record many of these species before they
disappear from the planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to develop and test
evolving theories for designing socially intelligent systems in which
enthusiasts (usually referred to as "citizen-scientists") and scientist?s
partner with technology to collect and process the data needed for large scale
observation-driven science. This study will extend existing work by examining
motivations of expert scientists and novice enthusiasts partnered with computing
technologies in a scientific domain; developing and testing novel theory-
inspired strategies for motivating participants; and beginning to develop a
meta-theory that characterizes the interplay between potentially competing
motivational strategies or "design levers" in the same socially intelligent
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Inventorying
and compiling basic descriptions of a fraction of the world's species is a huge
task that cannot be accomplished by trained scientists alone. This project will
help enlist the public to accomplish this task. The Encyclopedia of Life project
will employ the techniques that are developed in this project for use by other
volunteers to obtain additional information about species around the globe.