* 0968038
* Colloidal Assembly of Biodegradable Multifunctional Nanoclusters
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Keith Johnston, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 03/31/2014
* USD 334,875.00

0968038&lt;br/&gt;Johnston&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge in nanotechnology is to design
stable particles smaller than 100 nm with multifunctionality, and in particular,
strong optical and magnetic properties. It is difficult to achieve the required
particle morphology in the common approach of atomic growth guided by
surfactants. Thus, a robust and flexible alternative will be developed to
assemble ~5 nm nanoparticle building blocks physically into multifunctional
nanoclusters. This colloidal kinetic and interfacial assembly concept will be
developed to obtain simultaneously sizes below 100 nm and extremely high
loadings (&gt;80%) of gold and iron oxide particles to produce strong optical
(NIR absorbance) and magnetic (magnetic moment/volume and spin-spin relaxivity,
r2) properties. In addition, these clusters will disassemble back into the
original primary nanoparticles upon breakdown of biodegradable polymer
stabilizers, which is very important for their translation to the biomedical
field. Specifically, nanoclusters with high loadings of closely paced gold and
iron oxide nanoparticles will be formed by tuning the colloidal interactions to
control the cluster growth, size, and morphology. Weakly adsorbed polymer
stabilizers will favor much higher inorganic particle loadings than in the case
of equilibrium self-assembly, as well as cluster biodegradation. The spatial
orientation of each type of nanoparticle in the cluster will be analyzed by high
resolution TEM and TEM tomography at various tilt angles for a variety of
nanoparticle compositions, surface coatings and stablilizing polymers. The NIR
surface plasmon resonance and the spin-spin magnetic relaxivity will be measured
and explained in terms of the cluster morphology. The cluster de-aggregation
will be monitored in solution with spectroscopy and dynamic light scattering and
in live cells with hyperspectral optical imaging and transmission electron
microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
robust kinetic assembly platform for the design of biodegradable nanoclusters
with high inorganic particle loadings for strong multifunctional properties will
offer broad opportunities in microelectronics, sensors, imaging and
optoelectronics. The simplicity and flexibility of this colloidal approach to
form novel classes of nanoclusters will likely spawn numerous experimental and
theoretical studies to understand the relationship between the optical/magnetic
properties and nanocluster morphology. Furthermore, the optical/magnetic
nanoparticles can provide solutions to one of the major challenges of modern
medicine efficient delivery of therapeutics and molecular specific treatment of
pathology with real-time imaging (photoacoustic imaging and MRI) for guidance
and monitoring. The biodegradation of nanoclusters into primary nanoparticles
can overcome the major roadblock in nanotechnology that is toxicity upon
accumulation in humans and in the broader environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
key theme will be to show young students that engineering can play a major role
in improving health care, by integrating scientific concepts in chemistry and
biology to address practical problems. The PIs will develop educational
material, laboratory experiments and provide student teachers for the nationally
renowned UTeach Outreach program, which provides undergraduate students to serve
as volunteer instructors for science lessons in the Austin Independent School
District. In the UTeach Young Scientists Summer Camps, rising sixth grade
students from heavily Hispanic elementary Schools will come to University of
Texas for one week to participate in hands-on inquiry-based science lessons that
stress academic rigor. The PIs will add an engineering component to the science
lessons and the summer camp to complement current efforts in chemistry and
biology.