* 0968802
* Collaborative Research:  Center for Resource Recovery and Recycling (CR3)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2015
* Patrick Taylor, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 12/31/2015
* USD 343,500.00

I/UCRC for Resource Recovery and Recycling

0968839 Worcester Polytechnic Institute; Diran Apelian 0968802 Colorado School
of Mines; Brajendra Mishra

The Center for Resource Recovery and Recycling (CR3) will conduct research that
enables innovative recovery and recycling processing technologies that maximize
the capture of post-consumer scrap and minimize the quantity of manufacturing
scrap. Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) and Colorado School of Mines (CSM)
are collaborating to establish the proposed center, with WPI as the lead
institution.

The research efforts at the proposed Center will enable innovative recovery and
recycling processing technologies. The PIs will apply a systems approach to
identify best strategies and build optimal recovery and recycling technologies.
The proposed research will include establishing methods to design metallic
alloys that meet performance requirements while increasing recyclability;
developing sensors to identify metals and separation technologies to sort the
waste stream; and establishing materials sensors, processes and controls to
achieve greater tolerance of scrap metal input for downstream recycling
processes. The Center research projects will be multi-disciplinary and will
involve faculty and both graduate and under-graduate students from a spectrum of
disciplines.

The societal impact of the proposed Center includes the energy savings and
emissions reductions that are inherent in increased resource recovery and
recycling. Materials recovery and recycling is practiced by diverse and often
fragmented supply chain (scrap yards, municipal waste centers and others). The
proposed IUCRC plans to bring together industrial members from across this
spectrum, and provide a forum where all can gain an understanding of the entire
supply chain, identify issues, explore and develop innovative, integrated
solutions. Broadening participation is also a top priority for CR3, and will
involve underrepresented minorities and women within the Center activities
through targeted provision of research and educational opportunities for its
graduates at companies that belong to the Center.