* 0968226
* PIRE: International consortium for probing novel superconductors with neutrons, muons, photons and STM
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Yasutomo Uemura, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,091,693.00

This PIRE project forms an international consortium of leading superconductivity
researchers from the U.S., Japan, Canada, UK, and China to investigate novel
superconductors to clarify superconducting mechanisms and properties and develop
novel superconducting materials. In conventional electrical systems heat is
generated by friction as electrons collide with atoms and impurities in the
wire, a property that is ideal for appliances such as toasters or irons but not
for most other electrical applications. Superconductivity can be thought of as
"frictionless" electricity whereby electrons glide unimpeded between atoms, thus
vastly improving the conductor's energy efficiency. To date this has only been
achieved at extremely low temperatures; the challenge is to harness this
phenomenon at or near room temperature and at high electrical currents. This
project will fill gaps in our current understanding of superconductivity,
reconcile current theories, and advance the development of better materials for
fast-performing devices and cost-saving electric motors, generators, and power
transmission lines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project links leading materials
experimentalists and eminent theorists in a study of FeAs, CuO, CeCoIn5, and
URu2Si2 superconductors using powerful experimental probing techniques including
neutron scattering, muon spin relaxation, X-ray scattering, Raman spectroscopy,
and scanning tunneling microscopy. These advanced methods allow elucidation of
the phase diagrams of these important new materials of which some significant
aspects are currently unknown. The PIRE team will explore the parameters
affecting the highest temperature at which a certain material is superconducting
and ways of increasing that temperature so that superconductivity will not
require such expensive refrigeration. Some anomalies in the superfluid density
and specific heat discontinuities, inconsistent with the standard theory of
superconductivity, will also be investigated both experimentally and
theoretically.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;International collaboration is essential
for this work because it will provide U.S. scientists and students with access
to critical world-class accelerator-based facilities available in the UK and
Canada but not in the U.S., to high quality specimens fabricated in China and
Japan, and to first-rate scientific expertise from all countries. Combining and
comparing the results of multiple probes on the same high-quality specimens will
significantly improve the accuracy of data. Face to face collaboration of
theorists and experimentalists focused on key concepts will facilitate the
translation of mathematical theory into realistic and effective models and
materials. The project places great emphasis on training students and early
career scientists. Students and postdoctoral researchers will undertake 3-6
month research visits to work on superconducting mechanisms at foreign sites,
where they will also receive language and cultural training. The project will
actively recruit minority students into the sciences via workshops for high-
school students and teachers from disadvantaged schools in New York and via an
outreach program on superconductivity and scanning tunneling microscopy. High
school and undergraduate students will gain valuable beam-time experience
through the project, and female students, who are as a group underrepresented in
the physical sciences, will be provided valuable mentoring from four female
leading scientists on the team. The PIRE team will also develop a contemporary,
internet-based set of solid state physics lectures and a text book on
introductory solid state physics that reflect current knowledge in condensed
matter physics and related experimental techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project will strengthen and internationalize materials research programs at the
U.S. institutions and engage more U.S. students in international research
collaborations. It will place Columbia University and its students and faculty
at the core of a research and education partnership with extensive research
collaborations, teaching cooperation, and frequent reciprocal research visits
for participating faculty and students. Impacts extend beyond the PI and his
institution, including providing U.S. students with research opportunities at
two Department of Energy U.S. National Laboratories (Oak Ridge and Los Alamos)
and training of early career scientists at the UK's ISIS and Canada's TRIUMF
facilities, both of which will build the core workforce for new probing
facilities currently under construction in the U.S. and Japan. This PIRE project
will build upon an existing Inter American materials science network (CIAM) and
forge a foundation for long-term research and educational collaborations among
scientists and institutions in the five participating nations, all advancing the
state-of-the-art in superconductivity and its applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participating U.S. institutions include Columbia
University (NY), University of Tennessee at Knoxville, and the Department of
Energy's Oak Ridge (TN) and Los Alamos (NM) National Laboratories. Foreign
institutions include Institute of Physics - Chinese Academy of Sciences,
University of Bristol (UK), the UK Science and Technology Facilities Council's
ISIS facility, McMaster University (Canada), TRIUMF Canada's National Laboratory
for Particle and Nuclear Physics, Tokyo University (Japan), Osaka University
(Japan), Tohoku University (Japan), and the National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) (Japan).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and
the Division of Materials Research.