* 0968959
* Collaborative Research: Security and Software Engineering Research Center (S2ERC)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Wayne Zage, Ball State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 01/31/2016
* USD 1,570,883.00

0968959 Ball State University (BSU); Wayne Zage &lt;br/&gt;0968939 Iowa State
University (ISU); Doug Jacobson&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
proposal is to start a new I/UCRC "Security and Software Engineering Research
Center (S2ERC)" with a focus on improving the management of the software
engineering process, the productivity of software engineers, and the security,
quality and timeliness of software engineering products. The lead of the
proposed Center will be Ball State University (BSU) with a site location at Iowa
State University (ISU).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center (S2ERC) plans
to investigate integrated methods of engineering practical software systems that
are able to meet emerging security requirements in addition to encompassing
traditional software engineering objectives. This goal is of great importance to
both industry and government in order for them to be able to confidently deploy
real-world software systems that meet their mission goals even in the face of a
broad range of security attacks. The proposal introduces a high-level framework
to capture and guide the research focus of the Center on issues germane to
effective software engineering techniques as well as high security assurance.
The S2ERC researchers include national prize winners, NSF Career Award winners,
conference best paper winners, IEEE Fellows, journal editors and distinguished
professors. The collaborations with various prospective company members have
suggested many promising research initiatives for the proposed Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center will be an intellectually nurturing
environment where discovery and understanding is advanced to its faculty,
students and prospective members. The proposed Center will provide faculty and
students the unique opportunity to work on research teams in real world security
and software engineering applications. The proposed semi-annual S2ERC showcases
will provide an excellent opportunity for all the students to interact with
industrial partners and get a first-hand understanding of emerging challenges
and opportunities in their careers. The faculty and students will be a
programmatically diverse group from departments such as CS, EE, Industrial
Engineering, Management, and Systems Engineering. The diversity of the
researchers is enhanced further by women faculty.