* 0968234
* Polylogarithms, moduli spaces, Hodge theory, motives and L-functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2010,10/31/2010
* Alexander Goncharov, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2010
* USD 78,189.00

The PI would like to study a Feynman integral description of the real mixed
Hodge structure on the rational homotopy type of complex varieties. An
especially interesting case is the universal modular curve, where the
correlators of the Feynman integral generelize the Rankin-Selberg integrals. The
PI wants to relate them to special values of L-functions of products of modular
forms. He wants to find a Feynman integral description of the derived category
of mixed real Hodge sheaves. The PI wants to continue his study of the motivic
fundamental groups of curves and their relationship with modular varieties,
classical polylogarithms and their generalizations, special values of
L-functions, mixed motives and motivic multiple L-values. Finally, he wants to
continue his joint work with V.V. Fock on moduli spaces of local systems on
2D-surfaces higher Teichmuller spaces and its quantization using the quantum
dilogarithm, and relationship with representation theory hyperkahler geometry
and invariants of 3-folds.

During the last years many ideas coming from physics had a tremendous impact on
pure mathematics, and vice versa. Number theory has so far benefitted from these
insights significantly less then other areas of mathematics. The PI wants to
investigate several concrete problems of number theory, and more generally
arithmetic algebraic geometry, using Feynman integrals, quantum dilogarithms and
quantum deformations, quantization and other tools widely employed by
physicists. In particular he wants to show that certain very specific real
numbers, related to the set of complex solutions of an arbitrary system of
polynomial equations with rational coefficients, and so-called periods of the
rational homotopy type of an arbitrary variety over rationals, can be defined as
correlators of Feynman integrals. He wants to find the so-called special values
of L-functions among these numbers. The PI also hopes that this concrete example
of a Feynman integral related to an arithmetic algebraic geometry problem will
bring powerful methods of modern arithmetic algebraic geometry to the study of
Feynman integrals which appear in physics.