* 0968521
* SoCS:  Supporting A Nation of Neighbors with Community Analysis Visualization Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2012
* Ben Shneiderman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 08/31/2012
* USD 249,926.00

Computationally-mediated civic participation is emerging as a solution to
contemporary problems associated with economic and social issues such as
healthcare, energy sustainability, education, environmental protection, and
disaster response. The NSF-funded research project conducted by Ben Shneiderman,
Alan Neustadtl, and Catherine Plaisant at the University of Maryland will study
reasons for successes and failures of the community safety system, Nation of
Neighbors. The results will enable interventions to shift the balance towards
increasing success. One product of the research will be a computer-based
Community Analysis Visualization Environment (CAVE) that will enable community
managers to use a visual analytic toolkit to take the pulse of their communities
by identifying effective and ineffective components of the community
participation program, and will enable researchers to compare large numbers of
communities to understand the features that distinguish successful from failing
community participation programs. The project will test the four-stage Reader-
to-Leader Framework -- which assumes that participation moves from reader to
contributor to collaborator to leader, with fewer and fewer participants moving
into each subsequent stage -- by studying community manager strategies for
coping with the practical challenge of increased participation as well as
threatening disruptions caused by external events, malicious attacks, harmful
rumors, and disaffected members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition the results
will have general implications for many computationally-mediated civic
participation systems such as those designed for coping with natural disasters
(earthquakes, toxic waste discharges, etc.), medical outbreaks (food poisoning,
flu, pandemics, etc.), and human threats (terrorists, serial killers, bombers,
arsonists, etc.). The computational tools developed for the project will also be
useful to researchers studying community participation networks. The research
may also provide useful insights into the working of other types of social
networks and might have implications for organizations where information is
shared by large numbers of people, such as hospitals and school districts.