* 0968923
* CSEDI: Coupled Electromagnetic and Geodynamic Study of Thermochemical Piles
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,01/31/2015
* Chester Weiss, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2015
* USD 290,000.00

One of the great accomplishments in the Earth Sciences in the last few decades
has been an increasing appreciation for geologic, thermal, and chemical
complexity of Earth's interior, spanning a distance from a few kilometers depth
down to the outer boundary of the liquid outer core. This complexity is the
result of several interconnected geophysical observations that reveal not only a
current snapshot of Earth's state of planetary evolution, but also a 4.6 billion
year historical record of global scale geodynamic processes and events that have
shaped the surface upon which we live as well as the oceans and atmosphere. Our
research focuses on furthering our understanding of Earth's 'deep history' by
investigating enigmatic structures known as thermochemical piles, which reside
near the base of the mantle, just above the boundary with the core. The lateral
extent, size, temperature, composition and geologic significance of these
structures is presently a subject of great interest because of their potential
relationship to the origin of volcanoes, driving forces for present-day tectonic
plates and the fate of long-ago subducted tectonic plates. However, their
remoteness from Earth's surface - roughly 3000 kilometers down - makes them an
especially elusive target for geophysical investigation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of inherent resolution limits and selective
sensitivity to the full spectrum of geomaterial properties, no single
geophysical method is sufficient for painting a complete picture of this region
of the Earth. We propose to study the thermochemical state of the lower mantle
through a comprehensive set of numerical experiments, and comparison to
observational data, for mutually compatible electromagnetic and geodyamic
models. The union of these methods is based on the strong sensitivity of
electromagnetic observations to thermochemical variability as manifested in the
mantle's electrical conductivity, and the sensitivity of geodynamics modeling to
material parameters such as density and viscosity that control the accumulation
of material in the lower mantle and that material's thermal structure. Central
to these experiments is the over-arching question: How do we, or can we,
constrain our knowledge of the thermo-physio-chemical state of the lowermost
mantle through geodynamically-compatible electromagnetic observations?
Computational experiments will be conducted with a new, parallel electromagnetic
MANTle Induction Simulator (project MANTIS) for distributed memory compute
architectures, which shares the same underlying mathematical discretization as
the CitcomS code that will be used for the geodynamic simulations. This
compatibility between discretization methods between the two codes is important
for minimizing numerical artifacts as material properties from the
electromagnetic domain are mapped into corresponding properties in the
geodynamic domain.