* 0968703
* Collaborative Research: Ocean Mixing Processes Associated with High Spatial Heterogeneity in Sea Ice and the Implications for Climate Models
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Gokhan Danabasoglu, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 05/31/2014
* USD 316,377.00

Previous work, using of a single column ice-ocean model, showed that resolving
the high spatial variability in ice-ocean brine exchange has important
implications for ocean mixing and consequent sea ice mass budgets that influence
critical climate feedbacks. In particular, multiple ocean columns in each grid
with leads that are realistically embedded within the ice cover were needed to
improve simulations against Surface Heat Budget for the Arctic Ocean (SHEBA)
observations. Currently, this method has not been tested or implemented in any
climate models. Since the single column ice-ocean model study was limited to the
summer ice melting season and in a 1-D format only, funds are provided to allow
further studies on the multi-column ocean grid (MCOG) and related processes.
Questions to be explored include: How does MCOG work during the ice growth
period? How can MCOG be implemented in 3-D climate models? How does MCOG
influence physical and biogeochemical tracers that have fluxes between ice and
ocean? How much can MCOG reduce uncertainties in climate models? What is the
importance of explicitly representing the high ice/ocean flux spatial
heterogeneity in climate processes and feedbacks? How will representing this
sub-gridscale variability reduce uncertainties in climate models?

A more systematic study and implementation of MCOG in climate models to reduce
uncertainties associated with the high spatial heterogeneity in sea ice is the
focus of this study. A Climate Process and Modeling Team will address MCOG-
related problems and implementation in climate models systematically. The
following studies are planned: 1) Use sea ice and ocean field data and a small
regional ice-ocean model with and without MCOG to quantify key parameters and
investigate climate and biogeochemical processes influenced by the MCOG, 2)
Implement the MCOG scheme in the Community Climate System Model (CCSM) and GFDL
climate models, conduct long-term runs, and investigate the influence on climate
and biogeochemical feedbacks, 3) Validate the new model with observations, and
conduct model inter-comparison with other Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) climate models, and 4) Solicit more climate model users to
participate in using and assessing the new method through workshops, web-based
communications, and distribution of the new model code.