* 0968812
* Human Origins:   Genetic and Molecular Basis of Craniofacial Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 08/14/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Rogers, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 516,488.00

The heads of primates, including humans, all have the same basic parts, yet
every head is different. Craniofacial variation has important implications for
diet, defense, posture, balance, hearing, vision, and the accommodation of the
expanding primate brain. The skull is a complex adaptive structure, and the
question naturally arises pertaining to the genetic mechanisms that assemble and
coordinate its shape. This project will determine whether variation in head
shape occurs along similar anatomical axes among living monkeys and apes, their
fossil ancestors, a pedigree of 800 extant baboons, and in laboratory mice.
Computerized tomography (CT) scans will be acquired from these heads and used to
measure variation in three dimensions. The genes responsible for this variation
will be identified using data from baboon and mouse. Developmental pathways are
shared among mammals, so mice provide an important comparative and experimental
basis for primate findings. The manner by which genes structure variation in
head shape will be investigated by combined comparative DNA sequence and
bioinformatic analysis, and by engineering similar changes in mice to those seen
in baboons. Many genes doubtlessly contribute to structures like the head, and a
general challenge to modern evolutionary and developmental genetics generally is
to understand whether some genes are repeatedly involved in similar changes in
complex traits over the millions of years and different branches of evolution,
or whether different genes in the shared developmental pathways are responsible
in each instance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate a large amount
of data which will be posted on a publicly accessible website along with
information on analytical approaches and analyses. The PIs have a strong record
of training women and minority students and they will continue this tradition at
all levels from undergraduate to postdoctoral. Human evolutionary studies have a
strong public appeal and this project will be exceptionally popular to the
public media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;