* 0968888
* Toward New Astrophysical Insights on Particle Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Andrew Zentner, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Sher
* 09/30/2013
* USD 120,000.00

Numerous observations indicate that an unidentified form of dark matter drives
the growth of structure in the Universe. Significant experimental progress on
this issue is anticipated from a number of independent projects, including
direct searches for dark matter particles impacting nuclei in sophisticated
experiments on Earth and indirect searches for signatures of dark matter in
cosmic rays that bombard the Earth as well as the properties of stars and
galaxies. A possible weak link in the dark matter identification program is that
theoretical predictions for phenomena relevant to direct and indirect dark
matter searches remain inadequate to address expected improvements in
experimental techniques. The proposed project is a broad theoretical program to
improve the predictions for signals in dark matter direct and indirect search
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also envisioned to have
significant broader impacts. The graduate and undergraduate students
participating in this research program will cultivate unique skill sets. The PI
will continue numerous education and outreach projects under this proposal.
These projects include the development of general education courses on the
physics of energy and the physics of sports, public lectures at the Allegheny
Observatory, educational events at the Carnegie Science Center, and
participation in the Carnegie Science Center's programs to foster interest in
science in school-aged children.