* 0968772
* Iwasawa Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Ralph Greenberg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,978.00

Professor Greenberg intends to study a diverse set of problems related to Selmer
groups, elliptic curves, and Iwasawa theory. Selmer groups have traditionally
been an important tool for studying the Mordell-Weil group of an elliptic curve
over a number field. They have also played an important role in proving special
cases of the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture which provides a relationship
between arithmetic properties of an elliptic curve E and the behavior of the
Hasse-Weil L-function for E. In recent years, it has become clear that certain
natural generalizations of the Selmer group should provide similar conjectural
relationships to the behavior of much more general kinds of L-functions. Iwasawa
theory provides a framework for studying these conjectures. In its essence, the
idea is to study Selmer groups associated to a family of representations of the
absolute Galois group of a number field. The formulation of these conjectures in
a general setting leads to some fundamental problems. One problem is to find a
simple way to measure how large the Selmer groups are. Their size should be
measured by an element in a certain ring. But it is difficult to find a way to
define that element. One of the objectives of this project is to tackle that
question in two contrasting settings. In one setting, the ring is rather easy to
describe, but is non-commutative. In the other setting, the ring is commutative,
but we know very little about its actually structure. Another objective of this
project is to better understand the behavior of certain quantities which
indirectly reflect the structure of Selmer groups, especially in the non-
commutative setting. These quantities are certain ``multiplicities.'' There are
typically an infinite number of these quantities. Professor Greenberg hopes to
show how to determine all of these quantities from just a finite number of them.

One of the fundamental questions in the theory of numbers is the study of
solutions of an algebraic equation. The difficulty of this question depends on
the degree of the equation and the number of variables. It has been understood
since antiquity how to study this question when the degree is one or two and the
number of variables is also one or two. However, the question becomes much more
subtle when one considers equations of degree three, even if the number of
variables is just two. A fundamental conjecture concerning this question was
formulated in the 1960s by Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer. Although considerable
progress has been made since then, the conjecture remains unresolved. Such
equations define a class of curves known as "elliptic curves." The study of
their properties has proved to be of importance in cryptography - designing
codes for the secure transmission of information. Professor Greenberg intends to
continue his study of "Selmer groups" which have been a traditional tool in
understanding the arithmetic properties of elliptic curves and in studying the
conjecture of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer. The ultimate goal is to achieve a
deeper understanding of the solutions to the algebraic equations that define an
elliptic curve, and to develop a more general point of view concerning
conjectures analogous to the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture.