* 0968313
* PIRE:  Collaborations with France and Japan on Multiphase Fluid Science and Technologies
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2018
* Jason Butler, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2018
* USD 3,107,325.00

This PIRE project brings together two U.S. universities with six French and five
Japanese institutions to focus on multiphase flows with technological
applications. Multiphase flows are flowing streams of fluids that are mixtures
of liquids with other liquids, gases, and/or solids; examples include oil and
vinegar in salad dressing (liquid/liquid), water and air in soda (liquid/gas),
or water and cement in concrete slurry (liquid/solid). Multiphase flows and
their control play a vital role in many key technologies impacting the world
economy, such as metallurgy, mineralogy, materials processing, devices for
biological applications, and the automobile, pharmaceutical, aerospace, and
energy industries. This project will advance materials engineering by
investigating critical research challenges in multiphase flows - understanding
and predicting the patterns, instabilities, and turbulence that arise - to
develop and optimize materials and processes for industry. This PIRE team will
integrate the results from across a related sets of experiments including: study
of patterned flows and microfluidic mixing to improve micro-chip immunological
assays; use of microactuators and microsensors to study instabilities and
turbulence in multiphase systems; use of microgravity conditions to examine the
role of fluid instabilities; experimental and computational study of dynamic
flow of elongated particles/fibers; and expansion of current models of dispersed
turbulent flow via large-scale simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International
collaboration is essential to advancing our understanding of multiphase flows.
Complex multiphase flow research requires high speed computation and high-level
laboratory experimentation in which all three PIRE partner countries have
substantial complementary resources. The University of Florida is
internationally recognized for its programs in multiphase thermo-fluid mechanics
and flow control. Both Japan and France sustain strong research emphases in
thermal-fluid mechanics with key centers of excellence in multiphase flow. Japan
emphasizes technology in areas such as materials science, microgravity science,
bioassays and aeropropulsion while France emphasizes technology in nuclear
energy, environment, bio-sensors, and flow control. This award leverages strong
existing research collaborations and reciprocated access for U.S. scientists and
students to facilities and expertise not available in the U.S. The international
collaboration will also help industries in all three countries to engage highly-
trained personnel in fields involving applications of multiphase science and
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strength of this PIRE's educational
program is its plan to train U.S. students as global professionals with
versatility in professional abilities and attitudes that make them competitive
in the global marketplace. U.S. graduate students will be supported to work in
an international setting with foreign collaborators and advisors, functioning
and communicating in a multi-cultural atmosphere. Unique educational
opportunities include industry-relevant short courses, training in cutting-edge
research, cultural awareness workshops, and international symposia and
conferences. Internships in industrial research laboratories will give them
access to networking opportunities with industry within an international
context. Active recruitment of students from underrepresented groups will
contribute to diversifying and internationalizing the body of U.S. students
earning STEM graduate degrees. A certificate program in Multiphase Science and
Technology will be developed and offered through online distance learning
modules, thus making it available to international partners and their students,
interested students at other U.S. universities, and as continuing education for
industrial partners. U.S. researchers will also build skill sets needed for
research in international contexts via cross-collaboration with international
partners and co-advising foreign students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIRE
project is likely to have significant institutional impacts. It will strengthen
and internationalize research networks that address complicated multiphase
technological problems. It will help to build up an international engineering
research center of excellence in complex fluids and multiphase flows with
partnerships between international industry and academe that yield long-term
benefit to the U.S. economy. Such partnerships will also encourage industry
participation in education, international research cooperation, and student
internships. The partner institutions are committed to exploring joint and dual
degree programs, which would further internationalize the U.S. institutions and
enrich collaborative opportunities for future students and faculty alike.
Through these multifaceted initiatives and activities, this PIRE project will
serve as a model for both U.S. and international partner institutions as they
work to internationalize their own research and education portfolios.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. partners include the University of Florida and
Florida State University. French partners include Université de Poitiers,
Université Lille 1 Sciences et Technologies, Université Paris-Sud 11, Institut
de Mécanique des Fluides de Toulouse (IMFT), and Université de Provence Aix-
Marseille 1, and Université Bordeaux 1. Japanese partners include the University
of Tokyo, Tokyo University of Science, Kyoto University, Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA), and Tohoku University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIRE
project is cofunded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering and
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems.
NSF's support of this PIRE project leverages existing funding from the Embassy
of France's Partner University Fund and Chateaubriand Fellowship, the University
of Florida (UF), the Florida Center for Advanced Aero-Propulsion (FCAAP),
fellowships from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science and the
facilities of UF's Paris Research Center (France) and its Particle Engineering
Research Center.