* 0968813
* Interactions between the geometry of Banach spaces and other areas
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Alan Reid, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jane Hawkins
* 08/31/2013
* USD 167,442.00

The geometry of Banach spaces is centrally located to successfully interact with
many areas of mathematics including analysis and applied mathematics. This
proposal involves problems that, in particular, interact with set theory,
combinatorics, approximation theory and operator theory. The interaction with
set theory comes about from embedding theorems in Banach spaces that could not
hold without Martin's theorem that Borel games are determined. In turn their
existence has had implications for set theory. Recent surprising embedding
theorems of the investigator and co-authors are ripe for further development and
application and this proposal contains such problems. In particular these
results have implications on possible operator structures and how certain
"outliers" exist much more widely than previously supposed. The geometry of
Banach spaces has played a big role in the development by approximation
theorists of various notions of greedy approximations. Problems extending the
boundary of what is known in this region are also included in the proposal. The
interaction with combinatorics is through Ramsey theory and its relation to the
geometric notion of "partial unconditionality." This has remained a tough
frontier for nearly 30 years, but as the interactions between researchers in
both areas increase so is the likelihood that this can be successfully
attacked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal could ultimately have impact in
mathematical physics through the yet unproven (but now much more likely)
existence of a space very close to Hilbert space where all the operators are
simply written down. Physicists, rather than using Hilbert (i. e. Euclidean)
space as a model for natural phenomena might be able to use a weak form of the
space studied by Banach space geometers, if they can identify the operators on
the space. Such a space may exist with very few operators, ones easily handled
by theorists. Part of this proposal is to prove the widespread existence of such
very few operator spaces. This is a first step towards the goal above. Another
part of this proposal deals with problems in greedy approximation. This is, in
turn, connected with problems in signal processing. The central problem there is
to transmit information accurately and efficiently. The mathematical connections
of this proposed research are substantial and widespread, touching, in
particular upon set theory, analysis, approximation theory, operator theory and
combinatorics. Increased communication between researchers in these areas will
be fostered and should likely lead to further connections.