* 0968296
* PIRE: An International Pulsar Timing Array for Gravitational Wave Detection
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2017
* Dan Stinebring, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2017
* USD 6,548,073.00

This PIRE award will establish an international team for the detection and study
of low frequency gravitational waves (GWs) using timing observations of
millisecond pulsars (MSPs). GWs are ripples in the fabric of spacetime that
emanate from massive objects in accelerated motion. MSPs are rapidly rotating
highly magnetic neutron stars that emit pulses of radio waves - similar to
flashes of light from a lighthouse - and GWs perturb the travel of these pulses
from a pulsar to the Earth. Together with their international collaborators,
U.S. researchers and students will use radio telescopes to observe signals from
dozens of pulsars over several years. This will enable the PIRE team to directly
test for the existence of GWs and, after detection, measure their sky
distribution, polarization, and spectrum and identify and characterize their
astrophysical sources. GWs are a key prediction of Einstein's theory of general
relativity - the most complete description of gravity and spacetime - but until
now only indirect evidence has pointed to their existence. Direct detection of
GWs is one of the most transformational prospects of astrophysics, with the
potential to revolutionize our knowledge of the universe by enabling studies of
black holes within massive galaxies and the spacetime dynamics of early stages
of the universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both international collaboration and
coordinated use of worldwide resources are critical for detecting low frequency
gravitational waves. Detection sensitivity increases the longer the pulsars are
monitored, so observations over many years are required. Pairs of MSPs must be
observed from far distant points on earth to maximize sensitivity, thus
requiring observing sites in both hemispheres. Additionally, long, frequent
observations across many radio observing frequencies are required for high
precision and must be done for as many MSPs as possible. All of these factors
combine to place a substantial demand on the world's radio telescope time. This
PIRE project will catalyze the International Pulsar Timing Array (IPTA)
partnership between the North American NanoHertz Observatory for Gravitational
waves (NANOGrav) and Australian, European, and Indian scientists and will focus
a coordinated effort with dedicated research power on GW detection. By combining
data taken at the world's best facilities, with the highest-precision detection
techniques, with experts from around the world, the PIRE team expects to detect
GWs within the 5-10 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international project will
contribute to a more diverse, globally-engaged, U.S. science and engineering
workforce. It will train the first generation of astronomers able to directly
observe and study GWs and will prepare U.S. junior participants to be the future
leaders of this new field. They will gain the vital technical skills needed for
pulsar timing and will also explore the impacts of such measurements on the
fundamentals of astrophysics. The project will support postdoctoral researchers
and graduate and undergraduate students at nine U.S. institutions, yearly
international science meetings, student workshops, and research and observing
trips. As students and researchers make observations at the telescope
facilities, they will help to build an international mentoring network amongst
different educational levels, institutions, and countries. The project will also
exploit the fact that the world's best radio telescopes allow remote observing
and control of the telescope, thus providing a way to involve more undergraduate
and high school students in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
strengthen the capacity of the U.S. institutions to internationalize their
research, scientific networks, and curricula. This PIRE effort will broaden the
virtual international reach of U.S. institutions as their faculty and students
use cyberinfrastructure to access and analyze data from around the world,
operate telescopes remotely, share experiences via social networking tools, and
host international tutorials and web-based seminars. The U.S. institutions are
members of the NANOGrav consortium that pools North American resources and this
project will further solidify their U.S. and international linkages. Finally,
once established, a consortium-wide Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for the
planned research/study abroad programs will continue to provide valuable
opportunities for current and future generations of students at these
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. institutions include: Cornell University
(NY), University of Texas at Brownsville, Franklin and Marshall College (PA),
West Virginia University, Bryn Mawr College (PA), University of Vermont,
National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) (VA), University of Wisconsin at
Milwaukee, Oberlin College (OH), Universities Space Research Association &amp;
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (MD), National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center
(PR), and the Naval Research Laboratory (D.C.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Foreign
institutions include: Swinburne University (Australia), L'Observatoire de Paris
at Nançay/Nançay Observatory (France), Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy
(MPIfR) at the University of Bonn (Germany), National Center for Radio
Astrophysics (NCRA) (India), Netherlands Institute for Radio Astronomy (ASTRON),
Australia Telescope National Facility (ATNF), McGill University (Canada), Leiden
University (The Netherlands), University of Manchester (UK), Osservatorio
Astronomico di Cagliari (Italy), and University of British Columbia
(Canada).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIRE project was cofunded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Astronomical Sciences.