* 0968624
* Spectral Characterization of Atmospheric Dust from the IR to the UV: A Combined Laboratory and Modeling Study of Composition, Size, and Shape Effects on Dust Optical Properties
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Paul Kleiber, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 382,391.00

Mineral dust aerosol plays a critical role in the atmosphere. Dust affects the
Earth's radiation balance by direct absorption and scattering of light across
the spectrum from infrared (IR) to ultraviolet (UV). Atmospheric dust particles
also serve as sites for cloud nucleation indirectly affecting albedo, and as
reactive surfaces for tropospheric reactions altering the chemical balance for
important gas phase species such as SO2. Correctly modeling the effects of dust
in weather, climate, and air quality requires accurate information about dust
loading and composition, size and shape (CSS) distributions, as well as proper
treatment of dust optical (scattering and absorption) properties. Dust loading
and CSS distributions can be obtained by optical remote sensing. However, remote
sensing dust retrievals also depend critically on an accurate treatment of
aerosol optical properties. Thus, uncertainties in dust optical properties can
lead to errors in estimated dust loading, and CSS distributions with deleterious
consequences for weather and air quality forecasts and climate
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. We will investigate dust
optical properties across the IR-UV spectrum through laboratory measurements and
modeling analyses. The study will focus on authentic dust samples. Aerosol
extinction and light scattering properties will be analyzed by measurements of
particle CSS distributions through real-time in situ single particle time-of-
flight mass spectrometry and particle sizing, and various ex situ methodologies.
Since the particle CSS distributions will be measured simultaneously with the
optical properties, detailed comparisons with theoretical simulations will be
possible, with few (or no) adjustable parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goals of this work are to establish methods for using spectroscopic and
polarimetric measurements to infer mineral dust aerosol CSS distributions, and
to explore how these distributions may be altered by atmospheric aging. The
qualitative insight and quantitative data provided by this work can be
incorporated into remote-sensing retrieval algorithms, improving the reliability
of aerosol radiative transfer models for dust retrievals and climate forcing
calculations, and thus transforming our understanding of the impact of dust on
atmospheric chemistry, dynamics, and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. The proposed activities offer tremendous opportunities for post-
doctoral fellows and students to develop as independent scientists. This
research includes aspects of experimental aerosol science, light scattering,
spectroscopy, and reaction kinetics studies, combined with an extensive
theoretical modeling program. Students participate in all facets of the work,
presenting their results at seminars and conferences. The PIs, through a long
standing collaboration, have successfully mentored students and&lt;br/&gt;post-
doctors at all levels in preparation for professional careers in academia and
industry. More than half of the students involved in the research program have
been women or from underrepresented minorities. The program also maintains
active collaborations with faculty from small colleges in state Iowa, enhancing
their research and teaching.