* 0968388
* US-Latin American quantum gravity network workshop; July 2010, Buenos Aires, Argentina
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Jorge Pullin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/2011
* USD 24,200.00

This award supports the participation of a mixture of experienced and young US
researchers in a US-Latin American workshop on quantum gravity co-organized by
the Jorge Pullin of Louisiana State University and the Latin American Quantum
Gravity Network. It will take place in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on July 28-31,
2010. The workshop will be held in conjunction with the Fifth Quantum Gravity in
the Southern Cone workshop in Buenos Aires, and a preceding school on quantum
gravity will take place in La Plata, Argentina, the week before. Thus, U.S.
attendees will be able to participate in those events as well.&lt;br/&gt;This
meeting will allow graduate students, post-doctoral fellows and faculty to
interact and to share information about current research on the application of
the rules of quantum mechanics, which describe the microscopic world, to the
gravitational field. The personal interactions are expected to stimulate
relationships and collaborative research activities that will enhance the
careers of the participants. Among the objectives of study in this field is to
understand what happened shortly after the Big Bang process that created the
universe and what takes place inside black holes. &lt;br/&gt;The award is co-
funded by the Physics Division in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences and the Office of International Science and Engineering.