* 0968879
* Ergodic Theory, Dynamics and Fractals
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Boris Solomyak, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 167,000.00

In this project, the Principal Investigator will build on his earlier work on
substitutions, tiling dynamical systems, Bernoulli convolutions, and related
topics, to further advance basic mathematical knowledge. Specific goals include
extending the orbit equivalence theory and spectral theory to nonminimal
Bratteli-Vershik and substitution systems, characterizing invariant measures for
nonprimitive substitution tilings, and developing multifractal analysis of
Bernoulli convolutions and related self-affine measures. It is expected that new
links and connections between diverse areas will emerge in the course of this
investigation. In particular, flows along stable and unstable foliations of
pseudo-Anosov maps are linked to substitution systems, nonprimitive tilings give
rise to fractals, such as the Sierpinski gasket self-similar tiling and the
familiar fractal Sierpinski gasket set, complex rational (e.g., quadratic) and
piecewise linear dynamics are sometimes related by a conjugacy. The methods and
techniques used will not be limited to those from ergodic theory and dynamics
but will also come from other fields, including operator algebras,
combinatorics, number theory, probability, and complex analysis.

The fields of ergodic theory, dynamical systems, and fractal geometry have their
origins, motivation, and applications in many fields outside of mathematics,
including statistical and celestial mechanics, population biology, aero- and
fluid-dynamics, and materials science. A dynamical system is given by a so-
called phase space and some transformation rules that prescribe how states
change in time. Here "time" may be discrete or continuous, multidimensional, or
more generally, given by a group. Dynamics may be regular or chaotic, or it
could exhibit a "mixed" behavior. Many dynamically defined objects turn out to
be "fractals." Mathematicians often study simplified models that capture the
important features of the physical system in the simplest possible form. This
project aims to analyze in depth several existing models, as well as develop new
ones. Although it is primarily theoretical in its focus, it will advance basic
knowledge in areas with diverse connections and applications. Specifically,
Bernoulli convolutions and related fractal constructions have been used in
signal and image processing, control theory, and econometrics; substitutions and
tilings have many links to computer science and solid-state physics. The PI
interacts with scientists and participates in professional meetings of an
interdisciplinary nature. In addition, this project will contribute to the
development of human resources through training undergraduate and graduate
students.