* 0968905
* Cold Atoms, Cold Molecules, and Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Thomas Bergeman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2014
* USD 184,318.00

The work to be performed under this grant consists of two components. One
component will involve theoretical modeling of ensembles of cold atoms in a
Bose-Einstein condensate, in which all atoms are in the lowest quantum level, at
temperatures less than a microdegree absolute. Many recent experiments,
including some at Stony Brook, have been performed on such atomic ensembles when
placed in a periodic potential. These experiments can mimic, in a controllable
way, the periodic potential in a crystalline solid, such as a semiconductor or
superconductor. One question to be addressed is whether the atoms remain in the
lowest quantum state when the periodic potential is applied, perhaps suddenly,
or whether excitations are induced. The theoretical work will help to interpret
recent experimental observations on this point. The other component pertains to
work in several laboratories world-wide directed to the production of ultra-cold
diatomic molecules, also at nanoKelvin temperatures. In recent years, we have
been analyzing spectroscopic data on diatomic molecules to be able to tell
experimentalists what laser wavelengths to use to induce two cold atoms to bind
together into a cold molecule. The next stage of the work is to analyze effects
of nuclear spin structure (analogous to effects that are used in nuclear
magnetic resonance imaging), which become predominant in certain
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regard to the broader impact of this work, it
can be said that the attainment of extremely low temperatures of atoms and now
of diatomic molecules allows one to overcome averaging effects at normal
temperatures, when a vast number of quantum levels are occupied. By selecting
particles in the lowest quantum state, it is possible to obtain much more
precise information on their interactions and on their behavior. It has been
possible to better understand effects that occur in complicated naturally
occurring systems by being able to vary the conditions imposed on the cold
atoms. For example, a periodic laser light field can mimic the periodic
potential in a crystalline lattice, but over a range of lattice amplitude and
wavelength. This has already produced new insights into phenomena such as high
temperature (above 50 Kelvin) superconductivity and also into the complicated
interactions within atomic nuclei. Superconductors are now used in many reseach
applications. Their use in electrical power transmission in areas of high
electrical current density could improve the efficiency of the U. S. power grid.