* 0968245
* IRES: Development of a new generation of tropical ecologists through research and instruction opportunities in the Cerrado and Pantanal of Brazil
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2010,10/31/2013
* George Vourlitis, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 10/31/2013
* USD 148,625.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;George Vourlitis, California State University, San Marcos
0968245&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed IRES offers mentoring and research
opportunities in tropical ecology to undergraduate science students. The project
is centered on collaboration between Dr. G. Vourlitis, California State
University, San Marcos (CSUSM) and Dr. F. Lobo, Universidade Federal de Mato
Grosso (UFMT), and combines formal instruction and practical field work for four
undergraduate students each year. The core scientific project focuses on an
active, long-term ecosystem research program in the Brazilian cerrado and
pantanal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project provides instruction and
research opportunities in tropical ecology to undergraduate science students
early in their careers. The program consists of three phases involving pre-field
education in research methods, an in-field intensive research experience in
Brazil, and post-field training in data analysis and dissemination. Student
researchers will be mentored by Dr. Francisco Lobo (UMFT) who has collaborated
extensively with the PI in understanding the physiological ecology of Brazilian
ecosystems. Four US students will work for six weeks with Brazilian counterparts
and mentors at field sites in cerrado and pantanal ecosystems. The PI will
recruit a diverse group of undergraduate students to participate, with strong
representation of women and underrepresented minorities. A focus on recruiting
from community colleges, combined with the involvement of Brazilian
undergraduate and graduate students, will promote the engagement of
underrepresented minorities in this international research opportunity.