* 0968723
* EAGER: The Creation and Classroom Application of a Web Portal for Social Science Methods Education
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2015
* Michelle Dion, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2015
* USD 207,865.00

Little educational material is freely available to serve the needs of basic
research methods courses and those available in genres such as econometrics may
require substantial mathematical prerequisites. The creation of accessible
problem sets and and lecture notes is time intensive, but methods courses
requiring such preparation are becoming more widespread across all types of
institutions. OPOSSEM, the Online Portal of Social Science Education and
Methodology, solves these problems by providing various resources for teaching
social science research methods for edcuators in secondary, undergraduate, and
postgraduate settings. The web portal is hosted by the Inter-University
Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR), which provides for its
long term longevity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, which develops this
portal, has substantial intellectual merit. It has the potential to transform
methodological instruction in the social sciences by adopting cutting edge and
broadly available technologies and methodologies to promote the formation of
educational networks and communities among secondary, undergraduate, and
graduate instructors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also has substantial
broader impacts. First, project materials will be used as part of a pilot
project by Native American students at the Ihanktowan Community College on the
Yankton Sioux Tribe Reservation. These students will be provided with resources
through this project that may encourage them to consider the social sciences as
a major or graduate pursuit. Second, the portal will provide resources that will
strengthen undergraduate training in the social sciences. This will result in
the pool of potential graduate students in these fields to be better prepared to
undertake graduate study. Third and finally, the project reaches out to
secondary school teachers in both the social sciences and the mathematical
sciences. Many mathematically oriented high school students lean to the natural
sciences because they see applications to those sciences in their math and
science textbooks. Some of these students may be encouraged to consider the
social sciences if they are exposed to similar examples in those sciences. The
portal will make this more likely.