* 0968013
* Collaborative Research: Experiment, simulation, and theory of slowly driven granular materials --- from micro-state statistics to macroscopic properties
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Mark Shattuck, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 09/30/2013
* USD 196,593.00

0968013&lt;br/&gt;Shattuck&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description of the project: We
propose a set of coordinated experiments, numerical simulations, and theoretical
studies to provide predictive and quantitative descriptions of the structural
and mechanical properties of static and slowly driven granular materials. Dense
granular media are ubiquitous in nature and occur in many industrial
applications. However, there is currently no fundamental understanding of how to
uniquely characterize the state of a dense granular system using macroscopic
descriptors. In our proposed research, we seek such a description using a
systematic, bottom-up approach in which we first characterize microstate
probabilities of mechanically stable granular packings and then utilize them to
predict macroscopic behavior. In our studies of static particle packings, we
will measure the probabilities of distinct microscopic states (cataloged by the
particle positions) for different packing preparation protocols and particle
properties such as shape, friction, and size polydispersity. We will also
determine the number of microscopic states corresponding to macroscopic
observables, such as the volume fraction, elastic constants and mechanical
strength. By combining our results for microstate probabilities and the density
of macro-states, we will determine the microstates that contribute significantly
to ensembleaveraged quantities. We will also study the evolution of slowly
driven systems, in which transitions from one microstate to another occur. In
particular, we will measure the transition probabilities in experiments and
numerical simulations of tapping excitations and quasi static shear. We will
then develop master equation approaches to predict the steady state microstate
distributions and corresponding macroscopic variables as a function of the
intensity of the driving mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important aspect of this work is that the experiments
and numerical simulations will be performed over a range of system sizes. In
small systems (up to tens of particles), all static packings will be enumerated,
so that we can disentangle the influence of the packing generation protocol from
geometrical effects. In moderate sized systems (up to one hundred particles), we
will obtain the set of states that are statistically most relevant. We will also
gain insight into the macroscopic properties of granular systems in the large-
system limit by studying systems with O(103) particles. We thus will be able to
develop a unified picture that connects microscopic probability distributions of
mechanically stable (MS) packings to macroscopic properties. Another key feature
of this proposal is that we propose integrated experiments, simulations, and
theoretical studies. At each stage, we will compare the packing distributions
from experiments and simulations to understand the nature of the MS packings and
the effect of the packing generation protocol. Simple theoretical models will
also be developed to identify the dominant physical
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
our investigations are focused on the properties of granular media under
quasistatic conditions, our results will also contribute to a better
understanding of material properties of other amorphous systems, such as
molecular and colloidal glasses and emulsions and foams. In particular, our
research will be relevant for theories describing slow dynamics in glass-forming
fluids in terms of the statistics of inherent structures. Apart from the
fundamental importance, the knowledge gained from the proposed studies will have
impact on practical applications. Potential industrial applications include
development of efficient technologies for storage, mixing, separation, and
conveying of granular matter, and design of modern glassy materials of desired
properties (e.g., high-strength metallic glasses). The proposed investigations
will provide research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students (in
particular, we will mentor talented minority students from the STARS program at
Yale and the diverse student body at CCNY). We will participate in programs at
two high schools in New York City to involve high school students in our
research program. Our project will also promote iternational knowledge transfer
through the proposed collaboration with several scientists from the Institute of
Fundamental Technological Research in Poland.