* 0968244
* IRES: U.S.-Swedish Summer Research Experience for Students at the Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, on Materials Research and Interfacial Phenomena
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Ilona Kretzschmar, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

0968244&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IRES: U.S.-Swedish Summer Research Experience for
Students at the Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, on Materials Research
and Interfacial Phenomena &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program for International
Research Experience for Students (IRES), headed by principal investigator (PI)
Ilona Kretzschmar, at the City College of New York (CCNY), will provide U.S.
undergraduate and graduate students with early career research experience at the
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) in Stockholm, Sweden. During focused ten-
week summer programs, IRES participants will be involved in materials science
and interfacial phenomena research and will gain hands-on experience with
colloidal assembly, particle surface modification, and particle-particle
interaction characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student research training
will occur in the laboratory of Professor Kretzschmar (CCNY) and at KTH, in
cooperation with her counterparts in Stockholm, Professors Magnus Johnson,
Mamoun Muhammed, Jinshan Pan, and Mark Rutland. The research component at CCNY
will familiarize IRES participants with particle surface modification techniques
that are used to create so-called patchy particles. The research component at
KTH, in the School of Chemical Science and Engineering, will involve the
training of IRES participants in AFM-based colloidal probe characterization for
measuring particle-particle interactions and linker-patch binding strengths in
patchy particle systems. Overall, these activities should help build a growing
US-Swedish materials network of junior and senior researchers. Results are
expected to lead to novel measurements of particle-particle interactions and
linker-patch binding which may contribute to future work in applied
electrochemistry and biotechnology in areas such as surface and corrosion
science, functional materials, and wood chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this US-Swedish IRES include the introduction of students
from underrepresented groups, i.e., minority and female students, to a research
environment at a leading European institution while providing all participants
with early career mentoring. IRES participants will be recruited from the Grove
School of Engineering and the New York City-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) program. Each participant will be mentored by the PI
through biweekly meetings during the academic year and prepared for their
international research experience in the PI?s laboratory. Prior to their travel
to Stockholm, IRES participants will develop a summer research plan with their
KTH mentors and the PI. The research experience itself will provide the students
with a unique perspective on the scientific approach to problem solving and give
them a global perspective on colloids research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Further,
IRES participants will share their experience via publications in the CCNY
Journal for Student Research and presentations at the Urban Conference Series,
the NSF Engineering Education Awardees Conference, and an annual Bridge-to-the-
Doctorate retreat. Consistent with IRES objectives, this dissemination effort
will provide U.S. students, many from from underrepresented groups, with ample
role models while demonstrating the importance of obtaining international
research experience. Altogether, this meets the NSF goal of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Europe to combine
complementary talents and share research and education resources in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence.