* 0968216
* CAREER: Defining the Biomechanical Role of the Extracellular Matrix in Capillary Morphogenesis: An Interdisciplinary Plan Integrating Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Andrew Putnam, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 04/30/2012
* USD 256,984.00

&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0644968 Putnam The project will investigate the relationship
between capillary morphogenesis and the mechanics of the extracellular matrix
where the cells are seeded (in three dimensions). The research will provide
important information on the influence of extracellular matrix (ECM) mechanics
on capillary morphogenesis and provide with a well characterized three-
dimensional environment where to study the role of mechanics in cellular
behavior (differentiation). The project will study the role of cell mechanics
and ECM mechanics on capillary morphogenesis at the macroscale using
fluorescence microscopy and sectioning and at the molecular scale using
inhibitors to key molecules in the myosin light chain phosphorylation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have a high impact to the field of
tissue engineering by providing information on how vascularization of tissue
engineering scaffolds can occur and how better designs can be developed for
tissue engineering scaffolds taking into account the stiffness of the material.
In the long term, the success of the proposed research activity could enhance
the understanding of the endothelial matrix's mechanical role in capillary
morphogenesis, which will have impact in the study and treatment of human
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has five different educational
objectives and involves graduate, undergraduate, high school and middle school
students in tissue engineering learning. One important goal is to develop on-
line web modules that contain video of laboratory demonstrations generated by
undergraduate and graduate students. The web based modules have the potential to
reach wide audiences and are valuable to tissue engineering teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;