* 0968211
* PIRE: Land Use, Ecosystem Services and the Fate of Marginal Lands in a Globalized World
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Jerry Melillo, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,199,999.00

One of humanity's greatest contemporary challenges is producing enough food to
sustain human populations in developing regions while preserving naturally-
functioning habitats that provide key ecosystem services such as clean drinking
water, biodiversity, carbon storage, and climate moderation. This PIRE project
leverages substantial existing investments in Africa by the Millennium Villages
Project (MVP) to mount an international and interdisciplinary study of this
great challenge. One of the goals of the MVP is to increase food security by
providing local populations in 14 Millennium Villages (MVs) with agricultural
interventions such as mineral fertilizers and high-yield seeds. This PIRE
project builds upon the MVP's rigorous ongoing evaluation of responses to this
agricultural intensification and adds a new dimension of analysis by examining
the impacts of the agricultural intensification on land use decisions, human
well-being, and ecosystem services at the local and landscape levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two MVs, in Sauri, Kenya and
Mbola, Tanzania. It also incorporates the wealth of data, including survey and
field measurements and analyses of remotely sensed imagery, from all 14 MVs
across Africa. There are three main experimental components of this project.
First, the PIRE team will examine how agricultural intensification acts within
communities using indicators such as land-use change, human well-being,
ecosystem function, and biodiversity. Second, they will analyze the larger MVP
dataset to examine how population density, degree of landscape modification, and
climate influence responses to agricultural intensification. Third, for a subset
of MVs and nearby non-MV "control" villages, the team will take measurements of
ecosystem function and analyze the impacts of agricultural intensification over
time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty, graduate, and undergraduate students from
the U.S. and African universities will study both the social and biological
consequences of the MVP agricultural interventions. The interdisciplinary
expertise of the PIRE team will enable the team to, for example, combine social
survey data with satellite remote sensing data to test whether agriculture
intensification within MVs actually "saves land for nature" by changing
behaviors such that outside the villages there is reduced agricultural activity
and reduced conversion of natural areas to agriculture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to create a multi-institutional,
multinational, and interdisciplinary educational environment for students and
faculty from three U.S. institutions and two African institutions. Cross-
cultural mentoring and collaboration is a focus for participants at all levels,
benefitting U.S. and African students and faculty. Approximately 50 U.S.
undergraduate and Masters students will receive scientific training through core
courses, field courses, workshops, and internships. U.S. Ph.D. students will be
supported for MVP-focused research theses projects and receive language training
in Swahili before spending substantial time in East Africa collaborating with
African partners. Project faculty will develop a new interdisciplinary and
international course on the "Natural and Social Dynamics of Land-Use Change"
using data from Africa and engaging African faculty and students. The project
will provide U.S. students with international and interdisciplinary research
training in the context of sustaining food production and ecosystem services in
developing countries. By examining the impact of MV interventions on people and
the environment, the project will provide information that could guide future
policies for enhancing human wellbeing, food security, and environmental
conservation in one of the world's most impoverished
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIRE project will draw upon the individual
strengths of the U.S. and African universities and combine them with several
existing African research networks to form research and education networks
ideally positioned to conduct this interdisciplinary research. The U.S.
institutions will also benefit because the project will give both senior and
junior faculty invaluable international experience in designing and conducting a
large multinational research project, in training students via international
collaboration, and in managing the logistics of a complex project in Africa. The
PIRE project will also improve access to international research experiences for
U.S. students from groups underrepresented in science via collaborations with
the Leadership Alliance (RI), Dillard University (LA), and the Ecological
Society of America's Strategies for Ecology Education, Diversity and
Sustainability (SEEDS) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIRE is a partnership
among Brown University (RI), The Earth Institute of Columbia University (NY),
The Ecosystems Center of the Marine Biological Laboratory (MA) and foreign
partners at the Moi University (Kenya) and Sokoine University
(Tanzania).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the NSF's Office
of International Science and Engineering, the Division of Environmental Biology,
and NSF's EPSCoR Program.