* 0968909
* Collaborative Research: Reformulation-Linearization Technique for Discrete and Continuous Nonconvex Optimization with Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2010,10/31/2013
* Warren Adams, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 10/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

The research objective of this project is to develop theoretical and
computational tools for solving difficult, large-scale, discrete and continuous
nonconvex optimization problems. The work will focus on extending and refining a
reformulation-linearization/convexification technique (RLT). The RLT is a
methodological concept for enhancing problem solvability by constructing
improved (tightened) mathematical models in lifted, higher-dimensional spaces.
The intent of this study is to address several theoretical and algorithmic
developments as well as computational implementation issues related to the RLT,
and to identify and exploit mathematical structures that arise from applying it.
Specifically, the work will include (1) an extension of the underlying RLT
theory through the use of Lagrange interpolating polynomials to characterize
structures of the convex hull of discrete sets by way of enhancing the ability
to solve integer programs; (2) a unified RLT approach with semidefinite
programming constructs along with filtering and basis-reduction techniques that
can be used to design effective algorithms for solving discrete as well as
continuous nonconvex optimization problems; and (3) the development of tailored
methods for solving both discrete and nonlinear problems having certain special
structures that arise in particular applications. The results of this study are
expected to lead to more efficient tools for solving a variety of challenging
nonconvex optimization programs, both discrete and continuous. The discrete
programs arise in such diverse areas as clustering, cryptography, facility
layout, logical inference, and scheduling, while the continuous nonconvex
programs have applications in engineering design, network design, risk
management, and Homeland Security. The research will also demonstrate how the
algebraic properties of Lagrange interpolating polynomials can be exploited to
analyze and generate cuts for mixed-integer and continuous nonlinear programming
problems. Conceptually, the research will unify the realms of discrete and
continuous optimization, and improve understanding of these domains.