* 0968846
* Collaborative Research:  Large-Scale Nanomanufacturing of Well-Positioned and Highly Aligned DNA Wires from a Capillary Bridge
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Lei Zhu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2013
* USD 100,000.00

The research objective of this project is to develop simple yet robust methods
for massively producing well-positioned nanostructured materials composed of DNA
or DNA-based nanocomposites, which possess unprecedented regularity, over a
large area (i.e., large scale). Subsequent functionalization of highly ordered
DNA can serve as multifunctional materials for a variety of potential
applications in nanoelectronic devices. Three specific research goals will be
pursued throughout this proposed project: (1) Produce highly ordered structures
of DNA and DNA-based nanocomposites by controlling the flow of an evaporating
liquid. (2) Develop a reliable and scalable strategy for integrating individual
nanoscale building blocks (i.e., DNA) into functional two-dimensional devices
with high density. By performing two consecutive evaporation-induced self-
assemblies, it is possible to create highly ordered 2D DNA nanowire arrays. (3)
Understand the formation mechanisms of ordered structures. The ability to
predict the length scale of periodicity, height, and width and compare them with
experimental observations is key to the understanding on the structure
formation. This research is transformative in that it seeks to mass produce
high-density functional nanodevices and nanocircuits, built upon well-
positioned, highly ordered DNA or DNA nanocomposites for use in nanoelectronics,
nanotechnology, and biotechnology, thereby transitioning fundamental scientific
discoveries into useful technologies. The research project will be integrated
with nanoscience and nanoengineering education. The educational efforts include
recruitment of female undergraduate students, recruitment of high school
teachers and students with an emphasis on minority in summer to perform one week
of research, and development of lesson plans on DNA and DNA-based nanocomposites
by high-school female interns.