* 0968105
* GOALI:  Vesicle Dynamics: The Transition From Unilamellar to Multilamellar Structures
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* L. Gary Leal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 03/31/2013
* USD 318,367.00

0968105 - Leal

Vesicle based home and personal care products constitute a multi-billion dollar
business worldwide. Further, products that utilize vesicles for the
encapsulation and transport of drugs or other chemical species offer an enormous
potential that is only beginning to be exploited. Yet a fundamental
understanding of what determines vesicle structure is lacking, and this is both
extremely costly in terms of product stability, and limiting in the development
of new and more effective encapsulation procedures. The research proposed here
is a very significant first step toward addressing this deficiency for the very
important class of cationic lipid bilayer vesicles. Such vesicles are observed
to exist both in unilamellar and multilamellar ("onion") structures, with a
transition from unilamellar to multilamellar structures sometimes occurring
spontaneously over periods of hours or days.

This project is aimed at understanding how and when the structure of vesicles
may change (or be changed) from a single bilayer membrane to so-called "onion"
structures involving multiple imbedded bilayers. Experiments will be done to
correlate observations of vesicle structure, and how it may change with time,
with measurements of the mechanical properties of the membrane. Membrane
properties will be varied via different combinations of lipids/surfactants, and
the total concentration of lipids will be changed to control the volume fraction
of vesicles in the suspension. Vesicle structure will be studied primarily via
Cryo-TEM imaging. Membrane properties will be determined via micropipette
aspiration techniques using giant unilamellar vesicles. A theoretical basis will
also be developed, using numerical simulation methods, for predicting the
changes of vesicle structure, both from a molecular dynamics and continuum point
of view.

The combination of experiments and theory proposed here will therefore provide
new insight into the relationship between the constituent make-up of bilayer
membranes, their measurable mechanical properties, and the structure of
corresponding vesicles. The proposed research is transformative as it is a first
step in rationalizing the design of vesicles with control over structure with
applications in both materials development, and potentially in drug delivery
processes. Indeed, our industrial partner views this project as having the long
term potential for changing their "research tactics in a revolutionary way". In
addition, it quantifies the micropipette aspiration method for the measurement
of membrane properties; and it improves the ability to theoretically describe
vesicles via continuum-based models.

Broader Impacts: The PhD student will benefit greatly from collaboration with
Procter and Gamble via access to a broad range of materials, and facilities,
beyond what is available at UCSB, as well as a level of insight about the
industrial formulation and production of vesicles, that is simply not available
in the open literature. The project also involves important outreach activities
including: 1) the development (together with Todd Squires) of a UCSB freshman
seminar (for non-science majors) on the science and engineering that goes into
various food and personal care products, including those made from vesicles; and
2) funding to allow participation of the PI in the summer undergraduate and
teacher intern programs sponsored by the MSERC program at UCSB. These programs
are a fantastic opportunity for students involving 8-10 week individually
mentored summer research projects, as well as weekly meetings with education
staff to develop oral, visual and written communication skills.