* 0968495
* SoCS:  Signal Processing and Information Theoretic Approaches to Denoising and Demystifying Social Network Services
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Clifford Lampe, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 05/31/2014
* USD 766,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop in-depth understanding of the
nature, underlying models, and dynamics of Social Network Services (SNS) with
millions and even billions of users. Methods for the analysis of massive SNS
graphs using signal processing and information-theoretic techniques are being
designed to answer fundamental questions regarding SNS. The goal is to develop
new approaches for (i) identifying influential nodes in SNS networks, and
understanding how these nodes evolve and interact over time, (ii) inferring
people?s social graphs from SNS graphs, and (iii) inferring properties of an SNS
network from analyzing another SNS graph. To achieve these objectives, signal-
processing inspired and information/graph theoretic approaches are being
employed for: (a) projecting information contained in massive SNS graphs onto
compact representations; and (b) understanding how different graphs (e.g.,
representing different time-instances of a social network service or
representing different services) relate to each other.

This research enables a spectrum of novel applications that are currently
impossible. A deeper understanding of the structure of social networks and how
that structure evolves can be applied to a variety of social issues. The project
is interdisciplinary in nature and it bridges several different communities
including electrical engineering, computer science, and social science; and it
fosters interaction and communication among them. To promote education and
learning, this project actively engages high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students, especially students from under-represented minorities.