* 0968833
* Collaborative Research: PSERC Collaborative Proposal for a Phase III Industry University Cooperative Research Center Program
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Ian Dobson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/29/2016
* USD 589,000.00

PSERC is proposing a Phase III support (third five-year period) for the Center,
including support for center personnel, evaluation and research. The proposed
Center is a multi-university Center comprised of the following universities:
Arizona State University (lead), Cornell University, Texas A &amp; M, Howard
University, Washington State University, the University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Iowa S ate University, Wichita State University, Georgia Tech, the University of
Illinois at Urbana Champaign, the University of California-Berkeley, and
Colorado School of Mines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposal from PSERC seeks
funding for a Phase III (3rd five-year period) led by Arizona State University
(ASU). PSERC had its origin as a multi-university IUCRC in 1996, and was created
with the vision that collaboration amongst a large group of academic,
industrial, and governmental institutions can develop solutions to the complex
problems in electric energy. PSERC (currently comprised of 12 universities) will
conduct research organized under three primary research stem areas: markets
stem, system stem, and transmission and distribution technologies stem. PSERC
leverages the expertise of some 40 multidisciplinary researchers. The PI and all
of the other site directors are very well-qualified and have access to
appropriate and adequate resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
addresses important improvements and advancements in the transmission and
delivery of electricity. PSERC has been a leader in in developing several key
concepts with regard to the development of electricity markets. PSERC
researchers also developed one of the first large scale visualization tools for
the electric power industry, and this effort has resulted in the creation of a
company that has commercially developed the tool. Over the past six years, PSERC
member companies have employed an average of 80 graduate and undergraduate
students per year from PSERC universities. In the area of diversity, one of the
PSERC member universities is Howard University, a historically black university.
PSERC will continue to seek women and minorities through students and faculty at
member universities as well as on an individual basis as research associates.