* 0968360
* FRG:  Collaborative Research:  Modeling, Computation, and Analysis of Optical Responses of Nano Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Di Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2015
* USD 900,000.00

The interdisciplinary FRG team will develop mathematical techniques and
computational methods for the light-matter interactions for nanoscale structures
motivated by recent scientic and industrial applications. Critical issues on
multi-physics modeling, multi-scale simulations as well as mathematical analysis
of the coupled Maxwell and Schrodinger equations will be investigated. Our
proposed mathematical modeling techniques and computational methods will address
key scientific challenges in applied mathematics including multi-physics
modeling, multi-scale computation, density functional theory, efficient
numerical solution of Maxwell's equations, and well-posedness of the associated
new nonlinear PDE models. Advanced tools in computational electromagnetics for
simulations and optimizations of nanophotonic structures will be developed, with
a specific focus on those tools that enable multi-physics and multi-scale
computations. The initial efforts will be directed towards developing tools that
enable efficient simulations of dynamically modulated photonic structures, where
there is a critical need to overcome the numerical challenges resulting from the
large time-scale separations between the electronic and the optical processes.
The development here will contribute directly to increasing speed and reducing
energy consumption in optical information processing applications. Partners in
this FRG will collaborate to enable the applications of multi-physics
simulations towards impacts in practical technologies such as sensing or energy
conversion.Â 

The capabilities for controlling light are of paramount importances for many
aspects of modern society, and have applications in critical areas such as
energy, sensing and information technology. The use of nanophotonic structures,
where individual structure is at the nanoscale, is at the very forefront in our
quest to control light. Nano-optics is a fundamental and vigorously growing
technology with diverse applications including fast optical switches, plasmonic
materials, photonic nanocircuits, optical microscopy, Ramam spectroscopy, and
optical metamaterials. The recent enabling technologies of high-performance
computing facilities and modern lithographic techniques have led to a
substantial surge of applications of subwavelength and nano structures,
establishing nano-optics as one of the most rapidly advancing areas of current
research in optical science. A grand challenge encountered when optical fields
meet nano structures is a fundamental mismatch in scales, which gives rise to
phenomena not encountered in conventional optics and presents a challenge in
interacting with such structures. The future development of nano-optics will
clearly benefit from the availability of an efficient computational modeling
tool and mathematical analysis techniques. The computational tools developed in
this program will allow us to better understand and design these structures,
potentially leading to faster information processing devices that consume less
power, sensors with higher sensitivity, and solar cells with better conversion
efficiency.