* 0968578
* French-American Science Symposium.  Developing Partnerships for Sustainable Water Management and Agriculture in the context of Climate and Global Change
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Antonio Bobet, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2012
* USD 54,450.00

A Joint U.S. / French Symposium on Sustainable Water Management and
Agriculture&lt;br/&gt;0968578&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to Purdue
University (PU) will support a two-day workshop to promote scientific and
educational exchange between U.S. and French scientists in the key strategic
research areas of water resources management, water quality, global climate
change, and agricultural research. The meeting is intended for attendees from
French and U.S. institutions, including universities, research labs, industry
and policy-makers from public and private sectors. The award will support the
participation of up to 50 U.S. faculty and 20 U.S. students in the workshop. The
workshop is organized by Global Engineering Program at PU and the scientific
attach√© of the French Consulate in Chicago. The NSF funding leverages support
for the symposium from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development and numerous French research institutions such as the Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, the Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique, and the Institut de Recherche pour le
Developpement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global climate change and the related
effects on water quantity and quality extremes impact the daily lives of
millions of individuals and societies around the world. This is also the case in
the United States and in France, where warning signs for the need of sustainable
water management and food security tools and policies are surfacing. The
symposium will develop new Franco-American partnerships for sustainable water
management in agriculture that will lay the groundwork for improved research,
education and development opportunities to address: (1) water resource
management under water shortage/extremes; (2) impact of human activities on
agricultural water quality and water quality impact of agricultural activities;
(3) drinking water quality; (3) climate changes related issues and impact on
ground water; (4) multi-scale water and land-use modeling and uncertainties; (5)
integration of physical, sociological, social sciences to policy; (6) innovation
in education; and (7) the enhancement of interaction and synergies between
industries and academic institutions. These challenges are not unique to the
partner countries. They go beyond their borders to impact food security,
biodiversity and indigenous species, flood control, the interface of human
activity (industry, agriculture, urbanization) and eco-systems, tools for
accurate prediction and measurement of soil-climate-crop system interactions,
and the education of globally competent scientist and engineers. This award is
jointly supported by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering and
the Hydrological Sciences Program.