* 0968530
* Christoffel functions and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Vilmos Totik, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2014
* USD 97,028.00

This is a three year program in classical analysis, in particular in potential
theory with applications in approximation theory and orthogonal polynomials. A
common unifying theme is the behavior of Christoffel functions and reproducing
kernels and their various applications. Another unifying theme is the so called
polynomial inverse image method. The applications include fine zero behavior of
orthogonal polynomials (with direct translation to eigenvalues of Jacobi
matrices), universality results in random matrix theory/statistical physics and
various polynomial inequalities. Other questions are related to non-classical
orthogonal polynomials (with respect to doubling weights) and approximation by
homogeneous polynomials and by their level sets. In several of these problems
the polynomial inverse image method - that has already produced sharp and
significant results in the past - will play a crucial role, and, in return, the
tools to be developed will help us in better understanding this powerful
technique. At the heart of the research will be the systematic usage of
potential theory and classical harmonic analysis in the relatively distant areas
of approximation theory and orthogonal polynomials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed study of various properties of orthogonal polynomials is aimed, by
introducing there new tools, to advance a very classical field in mathematics
(going back to over 200 years) which has multitudes of connections and
applications. The results are relevant to other branches of mathematics, physics
and engineering, as well. The research will stimulate interest in students and
enhance research environment for them. Graduate and PhD students will have the
opportunity to learn the fundamentals and powerful techniques of different
disciplines, as well as their interrelations. Some of the results and methods
will be integrated into related courses, which in turn may advance the
professional development of K-12 science and mathematics teachers. Special
emphasis will be made to outreach general public. This will be achieved by
publishing educational articles, thereby offering understanding and appreciation
for science. These educational materials, just as the findings of the research,
will be widely distributed. Lectures will be held at different levels from
undergraduate societies to professionals meetings.