* 0968247
* PIRE: Hydrologic Redistribution and Rhizosphere Biology of Resource Islands in Degraded Agroecosystems of the Sahel
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2018
* Teamrat Ghezzehei, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2018
* USD 2,599,994.00

This PIRE project will enable a partnership of U.S., Senegalese, and French
researchers and students to examine how native shrubs of the Sahel region
influence soil moisture and soil microbial composition and how such shrubs, when
planted with food crops, might represent a new biologically-based way to improve
production in semi-arid agroecosystems. The vulnerable environment of the Sahel
is threatened by desertification and soil degradation, seriously reducing
agricultural productivity and negatively impacting local communities. In the
Sahel, woody shrubs co-exist with row crops and are cut back and burned every
spring. The team's previous research on the two dominant shrub species of the
Sahel, Guiera senegalensis and Piliostigma reticulatum, documented their ability
to draw water from wet sub-surface soil to dry surface soil and to grow unique
microbial communities around their roots. The PIRE team will examine whether the
hydraulic lifting of water by shrubs can reduce water stress to nearby crops
during dry periods and whether the shrubs' root-zone microbial communities
stimulate adjacent crop growth, for example by enhancing nitrogen fixation. They
will also test the potential of these shrubs to sequester carbon in their roots
zones and to improve soils more than manure, composts, or planting other trees.
This team's fundamental hydrologic and soil microbiology research should provide
the information needed to develop of a set of shrub-crop systems that reduces
drought effects and optimizes plant growth via microbial enhancement. Such
agricultural systems could restore currently degraded landscapes and lead to
sustainable agroecosystems in the Sahel. These outcomes could benefit all
countries in the Sahel which together have almost 15 million hectares (60,000
square miles) of semi-arid land that are largely now farmed with destructive
agricultural practices. The PIRE interdisciplinary and international research
team brings together the requisite expertise in molecular microbiology,
hydrology, soil physics, plant ecology and agronomy to undertake and complete
this important real-world project.

The educational impacts of this PIRE project include strengthening the existing
long-term partnerships among scientists committed to mentoring and training an
international cadre of students. This project will deliver a program of
transformative cross-cultural, language building, and international research
experiences by: 1) providing U.S. undergraduates summer research internships in
Africa; 2) enabling U.S. Ph.D. students to conduct their dissertation research
in Africa; 3) engaging U.S. students in public outreach about their
international experiences -- at local schools, in a "pen pal" program between
U.S. and Senegalese schoolchildren, and via a student blog on the PIRE website;
4) training U.S. early career scientists and Ph.D.s in tropical microbial
ecology and hydrology through the MicroTrop training program and; 5) exposing
all participants to the ecological challenges of the Sahel within a rural
poverty context. The active participation of faculty and students from Central
State University, a Historically Black University, will help this PIRE project
meet its goal to enhance the recruitment of females and underrepresented
minorities in science. An important outcome of the PIRE activities will be the
participants' shared experiences that will inevitably produce lifelong
interactions and international linkages.

The project will strengthen the capacity of the U.S. institutions to
internationalize their research, scientific networks, student training, and
curricula. The PIRE project will link and reinforce the complementary strengths
of many units (e.g., international affairs, African studies offices,
international agriculture programs, and language departments) both within and
between Ohio State and Central State Universities to develop a cohesive program
for pre-departure cultural orientation, language training, and logistical
support for PIRE participants. The comprehensive educational and research effort
of this PIRE project will be a model for U.S. universities to conduct state-of-
the art environmental research in a developing country within a natural resource
and rural poverty context.

The PIRE project funds will also be leveraged with other funding for additional
outreach and application of results in Africa. For example, the PI and his
institution will conduct a US Agency for International Development
(USAID)-funded project developing an Agroecology Degree Program at the
University of Gaston Berger (UGB) in Senegal, including E-education and distance
learning collaborations. The PIRE team and its research and education efforts
will enrich the content of the USAID education project and complement USAID's
initiative on Food Security for Africa.

U.S. institutions include: Ohio State University at Columbus and at Wooster;
University of California at Merced; USDA-Agricultural Research Service (ARS) at
Oregon State University; and Central State University (OH). Foreign partners
include: University of Thies (Senegal); Institut Sénégalais de Recherches
Agricoles (ISRA) (Senegal); Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD)
(France); IRD Laboratory of Tropical Microbial Ecology (LTME) (Senegal); and IRD
Laboratoire Commun de Microbiologie (France).

This project is cofunded by NSF's Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Environmental Biology.