* 0968963
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Joining the Advanced Small Satellite Technologies Research and Education Center
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Kuo-Chi Lin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 12/31/2013
* USD 12,999.00

IIP 0968963&lt;br/&gt;University of Central
Florida&lt;br/&gt;Lin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Central Florida
(UCF) plans to join the existing IUCRC for Advanced Small Satellite Technologies
Research and Education Center (ASTREC) which currently is a multi- university
center comprised of the University of Florida (lead institution) and North
Carolina State University (NCSU). The research mission of the Center is to
perform leading-edge research that is industry driven to produce technologically
small satellites and components, which will be on-orbit validated and
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCF plans to join the existing Advanced Small
Satellite Technologies Research and Education Center (ASTREC). The capabilities
of UCF will provide essential help to the ASTREC in terms of system engineering,
ground station support, guidance, navigation, control algorithms, simulation and
visualization. The collaboration between UCF and ASTREC will help advance the
state-of-the-art techniques in small satellites as well as enhance the space
related academic curriculum using realistic satellite projects. The research
interests and experience of the UCF team both augment and complement very well
the research activities and competencies already represented at the
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful participation of the UCF team in ASTREC
will greatly increase the competition of the Florida space research capability,
help in training a highly capable workforce, and attract more high value
research and development. The proposed research at UCF will offer a wide
spectrum of research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, in
particular from women and minority students. The PIs also plan to work closely
with the Office of Diversity Initiatives (ODI) and the Society of Women
Engineering (SWE) to encourage minority and women students. The research and
education activities that are promoted in this proposal would greatly help bring
this about.