* 0968575
* Cultural Heritage in European Societies and Spaces (CHESS)
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Krista Harper, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2014
* USD 149,550.00

This US-Spain IRES project will provide an early-career international research
experience for fifteen undergraduate and graduate students from the University
of Massachusetts Amherst and the Five Colleges consortium. Participants will
conduct systematic, comparative research around the theme of "Cultural Heritage
in European Societies and Spaces (CHESS)" in collaboration with the graduate
Program in Cul-tural Management at the University of Barcelona in Spain. For
each of the three years, research projects will be organized around a central
research stream: 1) "Memory, monuments, and commemoration," 2) "Multicultural
heritage in Europe" and 3) "Producing localities." By developing their projects
in relation to a central set of research questions, students will contribute to
three key areas of inquiry for global, comparative investigation of cultural
heritage as a site of contestation, conflict, and cohesion. Anthropol-ogists
have critically engaged the concepts of culture and heritage for decades, but
the rise of the field of heritage management offers new opportunities for
ethnographic investigation of how core disciplinary concepts are used by
policymakers, citizens, and other social actors. The proposed program provides
an integrative framework for an ethnographic field school that will draw the
participation of students across the four subfields of anthropology and serve as
a model for interdisciplinary teambuilding in applied heritage anthropology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Government institutions face new demands to develop public
programming that reflects our nation's diverse, multicultural heritage, and
there is a growing need for social scientists trained in applied heritage
anthropology and related fields. Broader impacts of this project include: 1)
training a diverse group of US students for international, comparative
anthropological research on cultural heritage policies in multicul-tural,
democratic societies; 2) developing scientific networks between anthropologists
in the US and Spain that will form the basis for further international sponsored
research; and 3) collaborating with faculty and students from Spain to produce a
body of systematic, comparative research publications available to the public
through an online project hub. This project will build synergistic initiatives
between European partner institutions and the UMass Department of Anthropology,
the Heritage and Society Studies and European Studies certificate programs, and
the Five Colleges consortium.