* 0968405
* PIRE: U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research and Education on Terahertz Dynamics in Nanostructures
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2010,12/31/2016
* Christopher Stanton, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Emig
* 12/31/2016
* USD 4,149,098.00

This PIRE renewal award supports the expansion of a unique interdisciplinary
U.S.-Japan research and education partnership focused on terahertz (THz)
dynamics in nanostructures. The 0.1 to 10 THz frequency range of the
electromagnetic spectrum is where electrical transport and optical transitions
merge, thus offering exciting opportunities to study a variety of novel physical
phenomena. By combining THz technology and nanotechnology, we can advance our
understanding of THz physics while improving and developing THz devices.
Nanotechnology is the study of nanostructures (between 1 to 100 nanometers long)
and how they can be controlled, fabricated, or manipulated. New discoveries
provide insight into the possibilities for novel electronic, photonic,
mechanical, and magnetic devices that have huge potential for future
technological applications including medicine, computation, and
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIRE project will (a) advance our
quantitative understanding of THz dynamics in nanostructures, (b) fabricate
novel nanostructures for THz study and applications, (c) advance cutting-edge
experimental techniques in THz spectroscopy and imaging, and (d) provide new
knowledge useful for developing novel THz devices. The projects explore THz
dynamics in carbon nanomaterials, namely, nanotubes and
graphene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. and Japan are global leaders in both THz
research and nanotechnology, and stimulating cooperation is critical to further
advance THz science and develop commercial products from new ideas in the lab.
However, obstacles exist for international collaboration - primarily linguistic
and cultural barriers - and this PIRE project aims to continue breaking down
these barriers. The project will also leverage large investments by both
countries to achieve long-term scientific and societal impact by providing
future generations of researchers with a better understanding of both the
culture and the state-of-the-art technology in each
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strong educational portfolio of this project
focuses on cultivating interest in nanotechnology among young U.S. undergraduate
students, especially those from underrepresented groups, and encouraging such
students to pursue graduate study and academic research in the physical
sciences. This renewed funding will expand and strengthen the award-winning
international research experience program for undergraduates called the
NanoJapan Program. Recognized as a model for international education programs
for science and engineering students, this program will provide U.S.
undergraduates with structured research opportunities in Japanese university
laboratories with Japanese mentors. This program includes a three-week
orientation program with language and culture training as well as extensive use
of information technologies as learning and community-building tools. U.S.
graduate students, early career scientists, researchers and alumni will benefit
from direct involvement in the PIRE research as well as from related follow-on
educational projects at home institutions and in local communities. Other
programs such as undergraduate and graduate research assistantships and the
NanoAsia Graduate International Research Experience (IRE) are additional venues
for international collaboration for U.S. students. The original PIRE had
particular success with recruitment of females and African-American students;
these recruitment efforts will continue and will be expanded to include first-
generation college-attending students. This broad portfolio of PIRE educational
activities should produce a diverse cadre of students with rich skill sets that
span nanoscience specialties, international cultural awareness, and the
intersection of culture, language, science, and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutional impacts of this award include
strengthening Rice University's leadership position in international research
and education in THz science, materials science, and nanoscience. It places Rice
at the hub of an exciting domestic and international collaborative network of
researchers and educators, while leveraging the University of Tulsa's
exceptional strength in international education, especially its expertise in
developing international education programs for science and engineering
students. An Introduction to Nanotechnology &amp; Nanoscience Online Seminar
will be developed within this PIRE and will be webcast live and archived online,
enabling live or asynchronous participation of all U.S. and Japanese
participants, thus enhancing the international curriculum at all institutions.
In addition, the project will further strengthen and internationalize
connections within and among campuses established through the original PIRE
award, including those with international offices, IT units, and curriculum and
assessment specialists. The project is also an innovative model that enables the
participating universities to foster multi-disciplinary international
collaboration among scholars in engineering, the sciences, and the humanities.
Furthermore, by bringing undergraduates into international research, the project
builds on the success of the original PIRE in strengthening the pool of
potential globally-engaged graduate students for the PIRE institutions and the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. project partners include Rice University (TX),
University of Florida, University of Tulsa (OK), State University of New York
(SUNY) at Buffalo, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, and Texas A&amp;M
University. Japanese partners include Osaka University, Chiba University,
Shinshu University, Tohoku University, University of Tokyo, National Institute
of Information and Communications Technology (NICT), National Institute of
Materials Science (NIMS), Hokkaido University, RIKEN, and University of
Aizu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the Office of International
Science and Engineering, the Division of Electrical, Communications, and Cyber
Systems, and the Division of Materials Research.