* 0968924
* EAGER: Assessing the Interdisciplinarity and Research Networking Impacts of the Human and Social Dynamics Priority Area Program
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Nils Newman, Search Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 199,842.00

This EAGER project will test a novel method for determining the relative value
of promoting interdisciplinarity of research projects. Specifically, the
research team will investigate the effectiveness of the Human and Social
Dynamics (HSD) priority area awards. Using a novel method to test how well the
HSD program has been at stimulating research that crosses disciplinary,
organizational, institutional, and geographic boundaries, this project will
examine research teaming and research community networking characteristics, as
well as measure the interdisciplinarity of publications by HSD researchers. This
EAGER project will support exploratory and potentially transformative, work to
study interdisciplinary perspectives. This project will perform non-traditional
program evaluation in refining measures of the interdisciplinarity of a subset
of NSF research. Using the HSD program as a proof of&lt;br/&gt;concept, the PI
will test his novel methodologies. The project also explores alternative ways to
visualize (map) such research, how it fits within the map of science, and social
network dynamics. It also explores novel data sources for such assessments in
seeking to ascertain the characteristics of especially fruitful research and the
transfer of that knowledge across other research areas and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project are expected to be
strong. If the proof of concept is successful, this project could lead to a very
exciting method for assessing the value of funding of interdisciplinary
research. The findings of this research should point to ways to facilitate
interdisciplinary research knowledge interchange. This assessment should help
point to what research&lt;br/&gt;approaches best enable such groundbreaking work
and offer insights to enrich graduate training programs to enhance young
researchers' networking and interdisciplinary skills.