* 0968781
* Bacterial Enzyme Systems for Wax Ester Production
* BIO,MCB
* 07/28/2009,06/30/2013
* Brett Barney, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 405,973.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wax esters are a highly valued class
of lipid utilized in cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, as fine lubricants, and as
fuels. The study of the pathways utilized by different organisms to produce and
accumulate energy storage compounds such as lipids has tremendous importance
towards pursuing new routes in the production of sustainable fuels to meet
growing energy demands. The wax ester is a unique biological lipid that is found
in many higher plants and animals, and among a small niche of bacteria. The goal
of this research program is to characterize a set of bacterial enzymes that are
responsible for the synthesis of natural wax esters. The terminal enzyme in this
pathway can utilize a large array of substrates to produce either wax esters, or
smaller esters with properties similar to biodiesel, while relatively little is
known about the other enzymes involved in producing these compounds. This work
will explore the chemistry involved in these biological processes, and further
aim to develop systems that alter the composition of or enhance wax ester
production using model organisms. The results of these experiments will provide
timely and important insights into the small array of proteins involved in these
biological pathways, and the broad diversity of products that can be produced
utilizing sustainable biosynthetic routes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program has been developed around the
emerging field of biofuels production, and encompasses a variety of approaches
that make it ideal for the training of both graduate and undergraduate students
alike. The studies contain both basic and applied components that will provide
opportunities for advanced enzymatic characterizations for graduate students and
direct analytical approaches with defined outcomes for undergraduates.
Additionally, the project will include several summer internships to high school
students to promote interest in science and basic research. Most commercial wax
esters are synthesized from fossil fuels, and thus there is a growing interest
in developing biological systems for the sustainable production of wax esters.
This research is essential in further developing the field of sustainable energy
to address the significant problems and global impacts associated with the
continued burning of fossil fuels.