* 0968979
* CSEDI: CIDER-II: Continuation and Expansion of the Cooperative Institute for Dynamic Earth Research
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Raymond Jeanloz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2013
* USD 669,648.00

The Cooperative Institute for Dynamic Earth Research has been conducting 6-7
week long bi-annual summer programs since 2004 to foster synergies between
individual and small groups of researchers. The goal is to help improve
fundamental understanding of the Earth's evolution and present dynamics through
a multi-disciplinary approach that facilitates cross-education among the
disciplines involved: seismology, geochemistry, geodynamics, mineral physics and
geomagnetism. CIDER facilitates cross-education of earth scientists at any level
in their career. Included in the summer programs are 3-4 weeks of lectures,
tutorials and working group activities that contribute to the multi-disciplinary
education of graduate students and post-docs in all disciplines of solid earth
sciences. The work of CIDER will ultimately impact how to better address two key
natural hazards issues of societal relevance: (1) natural hazards such as
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions; and (2) the whole-Earth budget of volatile
elements, especially water and carbon dioxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase II of
CIDER builds upon 5 years of experience with CIDER Phase I: three summer
programs in 2004, 2006 and 2008, and input from a community workshop held at the
Marconi Center, CA, May 2009 (which recommended continuation and expansion of
CIDER programs) and an on-going 2010 summer program. These programs have all
focused on 'deep Earth' science themes. Phase II of CIDER includes a 6 week long
summer program to be held at UC Berkeley from June 27th to August 6th, 2011 on
the theme 'The dynamics of mountain building', expanding the reach of CIDER to
the multi-disciplinary community working on near-surface earth processes. In
addition, it expands the activities of CIDER in two areas: 1) follow-up research
started by multi-disciplinary working groups during the Summer programs held in
2010 and 2011; 2) expansion of the CIDER web capabilities, in particular, to
experiment with and develop a supporting virtual organization.