* 0968874
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Experimental and Theoretical/Computational Studies of Low Energy Electron Collisions with Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Murtadha Khakoo, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 09/30/2014
* USD 76,531.00

This work continues and further develops a highly successful collaboration among
several institutions in the US and Brazil to investigate the interactions of
low-energy electrons with polyatomic molecules, and in particular with biofuels
and other biological molecules. The collaboration includes scientists from
California State University, Fullerton, the California Institute of Technology,
the State University of Campinas. It involves both experimental and theoretical
groups who have come together to work jointly on problems where they have
overlapping interests and complementary expertise. Major focuses in future work
will be electron-impact excitation of polyatomic molecules and dissociative
electron attachment to polyatomics. Calculations and measurements of electron-
impact excitation processes in polyatomics are challenging, and results are
scarce despite the need for such data in understanding reactive plasmas and
discharges. To build expertise in this area, measurements and calculations are
carried out for two prototypical molecules, ethylene and furan, both of which
have low-lying triplet states well isolated from other thresholds. Following
that, measurements and calculations of electron-impact excitation cross sections
for methanol and ethanol will be done. Electron-impact excitation of these
prototypical and ubiquitous alcohols is of fundamental interest and also has
high technological relevance: dissociative excitation and ionization are key
processes in spark ignition of alcohol fuels, and rate data are needed for
modeling and optimizing the ignition process. Collaborators in Brazil affiliated
with the Bioethanol Science and Technology Center in Campinas are initiating
studies of spark ignition that will involve both laboratory measurements and
numerical modeling, and those studies will make direct use of the electron-
impact excitation cross sections that will be measured and calculated as part of
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are that electron-
molecule collisions at low energy present many features of fundamental interest
and pose a great challenge to both experimental and computational methods, but
they also have wide technological significance, being relevant to the physics of
plasmas and discharges, the upper atmosphere, and circumstellar and interstellar
media. In the specific case of methanol and ethanol, accurate cross-section data
for the major collision processes, including elastic scattering, excitation, and
ionization, are needed for numerical modeling and optimization of discharges
used to ignite alcohols used as fuels. Such modeling may lead to improved spark-
plug designs that produce more complete combustion and thus higher fuel
efficiency. Moreover, an understanding of electron driven excitation and
dissociation in the alcohols may give insights into the same processes in
related biomolecules, including sugars. A central component of the project is
providing opportunities for young scientists to gain experience doing science in
an international context, with US students making extended visits to do research
in Brazil and vice versa. This project is co-funded with the Americas Program of
the Office of International Science and Engineering.