* 0968887
* Collaborative Research:  I/UCRC for Water Equipment and Policy
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Junhong Chen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 02/29/2016
* USD 884,000.00

I/UCRC for Water Equipment and Policy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0968887 University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee; Erik Christensen &lt;br/&gt;0968844 Marquette University;
Michael Switzenbaum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Water
Equipment and Policy (WEP) will focus on improving water quality and
understanding related technologies. The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM)
AND Marquette University (MU) are collaborating to establish the proposed
center, with UWM as the lead institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
Center will focus on improving water equipment based on recent advances in
materials, sensors, and control hardware/software. The Center will conduct
policy studies including water demand and risk analysis. A goal is to improve
the profitability of water equipment manufacturers and to improve the industry
competitiveness and ability to adopt new technology for enhanced economic
development. The five potential research thrust areas that form the basis of WEP
include: Advanced Sensor and Control System Technology, Novel Materials,
Autonomous Inspection and Repair, Environmental Systems Design, and Regulation,
Legislation and Water Policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center will
stimulate growth and economic development. The teams of researchers from both
universities will work with the industrial advisory board to select high
priority projects that should benefit society through improved water quality and
availability, not only in the Great Lakes region but elsewhere in the US and
world. Underrepresented students will be hired to work on these research
projects that are of direct industrial relevance. The PIs plan to work with the
Society of Women Engineers (SWE) and the National Society of Black Engineers
student organizations to attract highly qualified minority students.