* 0968784
* Cellular Determinants of Granulosa Cell Differentiation in Avian Ovarian Follicles
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Alan Johnson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 01/31/2013
* USD 372,827.00

In female vertebrate animals that ovulate a limited number of oocytes (eggs) per
ovulation cycle (e.g., mammals, birds, some reptiles), it is the process of
ovarian follicle selection that represents the rate-limiting step to fecundity.
Follicle selection entails the selective recruitment of one (or more)
undifferentiated follicle(s) into the final stages of maturation prior to
ovulation, yet the underlying mechanisms of this process are currently undefined
in any vertebrate species. Ultimately, the selection mechanism determines the
maximum number of offspring that can be produced within any given reproductive
cycle. The present studies will test the hypothesis that the inability of
undifferentiated follicles to spontaneously undergo follicle selection is
normally due to the active suppression of one or more genes (e.g., the Follicle
Stimulating Hormone receptor; FSHR) that are required for the differentiation of
the follicle's granulosa cell layer. Importantly, it is the granulosa cell layer
that nurtures the oocyte throughout follicle development. A second hypothesis to
be tested is that at the time of follicle selection there is a switch from a
negative regulation of FSHR gene expression to an upregulation of expression.
This event is widely assumed to be prerequisite for the maturation of ovarian
follicles to the preovulatory stage. The experimental design incorporates
cellular and molecular techniques directed at identifying genomic mechanisms by
which the expression of genes critical to this selection process in chickens is
repressed or enhanced. Results from these studies are predicted to impact our
ability to enhance female fertility in endangered species and domesticated food
animals, and to better understand select causes of infertility in women. More
broadly, the proposed research will serve to provide relevant and cutting-edge
training to undergraduate and graduate students (including those from
underrepresented populations) whose career goals include teaching and/or
research.