* 0968595
* US-Brazil workshop on establishing Aves Internacionales, the first network on bird migration research in South America:  Campos do Jordao, Brazil, August 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Kimberly Smith, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/2012
* USD 59,962.00

Because migratory birds travel across political and cultural boundaries, their
study and conservation requires collaboration between countries and cultures.
Such collaboration is now commonplace in the Northern Hemisphere, but it has
lagged behind in South America due to obstacles in communication, lack of
standardization, and lack of funds. To overcome these obstacles and catalyze
international research on bird migration in South America, this award supports a
workshop to form the Aves Internacionales Network (in Portuguese: "Rede Aves
Internacionais"; in Spanish: "Red Aves Internacionales"). The workshop, which is
co-organized by Miguel Marini of the Universidade de Brasilia (Brazil), Victor
Cueto of the Universidad de Buenos Aires (Argentina), and Ana Maria Mamani of
the Museo de Historia Natural Noel Kempff Mercado (Bolivia), will coincide with
the 25th International Ornithological Congress (IOC) in Campos do Jord√£o,
Brazil, in August 2010. Research topics generated by workshop participants will
center around two interrelated goals: (1) developing hypotheses on bird
migration in South America and collecting data to test those hypotheses, and (2)
testing hypotheses on how bird migration differs in South and North America. In
combination, these two goals will provide a new, geographically broader
perspective about how and why New World birds migrate.

This workshop aims to develop a research agenda based on questions that cannot
be answered by any single research group, but which require international
collaboration across North and South America. Participants will be drawn from
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, and the United States, and will include
active members of MIGRATE, a NSF-funded program to study migration in the
Northern Hemisphere. Many of the workshop participants will be students or young
professionals, personally committed to fostering long-term partnerships with
international colleagues. The workshop will contribute to knowledge about
socially relevant issues such as climate change, land-use patterns, and the
avian spread of diseases, and will also generate a series of education-based
activities in both North and South America.