* 0968853
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Social Value of Ornaments from Pueblo Bonito and Aztec Ruin
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Patricia Crown, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2012
* USD 14,469.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Patricia Crown, Hannah Mattson will conduct her
dissertation research on the meaning and use of ornaments from two of the
largest archaeological sites associated with the Chaco Culture, Pueblo Bonito
and Aztec Ruin. During the 11th and early 12th centuries, Chaco Canyon was the
center of a complex cultural system that extended across the northern U.S.
Southwest. Pueblo Bonito, an 800-room pueblo located in Chaco Canyon, was the
major ceremonial and/or political center for the Chacoan regional system during
its florescence (A.D. 950-1100). Aztec Ruin, a 450-room structure located 60 km
north of Chaco Canyon, was a major center in the 13th century, after the decline
of the canyon communities. &lt;br/&gt;Cross-cultural research has shown that
personal adornment is often a key visual indicator of social group identity;
worldwide, jewelry signals social differences of various kinds, including tribal
affiliation, gender, age, status, and ideological beliefs. It is expected that
ornaments would convey such social information in the past as well.
Archaeologists have recovered large numbers of ornaments at both Pueblo Bonito
and Aztec Ruin, particularly in association with other unique artifacts in
burials and ritual structures. Ornaments are thus an ideal artifact type for
investigating change in Chacoan identity in the period of demographic
reorganization represented by the shift from Pueblo Bonito to Aztec as regional
centers.&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Mattson's research will advance knowledge of changes in
social identity and ritual practice that accompany periods of demographic
upheaval. In addition, her research focuses on an understudied artifact class,
ornaments, and includes the study of museum collections that have never been
fully analyzed, such as the collection of ornaments from Aztec Ruin.
Furthermore, the study involves the application of a relatively new and non-
destructive technique within archaeology - the use of a spectrophotometer for
color measurements of ornaments. &lt;br/&gt;This research will also have broader
impacts by reinforcing partnerships between several national parks and research
institutions. The results of this research will be presented at professional
meetings and submitted for publication in national journals, as well as provided
to descendant native communities. Upon completion, the research will also be
presented to both native jewelers and the general public at various museums.
Public lectures for visitors will be given at Aztec Ruins National Monument and
at Chaco Canyon Historical Park. Finally, as a partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the Doctor of Philosophy degree, the research will aid in the
training of a young scientist.