* 0968159
* GOALI: Membrane Contactor Reactors for Environmental Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Theodore Tsotsis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2014
* USD 317,000.00

0968159&lt;br/&gt;Tsotsis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Nationwide about ~2.5 MM ft3/min of landfill gas (LFG) is
generated. LFG is potentially an important renewable fuel, as it typically
contains more than 50% methane (CH4). Unfortunately, today a large fraction of
the LFG is flared. The rest is utilized for electric power generation, and for
medium BTU gas-type (e.g., use in boilers) applications. One of the major
roadblocks to the utilization of LFG is its miscellaneous corrosive
contaminants, e.g., halogen and sulfur containing compounds, which necessitate
frequent energy producing equipment servicing, and may lead to eventual failure.
Worst of all, halogen and sulfur containing contaminants are emitted to the
atmosphere, during flaring or energy production, contributing significantly to
air pollution, particularly to acid rain. The removal of these contaminants from
LFG prior to combustion is a difficult problem, because of their wide range, and
their presence at trace amounts. These factors present difficulties for
conventional clean-up technologies, which have proven ineffective for LFG clean-
up. The PIs plan to develop a novel catalytic oxidation technology appropriate
for LFG clean-up, based on the concept of a pore-flow reactor (PoFR) endowed
with an oxidation nanocatalyst. Thus economical, environmental, and energy
advantages can be realized, if a process is developed that cost-effectively
removes the LFG toxic contaminants. The emphasis in this project is on
fundamental investigations of the complex reaction and transport processes that
occur in such a reactor; a major fundamental scientific advance will be
understanding and modeling the catalytic combustion of the complex heteroatom
compounds encountered in LFG. It is such better fundamental understanding that
will lead to the main technological advances needed for the further technical
development of the PoFR concept. The project will be developed with
collaboration with industrial partners M&amp;P and GCE. M&amp;P is an inorganic
membrane manufacturer dedicated to the development and application of these
novel materials. GCE is an Engineering Company specializing in LFG collection
and utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will provide educational experiences and training for the graduate and
undergraduate students as they will prepare and characterize novel new materials
and learn a host of state-of-the-art computational and experimental techniques.
The project will also provide the graduate and undergraduate students with the
opportunity to interact with industrial researchers. The urban setting of USC
affords the opportunity to work with a variety of 2-4 year colleges in the area,
several of which are predominantly minority Institutions. The PIs plan to
recruit qualified undergraduates as summer interns, and potentially as incoming
graduate students. They plan to disseminate the results of our work through peer
reviewed publications, presentations at technical meetings, and by making all
reports available on the Web. They will also take advantage of the ever-evolving
undergraduate curriculum program at USC, which emphasizes vertically- and
horizontally-integrated degree projects consisting of emphasis-specific
experimental/laboratory modules associated with each core Chemical Engineering
course. The PIs envision integrating research findings and aspects of their work
as the degree projects in the Reactor Analysis, Transport Phenomena, and
Separation courses. This catalytic reactor technology will cost-effectively
remove the toxic contaminants from LFG, offer significant economical,
environmental, and energy advantages, and will allow LFG (and biogas in general)
to gain its full potential as a valuable renewable fuel. In addition to focusing
attention on an important novel reactor concept, this project will also generate
fundamental insight, which will impact the knowledge-base of the broader field
of transport and reaction in nanoporous media, and is likely to catalyze new
thinking and rapid new advances in the area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is being supported by the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems Division (CBET) and the Division of Industrial Innovation and
Partnerships (IIP).