* 0968421
* PIRE: Toward a holistic and global understanding of hot spring ecosystems: A US-China based international collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2018
* Paul Schroeder, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2018
* USD 3,879,301.00

Despite tremendous progress made since Brock's pioneering work in Yellowstone
National Park in the 1960s and 1970s, our understanding of ecological processes
at high temperature remains limited. This PIRE project builds on an existing
foundation of collaboration between US and Chinese geobiologists to nucleate a
large, international team to focus on the microbial diversity, biogeography, and
ecosystem-level functioning within geothermal source pools in the largest hot
spring complex in China, the Tengchong Geothermal Field in Yunnan Province. The
long-term goal of this project is to develop a holistic and global view of
geobiology in geothermal systems to complement and build upon what is known
about life in other geothermal sites, such as Yellowstone National Park. In
addition, US students and scientists will have a unique opportunity to
experience the biologically-, geologically-, and culturally-diverse regions in
southwestern China and develop long-lasting international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of high temperature ecosystems
(&gt;73Â°C) is a frontier in biology because energy that supports these
ecosystems is derived from chemical disequilibria rather than light. The
expertise of this PIRE team enables it to test the central hypothesis that
geographically distinct hot spring systems host genetically distinct microbial
communities with similar carbob (C)- and nitrogen (N)-cycle functions. This
hypothesis will be tested by focusing on bulk water and sediment microbial
communities in source pools of six hot springs that represent three major
physicochemical classes. The project's research objectives are: 1) to define hot
springs as physicochemical habitats for microorganisms through extensive
geochemical analysis and thermodynamic modeling; 2) to robustly define microbial
community structure from both a phylogenetic and gene content perspective
through deep sequencing of 16S rRNA gene fragments, whole community
metagenomics, and fluorescent in situ hybridization; 3) to measure rates of
carbon-cycling processes and trace assimilated carbon into key players in the
C-cycle through DNA and lipid stable isotope probing, and C and Hydrogen natural
abundance stable isotope measurements; 4) to apply a comprehensive suite of
nitrogen-cycle process rate measurements combined with deep sequencing of
N-cycle genes and transcripts to link processes to key players in the N-cycle;
and 5) to sequence genomes of cultivated organisms to reveal possible roles in
biogeochemical cycles, particularly C- and N-cycles, and microbial endemism on
the genome scale. The combination of careful site characterization, direct
measurement of microbial activities, and genomic approaches will lead to an
unprecedented, integrated understanding of this system. When combined with
similar work underway in the US, the team will gain a detailed window into the
relative roles of geochemistry and biogeography in controlling microbial
community structure and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goals of
the project include: 1) Engaging U.S. graduate and undergraduate students,
Nevada high-school science teachers, early-career researchers, the international
geomicrobiology community, and the general public in globally-based scientific
research and international collaboration; 2) motivating the next generation of
internationally-engaged geomicrobiologists; and 3) increasing awareness of
fundamental interactions between biology and geology, the process of
chemolithotrophy, and the process and societal implications of advances in
biotechnology, bioenergy, and bioinformatics. The ultimate broader impacts
outcome will be a cohort of young US leaders who are scientifically-enlightened
and internationally-engaged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutional goals include:
1) Developing a strong network of long-term research and educational
collaborations among individuals and institutions in the US and China; 2)
strengthening programs at the project's US institutions to engage more US
students in international research; and 3) actively engaging the worldwide
geomicrobiology community by developing a permanent, open and interactive
website and data portal and by showcasing project results in major professional
meetings in China, in the US, and in other international forums.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participating US institutions include the University of
Nevada - Las Vegas, University of Georgia, Miami University (Ohio), Montana
State University, Northern Arizona University, Arizona State University, San
Francisco State University (CA), and Stanford University (CA). Participating
Chinese institutions include the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tongji University,
Yunnan University, China University of Geosciences - Beijing, China University
of Geosciences - Wuhan, and Xiamen University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering, the
Division of Earth Science, the Division of Environmental Biology, and NSF's
EPSCoR Program.