* 0968957
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Next Generation CAx joining the Center for e-Design
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* David Serrano, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 01/31/2012
* USD 11,500.00

0968876 Brigham Young University (BYU); Gregory Jensen 0968957 University of
Puerto Rico (UPR); David Serrano

Brigham Young University (BYU) and the University of Puerto Rico (UPR) propose
to join the existing Center for e-Design that is currently comprised of Virginia
Tech (lead), the University of Central Florida and the University of
Massachusetts.

YU and UPR will complement the research umbrella by investigating, modifying,
and prototyping, at kernel levels, new architectures for networked multi-user
computer-aided applications (v-CAx). The new institutions will add strategically
to Center goals, because of their strong histories in applications of modern CAx
software. The proposed research will support the existing Center?s
infrastructure research in all four thrust areas, but will strongly complement
Thrust II: New Paradigms and Processes. The intellectual merit will be measured
by how the rather subtle perturbations to the computer operating systems (OS)
and CAx architectures collapse product development times for multi-users.

The new universities bring cultural diversity to the research that will be
demanded by research prototypes. BYU will extend and integrate CAx applications
through API libraries, computer OS architectures, network security, and business
team conflict resolution. While BYU has strong relationships with several
international institutions that have expertise in gaming technologies, UPR has
backgrounds in constraint relationships as they relate to design parameters.
BYU's and UPR's strong dependence on both undergraduate and graduate students
for development and testing, will provide students a rich educational
experience. The universities also plan to involve K-12 and post K-12 levels in
the Center.