* 0968551
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Household Spaces and Everyday Practices at Xaltocan Under Aztec Imperial Expansion
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Lisa Overholtzer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Elizabeth M. Brumfiel, Lisa Overholtzer will examine
the social, political, and economic transition at the Postclassic Central
Mexican site of Xaltocan upon its conquest and integration into the Aztec
empire. Thus, this project will shed light on warfare, imperial expansion, and
abandonment and displacement processes, topics of perennial concern within
anthropology. Ms Overholtzer will evaluate ethnohistoric assertions that, having
been conquered after a long war, Xaltocan was abandoned by its native population
and then resettled with Aztec tribute payers. She will also explore the ways in
which commoners reformed everyday life in this new context. Fieldwork will
include horizontal excavations of two house mounds known to contain domestic
deposits dating to before and after incorporation into the Aztec empire. Careful
excavation should reveal evidence of site destruction, rapid abandonment, and a
hiatus in occupation, if ethnohistoric statements are accurate. The contextual
analysis of houses and the distribution of artifacts within them will help
reconstruct the spatial routines of daily life before and after incorporation
into the Aztec state. However, because many household items were regularly swept
up and placed in trash or were taken by their owners when the house was
abandoned, their presence and location within a house may not reflect their
places of use. Therefore, Ms Overholtzer will also employ analyses of micro-
residues - such as chemical signatures of ancient activities and small fragments
of artifacts that become imbedded in floors with trampling -that are not
affected by these processes. &lt;br/&gt;This research will make a theoretical
contribution by 1) offering a long-term case study of commoner experiences of
war and conquest, and 2) considering bottom-up processes and household decisions
at Xaltocan, such as the decisions to flee or rebuild, that contributed to the
character of the Aztec empire. This project critically shifts the frame of
analysis to focus on commoner choices within a changing political economy,
rather than on top-down elite constraints on commoner life. As a result, it will
allow one to understand empires in a more comprehensive way that considers the
roles of all people in imperial processes. &lt;br/&gt;Within Mexico a strong
sense of pride rests on national heritage. Ms Overholtzer will create additional
knowledge of this heritage and distribute it in several contexts: by training
residents in archaeological methods, providing site tours to local schools,
constructing an exhibit in the local museum, and distributing research results
through the local cultural center. More broadly, research findings will be
disseminated in the form of reports to Mexico's National Institute for
Anthropology and History, and in dissertation and publication form to academic
communities worldwide. Additional broader impacts include the promotion of
teaching and learning internationally. The project will provide opportunities
for two young archaeologists from underrepresented groups in Mexico and the
United States to gain valuable field experience. Through the development of new
multi-media curriculum materials and the dissemination of archaeological
information via an internet website, the author will encourage learning in
university classrooms and beyond.