* 0968736
* A High Throughput Microfluidic Sensor for Real Time Health Monitoring of Rotating Machinery
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Robert Veillette, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 06/30/2014
* USD 270,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0968736&lt;br/&gt;Jiang Zhi&lt;br/&gt;University of
Akron&lt;br/&gt;This project is to develop a miniaturized microfluidic sensor
for real-time condition monitoring of rotating and reciprocating machinery via
detecting metal wear debris in the machinery?s life blood, its lubrication oil.
The proposed sensor will consist of an innovative debris separator based on
surface acoustic standing waves that sorts debris particles by size and delivers
them to appropriately-sized detectors, and a parallel array of inductive Coulter
counting detectors that enables rapid analysis of a large volume of lubricants.
This work is expected to lead to an advanced sensor that has high throughput,
high sensitivity, high dynamic range and low cost. It will facilitate better
maintenance scheduling for a variety of machinery including bearings, gearboxes,
and turbomachinery, thereby significantly reducing the cost of machine
operation. In addition, this project also aims to develop and deploy MEMS and
sensing technology-related educational materials and contribute to motivating
K-12 students and students from underrepresented groups to pursue STEM careers.
Undergraduate students will be recruited, with an emphasis on underrepresented
minorities and women, to conduct research in this project. Through hands-on
activities added to existing summer workshops, middle school and high school
students and their teachers will be exposed to cutting-edge MEMS and advanced
sensor technologies.