* 0968480
* SoCS: Collaborative Research: Conversational Dynamics in Online Support Groups
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* John Levine, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2015
* USD 112,229.00

Health support groups, including those on the internet, can substantially
benefit participants, but the social processes responsible for these benefits
are unclear. A team of researchers led by Robert Kraut at Carnegie-Mellon
University will explore how the conversational dynamics of online cancer support
groups influence group functioning and participant quality of life and will
develop computational tools that can be used to analyze online conversations and
improve their effectiveness. The research project has four specific goals. (1)
To understand how conversational episodes in online support groups facilitate
social support. For example, what must a person say to get others to respond
empathically? (2) To understand how support in these groups influences group
commitment and affects health outcomes. (3) To develop computational tools to
make the analysis of large datasets of health conversations tractable. (4) To
use these tools to improve the training of support group
facilitators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Online health support groups are popular,
being used by about 58% of American adults. Identifying the role of
communication in online cancer support groups will provide valuable information
to users and facilitators of these groups and will enhance their training.
Moreover, a tool for analyzing large corpora of conversational data will
facilitate the work of researchers who are interested in conversational behavior
in other kinds of online groups