* 0968696
* Affine combinatorics, Schubert calculus, and total positivity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Thomas Lam, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 156,173.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Lam, Thomas
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS - 0901111 &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Affine
combinatorics, Schubert calculus, and total positivity&lt;br/&gt;Title: Harvard
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to develop combinatorics arising
from affine Lie algebras and loop groups. The PI with collaborators will study
the Schubert calculus of flag varieties of affine Lie groups. This includes
understanding the geometry of Schubert varieties and the combinatorics of the
polynomials representing Schubert varieties in (co)homology and K-(co)homology.
Together with co-workers, the PI will also develop a theory of total positivity
for loop groups, and for their flag varieties. The theory being developed
generalizes the classical Edrei-Thoma classification of characters of the
infinite symmetric group. Furthermore, new combinatorics for Coxeter groups
occurs, including a weak order for the limiting elements of a Coxeter group. In
another direction, the PI with collaborators will study the convex geometry of
the affine Coxeter arrangement, and in particular, certain polytopes which occur
in the study of affine Schubert varieties and total positivity of the affine
Grassmannian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's research is in the area of
combinatorics, which studies how to count discrete objects. The PI studies
combinatorial problems which arise from geometry (studying shapes of objects in
space) and algebraic structures (studying solutions to polynomial equations).
One of the on-going themes of the PI's work is the study of (positive) numbers
which arise in mathematics. These numbers may occur when counting the ways
geometrical objects interact in space, or by couting certain solutions to
polynomial equations. In particular, the PI aims to understand the "positive"
part of a geometrical figure in the same way the positive real axis is the
"positive" part of the real line. The PI's work will have a significant impact
on the understanding of the relationships between geometry, algebra, and
combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;