* 0968862
* A Novel Fabrication Process for Polysilicon Thin Film Solar Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Yue Kuo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 04/30/2014
* USD 370,945.00

This grant provides funding for the detailed study of a novel thin-film silicon
solar cell fabrication process that uses significantly less energy than current
processes. The silicon will be delivered via a low temperature deposition onto a
metal layer; the stack will then be crystallized in the solid phase using a
novel pulsed rapid thermal annealing process. This study includes an in-depth
investigation of the fundamental process-structure relationship that influences
the solar cell performance. The experimental study will elucidate the
crystallization mechanism by exploring the effects of crystallization rate,
concentration profile and grain structure. Optimization of the multi-layer
polycrystalline structure and properties will be a goal of the study as well.
Although the primary focus is on the single-junction solar cell structure,
multiple-junction cells will be fabricated using the same kind of process.
Commercial low-temperature glass will be used as the substrate for the solar
cell fabrication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the result of this
research will provide a viable solution to the photovoltaic industry, i.e., a
low-cost mass production process on the large-area glass substrate with high
throughput. The primary goal of this work is to understand the key process
factors that affect the bulk and interface polycrystalline thin-film structure
and material properties for optimum solar cell performance. The same principle
is applicable to the fabrication of a wide range of polycrystalline
semiconductor thin films for solar cells and other nano- and micro-electronic
devices. This work will also contribute to the advancement of solid-state
material science, device fabrication, and rapid thermal annealing processes.