* 0968825
* Transitional Creep Mechanisms in Textured Low c/a-Ratio Hexagonal Close Packed Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2010,02/28/2019
* K. Linga Murty, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 02/28/2019
* USD 437,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Ti and Zr alloys find extensive applications in
transportation and energy technologies respectively in addition to other
applications such as in biomedical and chemical industries. Particular needs
arise in the basic understanding of the underlying deformation mechanisms in
these textured alloys as lower stresses are encountered, comparable to those
under service conditions. Recent investigations on fine grained Ti3Al2.5V alloy
tubing revealed a new deformation mechanism at lower stresses, under which
strain-rates were found to be orders of magnitude higher than those predicted by
diffusional creep mechanisms such as Coble creep. In addition, under testing
conditions where dislocation creep is predominant, it has been shown that climb
of edge dislocations controls creep at lower stresses while jogged screw
dislocations make significant contribution at higher stresses. Microstructures
following creep are required to differentiate these mechanisms since the
measurement of creep parameters such as the stress exponent and activation
energy cannot distinguish between them. Further investigations using different
loading conditions, on other Ti and Zr alloys, are imperative. These low
c/a-ratio hexagonal metals exhibit crystallographic textures that lead to
complex biaxial anisotropy that must be properly taken into account. The
proposed research addresses these important aspects through studies involving
not only standard uniaxial creep tests, but also the characterization of
anisotropic biaxial creep using closed-end internally pressurized thin-walled
tubing superimposed with axial loading.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Zr and Ti alloys are commonly used as structural
materials in the nuclear and chemical industries as thin-walled tubing subjected
to complex biaxial loadings. In order to predict the dimensional changes of the
structures made from these materials, a thorough understanding of the
deformation mechanisms is needed. This is especially true of the changes in the
mechanism(s) as lower stresses, equivalent to those under typical operating
conditions, are approached. These transitions in time-dependent deformation
(i.e., creep) can lead to dangerous non-conservative estimates of the strain-
rates and lifetimes by blind extrapolation of the short-term high-stress and
high-temperature data to these low levels. The current proposed study emphasizes
the transitional creep mechanisms in these important structural alloys. Students
exposed to these experimental and modeling efforts will be able to appreciate
the complex phenomena that need to be addressed in attacking real life problems.
The project will actively participate in Young Investigator programs for high
school students during the summers by involving these students in the research.