* 0968714
* Generalized Fiducial Inference for Modern Statistical Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/03/2009,07/31/2011
* Jan Hannig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2011
* USD 170,900.00

In this proposal the investigators revisit Fisher's controversial fiducial
argument with a modern set of questions in mind. This is motivated by the
success of generalized inference as introduced by Tsui &amp; Weerahandi (1989),
which in fact leads to the same results as Fisher's fiducial inference (Hannig,
Iyer &amp; Patterson, 2006). The investigators do not attempt to derive a new
``paradox free theory of fiducial inference''. Instead, with minimal
assumptions, the investigators present a new simple fiducial recipe that can be
applied to conduct statistical inference via the construction of generalized
fiducial distributions. This recipe is inspired by the concept of generalized
pivotal quantity and is designed to be fairly easily applicable in many
practical applications. It can be applied regardless of the dimension of the
parameter space (i.e., including nonparametric problems), and it often leads to
statistical procedures that are asymptotically exact and, more importantly,
possess very good approximate small sample properties. The investigators propose
to investigate theoretical properties of generalized fiducial distributions for
statistical problems and apply their findings to various problems of broader
interest.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Systematic study of properties of
generalized fiducial inference will increase our understanding of foundations of
statistics and will give statisticians an additional tool to use when dealing
with problems they encounter in practice. More directly, successful solution of
the proposed applied problems will immediately bear fruit in the application
areas, e.g., pharmaceutical statistics and metrology. For instance, the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidance document spells out analysis
procedures for demonstration of equivalence of two or more drug formulations.
The investigators aim to show that the fiducial approach will lead to more
efficient procedures, which will result in cost and time savings, an important
issue for the drug industry. In metrology, the International Bureau of Weights
and Measures (BIPM) in conjunction with the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO), has published a ``Guide to Expression of Uncertainty in
Measurements" (GUM) which spells out the procedures to be followed by national
metrological institutes such as NIST in the US, NPL in UK, and PTB in Germany. A
problem that is unique to metrology is that every measurement is subject to
unknown and unknowable systematic errors that are often larger than random
errors. The only way to quantify these unknowable systematic errors is via
specification of subjective distributions for them. The GUM specifies how to
combine data-based estimates of standard deviations for some error components in
the calculations and subjective estimates of uncertainty for other error
components. The investigators aim to demonstrate that the fiducial method
provides a natural approach for accomplishing this. Such results are likely to
influence the metrology community in modifying and improving their current
procedures.