* 0968080
* Ignition and pollutant chemistry of next-generation biodiesels
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* S. Scott Goldsborough, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 04/30/2013
* USD 299,999.00

0968080 Goldsborough

The objective of this project is to investigate and understand the ignition and
pollutant formation chemistry of next-generation of biofuels. Bio-derived fuels
represent an important domestic resource with the potential to enable
sustainability targets to be achieved while addressing regional air quality
problems. These fuels behave significantly differently from conventional fuels
and a fundamental understanding is critical for the development advanced
combustion engines (ACE). This study will focus on biodiesels, or more
specifically biodiesel surrogates. These surrogates are medium weight esters
whose molecular structure is similar to today?s biodiesels and tomorrow?s bio-
derived synthetic-derivatives. Synthetic derivatives are being pursued by the
bio-fuel industry in order to improve important fuel properties such viscosity,
surface tension, pour point and thermo-oxidative stability. It is hypothesized
that manipulations of the fuel?s molecular structure not only impacts these
properties, but also ignition behavior and pollutant formation. Various fuel
structures will be investigated in this study including different fatty acid
chains and different ester groups. A well-characterized, rapid compression
expansion machine (RCEM) along with an integrated gas sampling system and GC/MS
analytical unit will be employed to acquire necessary data. The data from the
RCEM will be used to develop chemical kinetic mechanisms that can describe
ignition delay, heat released, and combustion intermediates. The mechanisms will
be validated and refined with the aid of reaction path and sensitivity analysis
tools. The PI will work closely with collaborators at the National Center for
Food and Agricultural Research, LLNL, the National University of Ireland Galway,
ANL, Reaction Design and Ford. These organizations represent a wide spectrum of
parties invested in the development and effective utilization of next-generation
fuels in ACEs. The PI and his research group, through this project, will play an
integral part in this evolving industry.

Intellectual Merit

The combustion chemistry of bio-derived fuels is not well understood. The
proposed work will focus on C13- esters as surrogates for larger C17- C21-
molecules in order to reveal how fuel molecular structure, including novel
synthetic formulations, regulates ignition behavior and pollutant formation when
used in operating combustion engines. Of particular interest are processes in
ACE regimes including low/intermediate temperature (600-1100K), high pressure
(2-20MPa) and various levels of dilution. Fundamental data for diesel and bio-
diesel relevant fuels are scarce in part due to the problem of involatility.
This research will develop techniques to overcome this barrier and acquire the
necessary data. Broader Impacts

This integrated research and education plan will enable collaboration with
others, to recruit and retain a diverse pool of high-quality undergraduate and
graduate students in mechanical engineering at Marquette University. Through
this program students will be exposed to: critical issues facing our nation,
techniques and tools for scientific discovery, exciting and relevant research
topics, and opportunities for professional development, collaborative
environments and international perspectives. Strong relationships will be
cultivated between the PI and three national labs, one international university,
two industrial organizations. Education and outreach to area high schools will
be facilitated through the College of Engineering?s participation in Project
Lead the Way. The data and understanding acquired through this work will
contribute to an urgently needed body of knowledge regarding bio-derived fuel
combustion. Results will be disseminated widely in journal, conference, working
group and web-based forums.