* 0968929
* Collaborative Research: Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Sustainable and Integrated Buildings and Sites
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Volker Hartkopf, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 01/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

0968995 University of North Carolina at Charlotte; Helene Hilger
&lt;br/&gt;0968929 Carnegie-Mellon University; Volker Hartkopf
&lt;br/&gt;0968975 Appalachian State University; Jeffrey Ramsdell
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Sustainable and Integrated Buildings and
Sites (SIBS) will focus on a joint industry and university research on
integrated building design and site development. The proposed Center includes
the University of North Carolina-Charlotte (UNC-Charlotte, Charlotte NC) as the
lead institution, with research sites at Carnegie-Mellon University (CMU,
Pittsburgh, PA), and Appalachian State University (ASU, Boone, NC).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this planning project are to initiate
formal partnership with various industry partners and government/non-
governmental agencies that have an interest in creating a more sustainable built
environment. The research themes at the proposed IUCRC are aimed at the industry
need to respond to regulatory and public demands for minimizing virgin material
use, water use, non-renewable energy use, and waste generation, and also at the
societal need to protect the natural systems that support human life. The
proposed Center offers the integrated expertise of architecture, building
science, site design and natural system science. Each site director comes from
already existing university centers, so that while sharing expertise through
SIBS, the PIs can leverage existing university support from their respective
sites. The proposed Center will accelerate the rate at which performance-tested,
environmentally sound, and more sustainable buildings and site features are
routinely employed in new and existing buildings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed IUCRC will increase the research capabilities and competitiveness of
the building industry. In addition to broad economic implications, the work of
the Center will have impacts on U.S. efforts to meet climate change targets, and
the critical societal need to sustain natural capital reserves and maintain the
integrity of ecosystem services. Students engaged in SIBS research will be
leaders in the cadres of new architects and engineers to shape the future built
environment. The Center plans to include student opportunities for site and
international exchanges, programmatic professional development and cross-
mentoring programs, and a shared core course on the life cycle relationships
between buildings and natural systems. The PIs also plan to collaborate with
several community colleges in North Carolina and two historically Black
institutions in Charlotte and Greensboro.