* 0968792
* Computational Study for Optimizing Microstructures and Properties of Polymer-Matrix Magnetostrictive Composite Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/10/2009,11/30/2012
* Yu Wang, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2012
* USD 207,008.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education on
composite magnetostrictive materials. The PI will use phase field materials
modeling methods to study the properties and microstructure of polymer matrix
magnetostrictive composites. The work may have impact on the processing of
magnetostrictive composite materials. This computational research focuses on
technologically important composites that are composed of giant magnetostrictive
Terfenol-D particles embedded in an epoxy resin matrix. The properties of these
systems, in a cured epoxy resin, are studied by assuming a free-energy of the
magnetostrictive composite system that includes the magnetocrystalline
anisotropy energy, the domain-wall energy, the long-range magnetostatic dipolar
interactions, the interactions of the magnetic dipoles with an external magnetic
field, and the magneto elastic energy. The temporal evolution of the
magnetization is determined by solving the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation. A
similar technique is used to determine strategies for field-optimized assembly
and control of the Terfenol-D nanoparticles in the uncured epoxy resin. In this
case short-range interactions, which account for viscous drag on each particle,
are included which ultimately provides a force and torque on each of the
nanoparticles.

Understanding such materials furthers technologies aimed at the development and
application of magnetic sensors, actuators, and transducers. Polymer-bonded
Terfenol-D composites significantly increase the electrical resistivity, reduce
eddy current loss, improve mechanical toughness and tensile strength, and
provide magnetostrictive strains comparable to that of monolithic Terfenol-D
alloy, and extend the operational bandwidth. A thrust of this research is a
detailed understanding of the connection between materials properties of
magnetostrictive composites and microstructure and aims to address how
microstructure can be controlled. This computational research complements and is
closely related to a large body of experimental findings in both monolithic
Terfenol-D and polymer matrix magnetostrictive composites, which together enable
effective computer-aided design and fabrication of the composites.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research on the magnetic
properties of a class of polymer-matrix composite materials with an aim to
understanding the relationship between the structure of the composite and its
properties, and how they can be controlled. Polymer-matrix composites are
important materials, composed of magnetic particles embedded in an epoxy resin,
that offer a variety of advantages over crystalline materials composed of the
same magnetic material. They are less susceptible to degradation and mechanical
failure but still respond to applied magnetic fields in a way that is comparable
to conventional crystalline materials. This research has potential impact on
sensor and transducer technologies and will also develop and distribute
computational tools for computational materials design and fabrication of
advanced magnetostrictive composites.

The research is integrated with educational activities that train future
computational materials scientists, develops instructional materials, and
distributes free source codes to the larger community of scientists in this
field. Outreach activities to high school students and teachers are also
included in this effort.



