* 0968489
* SoCS:  Assessing Information Credibility Without Authoritative Sources
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Dragomir Radev, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* laura stanley
* 06/30/2015
* USD 765,994.00

Rumors, smears, and conspiracy theories can now spread quickly through email,
blogs, and other social media. Recipients of such messages may not question
their validity. Moreover, even upon careful investigation and reflection, not
everyone will agree about the validity of particular claims. This project will
develop tools that help people make personal assessments of credibility. Rather
than relying on particular sources as authoritative arbiters of ground truth,
the goal is to minimize the amount of "social implausibility." That is, the tool
will identify assertions that are disbelieved by "similar" people (those who,
after careful consideration, someone tended to agree with in the past) or come
from sources that someone has tended to disagree with. A text mining system for
online media will be developed to extract controversial assertions and the
beliefs expressed by users about those assertions. Comparisons of beliefs about
common assertions, and retractions or updates to beliefs, will be tracked as
part of personalized reputation measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is the
first attempt to formally address the automatic assessment of information
credibility based on text mining and social computational systems. The
techniques will provide the solution to many challenging research problems in
information retrieval and reputation networks. The techniques are broadly
applicable to other domains where the credibility of content and reputation of
sources is a concern, to help a broad class of information consumers. Prototype
tools will be released freely and demonstrated in high schools, thereby building
awareness of the diversity of beliefs around topics of public interest.