* 0968585
* Workshop on Protein Folding Pathways
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2011
* Michael Thorpe, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 05/31/2011
* USD 16,000.00

Understanding the principles behind protein folding remains one of the greatest
challenges in science. The protein folding problem has been studied for three
decades, and despite the great progress in recent years, there are still many
questions to be answered. Only with the synergy of experimentalists and
theoreticians from diverse disciplines will this challenge be answered.
Moreover, there are now new computational tools along with new experimental
techniques being developed for the studies of in vivo and in vitro protein
folding. It is very important to bring together these scientists who are
pioneering these quantitative approaches to create a novel collaboration for
answering the challenges in protein folding. This workshop in Tempe, Arizona,
May 9-13, 2010, will bring together a select group of some of the world's
leading scientists from physics, chemistry, mathematics, and engineering. All
have unique expertise in various aspects of protein folding, experimentation,
and computational modelling. Protein folding has advanced in recent years with
the use of high performance computing. The workshop will address the dynamic and
thermodynamic properties of protein folding and the role of flexibility in
protein sequence-structure-function relationship. Simulation and theoretical
methods will be discussed in application to protein stability, folding, specific
pathways and enzymatic activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are among the
most incredible molecular machines in living systems. Not only are they
accurate, proficient and specific, but they also have the rare ability to
acquire new functions and structures to carry out a diverse set of functions,
from enzymes to cytoskeleton to membrane channels. When a protein folds into its
unique 3-dimensional structure, it starts immediately performing its function
that has been evolved through the years. Thus, protein folding is central in
understanding of living things. The list of workshop participants represents a
truly impressive and wide-ranging cast of established leaders in the field, plus
some younger people who are starting to make an impact. The meeting is designed
to consist of a set of highly focused and intimate sessions. Understanding
protein folding and hence mis-folding, has implications for health and medicine.
We will open the meeting to local attendees from Arizona State University and
the University of Arizona, including graduate students and postdocs.