* 0968505
* Local and Global Aspects of Automorphic L-functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* James Cogdell, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2015
* USD 180,000.00

The problem of Langlands' Functoriality is central in the theory of automorphic
forms and representations. It is a ramification of Langlands' formulation of
non-abelian class field theory, probably the most important problem in modern
number theory, which can be tested in a self-contained manner within the context
of the theory of automorphic representations. The successful approach to this
problem taken by the proposer and his coworkers is via thetheory of L-functions
of automorphic representations and the development of a Converse Theorem for
these L-functions for the general linear group. These L-functions are analytic
invariants that can be attached both arithmetic objects and analytic objects and
are used to mediate between them; Langlands non-abelian class field theory is
one such connection. Converse Theorems allow one to characterize the analytic
side of this equation via the properties of these invariants. The problem of
Functoriality comes from interpreting arithmetic phenomena on the analytic side
in term of these L-function invariants. The main thrust of this proposal is to
develop techniques that will allow for the extension of these efforts. The local
projects are to extend the proposers previous work on Bessel functions and
stability of local L-functions and related invariants and to develop techniques
for computing local L-functions at ramified and infinite places. The global
aspects of the project are to improve the Converse Theorem, which is the engine
that drives the results on Functoriality. Besides applications to extending the
proposers results on Functoriality, which is the main motivation, these results,
local and global, should have applications to unveiling the arithmetic hidden in
special values of L-functions.

The projects in this proposal all fall under the broad rubric of analytic number
theory. At its most basic level, number theory is interested in understanding
the integers. Additively, the integers are quite simple, generated by 1, but
from the point of view of multiplication and factoring they are quite
complicated and mysterious. The multiplicative structure is generated by the
prime numbers and a large swath of number theory is devoted to the study of
prime numbers. This study is full of problems that are simple to state but with
no apparent machinery with which to attack them. Over the ages a vast and subtle
algebraic structure has been built around these problems -- this is algebraic
number theory. But as with many problems, to bring in seemingly incongruous
techniques from other areas can lead to new insights. One such ``incongruous''
area is analysis and the theory of group representations; this leads to the
theory of automorphic forms, a type of analytic number theory. The connection
between the two in its most basic guise is ``class field theory'' and is
mediated by certain analytic invariants, called L-functions. Class field theory
is a deep and hard problem and any light we can shed on this connection lets us
bring the tools of analysis to bear on basic arithmetic problems. This proposal
continues our investigations of these invariants, the L-functions, from both the
algebraic and analytic points of view, in hopes of narrowing the gap between
these two areas in the short term and impacting our understanding of class field
theory in the long term.