* 0968588
* SoCS:  Energy Sustainability and Smart Grids: Fostering and Supporting Cultures of Participation in the Energy Landscape of the Future
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Gerhard Fischer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 12/31/2012
* USD 265,525.00

The vision for the Smart Grid is to support new ways of producing, transmitting,
distributing, and consuming energy to change and improve the sustainability of
future energy environments. This represents a unique opportunity for synergy
between research in social-computational systems and the Smart Grid application
domain. This project will demonstrate that on the one hand, for the Smart Grid
effort to live up to its vision and expectations, technological developments are
necessary but not sufficient: fostering and supporting changes in human behavior
are equally important. On the other hand, social-computational systems face
interesting, specific, and unique research questions to cope with the challenges
associated with Smart Grids.

The project will design and develop: (a) components of an initial theoretical
framework for social-computational systems based on cultures of participation
and (b) initial architecture and interaction mechanisms for HYDRA, an open,
collaborative, living knowledge environment to foster and support ecologies of
different levels of participation. Evaluation in naturalistic settings will
provide requirements and guidelines for future developments as a major outcome.

The project will transcend existing technological research by creating
prototypes of new socio-technical systems to empower human beings and provide
opportunities, incentives, and rewards for changing their behaviors.
Collaborations with local technology companies, local governments, and
international researchers will ensure the broad impact of our research. Beyond
the lessons learned from our specific developments, the theoretical grounding of
our research will make our methodologies, components, architectures,
requirements, and guidelines applicable to a large number of social-
computational systems.