* 0968518
* Graphics Hardware Accelerated Real-Time Machinability Analysis of Free-Form Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/16/2009,07/31/2011
* Roshan D'souza, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 07/31/2011
* USD 117,678.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate new geometric
manufacturability/machinability analysis techniques that will leverage the
massive computational capabilities of commodity computer graphics hardware to
generate real-time feedback to designers. We intend to provide designers with
tools to evaluate geometric machinability during the detailed design phase.
Instead of operating on the continuous-space solid modeling representations of
geometry, our techniques will function in the discretized domain thus
simplifying calculations and reducing numerical errors. These methods will
exploit the capabilities of graphical processing units (GPUs) to handle the
large data-sets which occur when using discrete domain methods. The result will
be a collection of various machinability queries implemented as specialized
filters that will act on tessellated models of the parts (commonly used for
three dimensional display). Manufacturability evaluation will consist of viewing
the free-form surfaces with the appropriate filters within the modified graphics
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will result in
manufacturability evaluation pipelines analogous to the standard graphics
pipeline which will be integrated into contemporary CAD systems for real-time
geometric machinability evaluations. Designers will be able to switch between
the standard graphics display and the machinability evaluation display to
visually identify problem areas in the design during detailed design. As part of
the educational plan and outreach, we will develop visualization tools that will
be used in courses to improve students' understanding of geometric
machinability. These plug-ins will be used in an undergraduate course in
computer aided design and in K-12 outreach programs. Promising undergraduate
students from computer science (as programmers) and mechanical engineering (test
part developers) will be recruited through the Research Scholars Program (RSP)
using REU funding. Broader societal impact is addressed through the effect this
research will have on maintaining the competitiveness of US product designers in
the global market. &lt;br/&gt;