* 0968805
* RUI:  Energy Density Fluctuations, Negative Energy Detection and Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Thomas Roman, Central Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 135,000.00

This award supports research to understand the properties of "negative energy."
One focus is on methods of indirectly detecting this unusual form of energy
using, in part, techniques developed in the field of quantum optics. The PI and
a collaborator will work with an experimentalist to determine if such detection
is feasible. A second major focus will be to study the distribution of energy
fluctuations in the vacuum. Contrary to our experience in everyday life, the
laws of quantum physics tell us that "empty" space is not really empty but
consists of ever-present fluctuations of energy. The average value of the energy
in empty space is zero, as one would expect, but quantum mechanics says that
there must be fluctuations around this mean value. In order to average out to
zero, there must be both negative as well as positive fluctuations. What is the
likelihood then of getting a negative value in a single measurement? Previous
work yields a surprisingly high probability for one spatial dimension. Current
efforts are geared toward trying to determine the form of this "probability
distribution" in the three-spatial-dimensional world in which we
live.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laws of quantum mechanics allow the existence of
states of energy that are lower than that of the vacuum. If there are no
restrictions on negative energy, then bizarre macroscopic effects might become
possible. These would include wormholes and warp drives for faster-than light
travel, violations of the second law of thermodynamics (e.g., refrigerators with
no power sources), and the destruction of black holes. However, the same laws of
quantum mechanics which allow this form of energy to exist severely limit its
behavior. Typically, the longer the negative energy lasts, the smaller its
magnitude. This work lies at the juncture of the fields of quantum theory,
Einstein's general relativity, and thermodynamics. The only direct probe of
negative energy is gravity, but the amounts of negative energy obtainable in the
laboratory are minute. Therefore, one has to resort to indirect detection, such
as measuring the effect of negative energy on atomic decay rates. The issue of
the form of the probability distribution for energy fluctuations is key to
understanding the structure of the vacuum, and has implications for other fields
such as cosmology. Undergraduates are being prepared to engage in this research
through Mathematica-based courses developed by the PI.