* 0968947
* Wire Flyer (WiFly): A cable flying vehicle system for high resolution water column profiling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* David Ullman, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 611,334.00

Profiling the water column to achieve both high vertical and horizontal
resolution from a moving vessel in deep water is difficult. All current
solutions, such as CTD tow-yo?s, moving vessel profilers and undulating tow
bodies are significantly limited by ship speed or water depth, especially beyond
100 meters. As a consequence it is difficult to obtain oceanographic sections
with sufficient resolution to identify many relevant scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s request funding to design and build a versatile
depth-independent system using flying vehicles which slide up and down a towed
wire in a controlled manner using the lift created by wing foils. Prior work has
demonstrated the viability of the proposed concept. Scale model tests have shown
a wide range of achievable glide slopes for cable angles between vertical and 45
degrees. The wing foils provide a novel low power method of propulsion along the
cable, in similar fashion to a sailboat sailing up wind, that utilizes the free
stream velocity of the wire moving through the water. Tests have also
demonstrated effective isolation of cable strum vibration from the towed flyer
body using several spring mount concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
1000 meter system will consist of two cable flying vehicles carrying sensors,
and a depressor weight to keep the cable tight. The flyers will be streamlined,
battery powered vehicles containing packaged electronics, a wing motor actuator,
flotation, acoustic communications hardware, and a passively articulating tail
fin. Data collection, logging and control will be achieved by a small
microprocessor and peripheral circuitry. The proposed vehicles will support CTD
sensors and have payload capacity for a variety of other sensors, such as
fluorometers, dissolved gas and turbidity, applicable for a wide range of
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using of
this project as an undergraduate engineering project makes a lot of sense. It
will develop potentially important technology and methodologies; involves
several different disciplines of engineering, science, project management, at-
sea operations, etc.; is a big enough project to require a team effort over
several phases and has a reasonable scope to be manageable. This profiling
system has broad application in both coastal and deep-water oceanography, and by
having a flexible scientific payload capability on each self-recording flyer
vehicle, should be capable of supporting a range of physical, chemical and
biological sampling systems.