* 0968321
* SoCS:  The Climate Collaboratorium:  A Tool for Large-Scale Model-Centric Collective Decision-Making
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* John Sterman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 248,774.00

The goals of this project are to develop collaborative tools for helping to
solve difficult managerial and societal problems and to test these tools on an
important problem confronting the world today: global climate change. Inspired
by systems like Wikipedia and Linux, the project will develop a global, on-line
forum - called the Climate Collaboratorium - in which thousands of people around
the world can create, analyze, and ultimately select detailed plans for what
humans can do about global climate change. At the core of the system will be an
evolving collection of user-created plans based on computer simulations of the
actions humans can take and the predicted impacts of those actions. Users will
also be able to debate the pros and cons of different plans and vote for the
plans and arguments they find most credible and
desirable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;The primary
intellectual contributions of this work will be lessons about how to design
large-scale model-centric collective decision-making tools and the communities
to use them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;At a minimum, this
on-line forum can help educate the general public about the real issues involved
in global climate change. But more importantly, by constructively engaging a
broad range of scientists, policy makers, and ordinary citizens, this forum may
help develop plans and policies that are actually better than any that would
have otherwise been developed. In short, it could become a combination of a kind
of simulation game for climate change, a Wikipedia for controversial topics, and
an electronic democracy on steroids.