* 0968877
* Center for Design of Analog-Digital Integrated Circuits - NSF I/UCRC Phase III
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Pavan Kumar Hanumolu, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 01/31/2016
* USD 327,000.00

Full Center Proposal (Phase III) for an I/UCRC for the Center for Design of
Analog-Digital Integrated Circuits (CDADIC)

0968877 Washington State University; John Ringo CDADIC is proposing a Phase III
support (third five-year period) for the Center, including support for central
personnel, evaluation and research. The lead of the proposed Center will be
Washington State University (WSU) with site locations at the University of
Washington (UW) and Oregon State University (OSU). CDADIC was established in
1989, and is currently a self-sustaining Center that continues to operate under
the IUCRC model. The Center's research focus is on the design and development of
analog and mixed-signal circuits and systems. While CDADIC has made numerous
advances in this area over the past two decades, the demand for more advanced
circuit design technology continues to grow as does the need to address the
critical national concern of a shrinking domestic workforce in this field. In
the coming years, the Center will continue to provide new technology and highly
trained employees for this industry.

CDADIC has made significant contributions and will continue to do so to the
semiconductor industry and society. The Center has contributed to economic
growth through new technology development and transfer, and new technologies
have been transferred to industry over the years. Industry partners provide a
mechanism for the incorporation of Center output into commercial products. The
wider utilization of devices developed for DoD in commercial applications is a
routine component of the Center business practices. Since its inception, CDADIC
has provided research and educational opportunities to approximately 500
students, with nearly 90% of its graduates going into industry. CDADIC's
educational objectives are well aligned with NSF goals, specifically the Center
commitment to the integration of research and education in order to produce
highly trained analog/mixed-signal designers for employment in industry. Under-
represented students are recruited through a variety of mechanisms such as REU
awards, and recent related research funding resulted in a domestic student
workforce development initiative.