* 0968269
* Collaborative Research: Quantum Vaccum Energy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Stephen Fulling, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2014
* USD 291,044.00

Vacuum (Casimir) energy in quantum field theory is of interest in the physics
community and its connections with some mathematical topics in spectral theory
and asymptotics of differential operators have recently become clearer. Thus
this collaboration between physicists and mathematicians is an effective
approach to further progress. The investigators intend to build on the results
of their previous collaboration to make progress in two areas: (1) Gravitational
significance of vacuum energy: The previous work has demonstrated that vacuum
energy gravitates just as does any other form of energy. For plane geometries
the divergences renormalize the masses of the material bodies confining the
field. This analysis will be extended to general geometries. This requires the
mathematical theory of the asymptotics of (Schwartz) distributions as well as
sound physics. (2) Improved calculational methods: In the presence of curved
surfaces, higher-order corrections are hard to calculate in classical-path
analyses of vacuum energy and eigenvalue distribution. In the presence of sharp
edges or corners (other than right angles) the semiclassical methods break down
quite seriously (diffraction). The project will develop and apply more
fundamental and accurate analyses, known as multiple reflection or multiple
scattering. Previous success in treating the forces between dielectric bodies by
multiple scattering will be extended and applications to practical
configurations such as noncontact gears and multilayer surfaces are being
pursued. Also, the multiple-reflection expansion will be used for accurate
calculation of vacuum energy density and pressure near curved surfaces and edges
and corners.

The broader impact of the project stems partly from its interdisciplinary
nature. The subject not only combines physics and mathematics, but also combines
topics within physics and within mathematics that are ripe for productive
interaction. Vacuum energy is relevant both to new nanotechnological devices and
to cosmological issues (dark energy). Mathematically, the connection between
periodic-orbit theory and vacuum energy has only recently been exploited, and
the implications of vacuum energy for spectral theory have barely been explored.
Undergraduate and graduate student research assistants from both physics and
mathematics will be recruited and their educations will be enhanced, and a
diverse student population is being trained. The project will also foster future
research interactions with other fields (gravitational implications,
nanotechnology, quantum graphs, spectral geometry).