* 0968399
* PIRE: Advancing the US-China Partnership in Electron Chemistry and Catalysis at Interfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2018
* Peter Ford, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2018
* USD 4,048,743.00

This PIRE renewal award expands support for a pioneering U.S.-China partnership
in chemistry, chemical engineering, and materials science, and adds additional
Chinese institutions and a new alliance with two German institutions to the
project. This multidisciplinary research and education effort focuses on
catalytic systems that are technologically important in the development of clean
energy and energy conservation. Global energy and environmental challenges
require international science and technology cooperation and this project takes
advantage of the major roles the U.S. and China play in creating and using
energy. This partnership brings together complementary expertise and diverse
viewpoints and provides U.S. researchers and students with access to expertise,
facilities, and instrumentation not available in the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research focus is modern heterogeneous
catalysis with an emphasis on well-defined nanostructured materials as both
catalysts and catalyst supports. Catalysis occurs when a substance, the
catalyst, changes the rate of a chemical reaction; heterogeneous catalysis
occurs when the catalysts chemical phase (solid, liquid, or gas) differs from
that of the reactants. This project?s research will improve our fundamental
understanding of catalyst structure, function, and activity. It will also unite
nanoscience, catalysis, and photocatalysis approaches to explore phenomena with
relevance to energy-related issues such as H2 production, CH4 utilization,
biomass conversion and CO2 activation and sequestration. Specific research areas
include: quantum dot antenna/photocatalysts for CO2 reduction, selective
oxidation of hydrocarbons by supported and doped metal oxides, spontaneous
formation of catalytic nanostructures, and nanoscale optical imaging and
spectroscopy. The PIRE research team will also explore various types of catalyst
supports, including oxide nanowires, mesoporous carbon and silica, as well as
new gold and platinum complex catalysts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers will participate in 3-6 month research
visits to research laboratories in China. They will be trained in Chinese
language and culture and will have opportunities to develop project management,
communication, and mentoring skills, thus equipping them with the technical,
cultural, and language tools to become effective research leaders. A lecture
course in technology transfer, and its accompanying Technology Transfer Study
Tour to national and multinational companies operating in China, will be
expanded, addressing technology transfer in the U.S. and China, and giving
students a working knowledge of Chinese industrial research and development
(R&amp;D) operations. The project will continue its yearly international
workshops that bring together graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
with domestic and international senior researchers and industrial leaders to
exchange ideas about research directions, with the participation of both Chinese
and German research partners. A new enhancement to the workshop will be a half-
day seminar on ethics in international science, with a particular focus on how
culture influences ethical decision-making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has potential for broad impact well beyond the individual researchers. At the
national level, it embeds U.S. individuals and institutions within a research
alliance that includes two strategically important countries, China and Germany.
It also links U.S. students with collaborating scientists from two U.S.
Department of Energy National Laboratories. At the institutional level, the
funding for increased numbers of graduate students, post-doctoral researchers
and research groups will bolster UCSB's catalysis/surface-science community and
strengthen UCSB's role as a focal point for an innovative international research
network. Industrial R&amp;D is an increasingly globalized endeavor and career
target for U.S. Ph.D. students, and this award will enable UCSB to attract more
high-quality graduate students by providing access to international expertise,
equipment, training, and networking opportunities. This project strengthens
UCSB's institutional capacity to engage in international research and education
partnerships via multiple mechanisms, including wide dissemination of lessons
learned. In the original PIRE award, UCSB and DICP successfully negotiated a
ground-breaking Intellectual Property Agreement, removing many barriers to
collaboration and providing a template for other universities to cultivate
research partnerships in China. The project will continue and expand its campus-
wide activities, including a seminar series on U.S. - China socio-economic,
policy, and scientific topics, and co-hosting events to promote awareness and
interest in Chinese culture. UCSB will pilot the use of its AccessGrid video-
conferencing classroom to internationalize PIRE-related courses and research
activities, thus broadening the university's internationalization via the
cyberinfrastructure. Finally, the project will bring Santa Barbara City College,
a two-year college, with its expertise in the ethics of science and technology,
into the international network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. collaborating
institutions include: University of California at Santa Barbara and Santa
Barbara City College (CA), as well as U.S. Department of Energy's Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory (WA) and Argonne National Laboratory (IL). Chinese
collaborating institutions include: Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics -
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Dalian University of Technology, Xiamen
University, Zhejiang University (Hangzhou), University of Science and Technology
of China (Hefei), Tsinghua University (Beijing), Suzhou Institute of Nano-tech
and Nano-bionics - CAS, and Fudan University (Shanghai). German collaborating
institutions include: Max-Planck-Institut für Biophysikalische Chemie
(Göttingen) and Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft
(Berlin).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is cofunded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemistry.