* 0968976
* EAGER: Single Quantum Dots via 2-Photon Excitation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Paul Selvin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2013
* USD 258,580.00

Lay Abstract 0968976 EAGER: Single Quantum Dots via 2-Photon Excitation Selvin,
Paul R.

Intellectual merit. A two-photon fluorescence microscope will be used to excite
individual quantum dots (q-dots), attached to in vitro and in vivo biological
specimens. Eventually, the aim is to demonstrate super-accuracy and super-
resolution, i.e. accuracy and resolution beyond the diffraction limit of the
microscope (< 10 nm) using the methods that will be developed. Two-photon
excitation has been shown to be incredibly useful as a means to obtain
simultaneous resolution in x, y, and z directions (using the technique known as
confocal microscopy), to minimize the effect of light scattering, and to excite
multiple fluorophores simultaneously with a single excitation wavelength of
light. One-photon excitation of q-dots has already been extremely useful as a
means to achieve very bright q-dot emission, long photostability, and the
accuracy to visualize individual q-dots at the single-molecule level. In this
project, preliminary results indicate that individual q-dots can also be easily
visualized with two-photon microscopy under enhanced conditions that rely on
extremely low light intensities to excite the q-dots. A goal of this project is
to optimize these conditions for 2-photon excitation under biological conditions
in order, for instance, to watch molecular motors move (e.g., kinesin and
myosin), or to catch a phage virus in the act of infecting a bacterium. The PI
has obtained promising preliminary results with wide-field excitation (i.e., not
focusing the light down to a diffraction-limited spot) but without a confocal
effect needed for z-resolution. To obtain z-resolution, the researchers will
repeat the usual methodology but will enhance it in two important ways. First, a
highly sensitive charge-coupled detector (CCD) camera will be used to increase
the speed of image acquisition. Second, a spatial light modulator will be used
to hit the sample with a 10 Ã— 10 array of near-diffraction limited spots,
further increasing speed and also permitting super-accuracy and super-resolution
in all three spatial dimensions.

Broader impacts. The broader goals of the project are to enable new biological
discovery through the development and biological application of two-photon
excitation of individual q-dots. Many of the techniques are (or potentially will
become) extremely simple. Therefore, it is anticipated that the project will
result in generalized techniques that will be widely available to many
laboratories interested in visualizing single molecules in living cells and
other biological specimens. The project will also enhance the training and
expertise of the undergraduates and graduate students who will be involved in
the project.