* 0968987
* I/UCRC for Next Generation Photovoltaics
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* W.S. Sampath, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 02/29/2016
* USD 483,000.00

0968987 Colorado State University; W. S. Sampath NGPV is seeking a Phase I
support (first five years) for the Center, including support for center
personnel, evaluation and research. The proposed Center is a single-university
Center led by the Colorado State University (CSU).

The proposed Center will develop with industry partners, new materials,
precursors, and formulations for manufacturing high performance and low-cost
NGPVs that have great potential for energy sustainability. Novel materials,
processing strategies, and device structures that result from fundamental
materials discovery research at CSU will then be evaluated and optimized with a
focus on thin film CdTe PVs. The aim of the proposed research is to overcome the
scientific challenges outlined in the National CdTe Roadmap.

A solution to deceasing PV manufacturing costs significantly would mean
widespread adoption of solar cell technology worldwide and a decrease in the
worlds reliance on non-renewable energy resources. The proposed deliverables and
outcome of this proposal include: fundamental understanding and advancement of
PV devices, hands-on experience for students to learn PV technology, and
advancing the technology by demonstrating improvement in device performance, and
meeting the goals of the National CdTe roadmap. The Center plans to interface
with some key educational programs (such as the green technology focus), and to
have a team of faculty and students that is diverse in gender, race and
ethnicity.