* 0968710
* Descriptive Set Theory and Its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Alexander Kechris, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2016
* USD 587,258.00

This project deals with the development of the theory of definable actions of
Polish groups, the structure and classification of their orbit spaces, and the
closely related study of definable equivalence relations. It is motivated by
basic foundational questions, like understanding the nature of complete
classification of mathematical objects, up to some notion of equivalence, by
invariants, and creating a mathematical framework for measuring the complexity
of such classification problems This theory is developed within the context of
descriptive set theory, which provides the basic underlying concepts and
methods. On the other hand, in view of its broad scope, it has natural
interactions with many other areas of mathematics, such as model theory,
computability theory, the theory of topological groups and their
representations, topological dynamics, ergodic theory, operator algebras, and
combinatorics. Within this general program it is proposed to study: (i) newly
developed connections between the topological dynamics of automorphism groups of
countable structures and finite Ramsey theory as well as a related semigroup
framework for such connections with infinite Ramsey theory; (ii) the concepts of
genericity and ample genericity in Polish groups and their relation to other
structural properties of groups such as the small index property, uncountable
cofinality, the Bergman finite generation property, fixed point properties for
actions on trees and automatic continuity; (iii) the global theory of ergodic
group actions, including the study of complexity of classification problems
arising in ergodic theory; (iv) aspects of measurable
combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental question that arises in many
fields of mathematics is that of classifying a given collection of objects under
study. This amounts to providing a "catalog" or "listing" of these objects, in
principle not unlike that of cataloging species in biology or stars and galaxies
in astronomy. If such a classification is possible, one has a "complete"
understanding of the mathematical structures involved. Otherwise a more or less
"chaotic" behavior is expected. It is thus very important to understand under
what circumstances a classification is possible. This difficult foundational
question is further complicated by the fact that what constitutes an acceptable
classification is very much dependent on the particular field of mathematics
studied, so the criteria for a "good" classification in one area might not be
appropriate in another. At its basic level, this project aims to develop a
general quantitative theory, which in many situations can precisely measure the
complexity of a classification problem and thus provide objective means by which
one can decide, in any given field, whether a satisfactory classification of the
objects in question is possible. Developments arising in this program often lead
to the study of the symmetries of various mathematical structures and their
dynamics and this is another important aspect of this project.