* 0968042
* GOALI: Shear thickening and defect formation in chemical mechanical polishing slurries
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Kim Williams, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 04/30/2014
* USD 340,311.00

0968042 - Liberatore

The Chemical Mechanical Polishing (CMP) process is a critical piece of
technology enabling the continued reduction in feature size in semiconductors,
with the concomitant increase in feature density. CMP in turn is a major
contributor to continuing increases in microprocessor speed and power with
continuing reductions in cost to performance measures, often referred to as
Moore's Law. Continued reduction of feature sizes on semiconductor chips has
necessitated the recent introduction of low dielectric constant materials as the
insulator between connectors. These low dielectric constant (low k) materials
are generally fragile and much more prone to stress induced damage than the
traditional silicon dioxide material. This stress induced damage can be severe
enough to destroy the insulating capability in the vicinity of the damage event,
leading to a short circuit and failure of the semiconductor device. Thus, a
collaborative effort seeks to obtain detailed understanding of the high shear
rheology of CMP slurries and both temporary and permanent changes to the
particles in the polishing slurry, including both particle size distribution
changes and the structure of any new particle agglomerates produced. Three
objectives will test the hypothesis that shear thickening of concentrated
slurries can cause solid like behavior during polishing, which can lead to
defect formation when polishing dielectric wafer surfaces, particularly the
newly introduced low dielectric constant insulating materials. The objectives
are:

1. Integrate simultaneous structure and rheology studies using rheo-optic
measurements on CMP slurries at process relevant shear rates in the presence and
absence of shear thickening.

2. Quantify temporary and permanent changes to the particle sizes in the slurry
using field flow fractionation (FFF) separation as the shear thickening of CMP
slurries may be caused by a very small fraction of oversized particles.

3. Correlate shear response and particle size to polishing conditions causing
surface defect formation on dielectric wafer surfaces.

Intellectual Merit:

Evaluate whether shear thickening is a reasonable hypothesis for defect
formation in chemical mechanical polishing. Proving or disproving the hypothesis
has immediate implications for slurry design, manufacture and use to enable
future development of semiconductors with smaller feature sizes. Also, this work
will extend the basic understanding of shear thickening in high solids colloidal
dispersions to dispersions composed of particles with their own fractal
structure.

Broader Impact:

The three pronged approach proposed here will provide important insights on the
potential and limitations of the colloidal nature of CMP. This will enhance the
ability of slurry producers and semiconductor manufacturers to optimize both the
formulations and the processing parameters, thereby enabling rapid progress in
future semiconductor production. The research will impact other industries that
utilize large area silicon technology, e.g., flat panel displays and solar cells
and tie into the Colorado School of Mines, NSF Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center on renewable energy. In addition, this research will help
educate graduate and undergraduate students in the fields of rheology and
particle characterization as they apply to problems of real industrial interest.
A senior industrial scientist will spend time teaching in the academic
environment while students will spend months in residence in the industrial
setting.