* 0968445
* SoCS:  OKES: An Open Knowledge Exchange System to Promote Meta-Disciplinary Collaboration Based on Socio-Technical Principles
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2011
* Michael Brownstein, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 249,168.00

New paradigms for socio-technical knowledge exchange, especially within and
across academic disciplines, is important in order to generate insights about
how new knowledge is (and can be) created. Academic researchers regularly use
Web-based tools such as wikis, blogs, electronic repositories and open
publishing systems to promote the open exchange of knowledge, but with varied
levels of success. This work creates an open knowledge exchange system that is
based on socio-technical principles, one conducive to collaborative research and
the generation of new knowledge. This work will facilitate an egalitarian review
process, provide support for micro-contributions as well as full-length reviews
of working papers, and allow for immediate feedback on the relevance and utility
of contributions. The work begins with a conceptual design and develops a socio-
technical system comprised of existing tools as the basis for a KES openly
accessible and available to all. It will gather data for future analysis of user
behaviors and outcomes to assess the relevance, adequacy and performance of the
system?s functional elements.

Intellectual Merit: This work will identify new knowledge about the
participants, interactions, and contributions required for a successful,
community-mediated system of open academic exchange.

Broader Impact: OKES will provide a research-driven blueprint for launching and
operating an open, academic knowledge exchange, which promises to enrich the
academic research climate for many fields. It will help students and
practitioners in industry more actively engage in knowledge generation, and
produce a rich research dataset to support follow-on studies.