* 0968836
* IRES: A US-Saudi Arabia Collaboration on Hydrometeorological Analysis and Modeling in Complex Terrain
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Hatim Sharif, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2013
* USD 47,711.00

0968836&lt;br/&gt;Sharif&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is to support an
International Research Experience for Students (IRES) for US-Saudi Arabia
Collaboration on hydrometeorological analysis and modeling of complex terrain,
by US students to work in the south west of Saudi Arabia. The US PI is Dr. Hatim
Sharif, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of
Texas at San Antonio (UTSA). The foreign collaborator is Dr. Muhammad Al-Zahrani
of King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals (KFUPM) in Dhahran, Saudi
Arabia. The research aims to organize and conduct field experiments in Saudi
Arabia to study the key fundamental processes of the hydrometeorology of arid-
semiarid regions. Five U.S. undergraduate and graduate students led by the PI
will travel to Saudi Arabia to conduct field experiments together with Saudi
counterparts, a faculty member and five students. The experiments will be
followed by data analysis, modeling, and hypothesis-driven research. The field
experiment involves ?hands-on? training for students in a number of
hydrometeorological sensors, field preparation and design of experiments, data
collection and analysis, teamwork, and dissemination of knowledge through
presentations and publications. Because of its unique arid-semiarid climate,
topography, strong diversity in ecology, and susceptibility to flash floods, the
study region (Asir in Saudi Arabia) offers a unique environment to perform
hypothesis-driven research through an international research experience.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research has three objectives to: 1) Evaluate
satellite-based estimates of evapotranspiration in the region; 2) Characterize
orographic controls on the space-time variability of rainfall; and 3)
Characterize dominant runoff mechanisms and quantify partitioning of
precipitation into surface runoff, infiltration, groundwater recharge, and
evapotranspiration through measurement and modeling. The project can eventually
become the first step of a series of focused research projects addressing
surface water and groundwater sustainability in arid-semiarid regions with
similar physiographical settings. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Sustaining our
precious water resource depends upon our ability to understand and predict the
availability and variability of this resource. The project will support 5 U.S.
undergraduate and graduate minority students under a faculty member to conduct
field experiments in a unique region of an extremely dry country. The field
experience will help consolidate inquiry-driven, problem-based learning and
promote development of global perspective in scientific research in a region
with similar climatic characteristics as parts of South Texas and Mexico from
which most UTSA students originate. The program will also help forge
relationships between young researchers from both the U.S. and the Middle East
in the early stages of their careers. Educational activities will expand
collaborations between the UTSA and KFUPM. Two-way mentoring, a colloquium, and
outreach activities will ensure that participating students share the gained
knowledge and experience with peers and pre-college students. The project can
help attract future funding for similar collaborative research activities in
neighboring countries in the Arabian Peninsula and promote integrated bi- or
multi-national water management policies in the region.