* 0968667
* CAREER: Architectural Support for Automated Software Debugging
* CSE,CCF
* 08/17/2009,06/30/2014
* Huiyang Zhou, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2014
* USD 388,229.00

Given their ever increasing complexity, modern software systems are plagued with
software defects, commonly known as bugs. It usually takes significant amount of
efforts for software developers to locate the defects after a program failure is
observed. Due to the limited on-chip resource at the time, traditional
architectural support for debugging was limited to a basic set of primitive
functions like breakpoints and watchpoints. With the advances in semiconductor
technology, the resource constraint is less of a concern and much more powerful
architectural support becomes possible to be implemented to ease software
debugging. In this research, novel software-hardware integrated approaches are
developed to automatically pinpoint software defects and the aim is to develop a
computer that can automatically pinpoint the faulty code in either sequential or
parallel programs and potentially generate a fix to the defect.

Previous work on architectural support for debugging mainly focused on one
aspect of debugging activities including faithfully reproducing program failures
or detecting potential bugs. In comparison, this research introduces novel
architectural support for: bug detection to report potential bugs, bug isolation
to find the relevant bugs based on cause-effect relationship between the
potential bugs and the program failure, and bug validation to generate quick
fixes to the isolated bugs, thereby forming a complete process of automated
debugging. Bugs in both sequential and parallel programs are the target in this
research. For parallel programs, the research investigates thread interaction
under the transactional memory programming model and develops novel automated
debugging schemes for concurrency bugs. The research also includes the prototype
of the novel architectural supports to evaluate their effectiveness with real-
world applications.