* 0968391
* PIRE: International Collaboration and Education in Ice Core Science (ICE-ICS)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2017
* Edwin Waddington, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 4,524,667.00

This interdisciplinary PIRE project will focus on the history of Earth's
environment as recorded in ice of the Polar Regions. The project brings together
teams from eight U.S. universities and five international research institutions
located in Denmark, France, Switzerland, and Japan. Together these partners will
build on recent technical developments and utilize samples secured via major
international ice core-drilling programs for the purpose of refining
glaciological models and advancing the study of ice cores as records of climate.
This will be accomplished by developing and applying the next generation of
laboratory techniques and mathematical tools to study ice cores. Specifically,
the PIRE team expects to produce: 1) new analytical tools and measurements for
trace gases in ice and new measurements of dust and isotopes in polar regions,
2) a mathematical model of the physics of atmospheric gases trapped in snow that
is changing from firn ice to glacial ice, and 3) useful new data and models to
elucidate mechanisms of abrupt climate change that occurred in the past. If
successful, results should yield new insights to help describe the link between
climate change and the biogeochemical cycling of greenhouses gases on a global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By drawing on complementary U.S. and international
expertise, facilities and data, this PIRE collaboration in ice core science is
expected to: improve the rate and quality of data acquisition about past changes
in climate and atmospheric conditions, develop promising new measurements that
inform us about past environmental conditions, and improve our understanding of
their meaning. Furthermore, chief among its broader impacts, the ICE-ICS PIRE
should provide a strong, more coherent focus for the U.S. ice core community and
contribute to an increasingly significant international presence for that
community, which should enhance the long-term role of U.S. investigators in
future international climate-related projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the
PIRE education component, a cohort of five U.S. post-doctoral researchers and
sixty-three undergraduate and graduate students will receive training and
contribute to the overall ice core science agenda in cooperation with senior
U.S. researchers and leading investigators from the foreign institutions. Across
this impressive research and institutional network, a carefully integrated five-
year set of educational activities will incorporate international research
visits and workshops as well as short courses, virtual seminars, and networking
within the U.S. ice core community. Post-doctoral researchers and graduate
students will gain additional experience in planning multi-investigator
projects, teaching, and mentoring. The PIRE collaborative experience is designed
to provide a unique training opportunity for these junior U.S. participants who
should be well positioned to lead the next generation of polar research, which
has rapidly become an important international field of endeavor. Overall, the
extensive ICE-ICS team of researchers, students and institutions is poised to
deliver an innovative and broad spectrum of science associated with the study of
ice cores, in a way not possible to achieve in isolation. The project will also
have a significant impact on education of U.S. polar scientists who are
typically trained at one institution without access to the full spectrum of
disciplines necessary to take advantage of research opportunities in polar
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current U.S. study of the ice core record is
distributed among a number of small university research groups scattered widely
around the country. Different research structures in Europe and Asia have led to
several recent major scientific successes. This project will focus U.S.
investigators and students around a common theme with international partners
creating a more integrated U.S. community that can plan and implement ambitious
projects and provide a formal venue for interaction with international groups.
The project will also enhance opportunities for sharing and collaboration in
graduate student and post-doctoral education by developing the connections
needed for a sustained level of international collaboration in graduate and
postdoctoral education beyond the duration of the award.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. institutions will be linked together in this
interdisciplinary network and gain experience with joint international support
of graduate students and post doctoral researchers. The project will also
broaden the virtual international reach of U.S. institutions as PIRE team
members will use video-conferencing regularly, develop remote operation of
research equipment, and engage in interactive international modelling by making
the firn ice model widely accessible as it is being developed and
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participating U.S. institutions are: Oregon State
University, Dartmouth College (NH), Scripps Institution of Oceanography at
University of California-San Diego, Desert Research Institute (NV), The
Pennsylvania State University, University of Washington, Columbia University
(NY), and University of Colorado. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International partner
institutions are: The Niels Bohr Institute-University of Copenhagen (Denmark),
University of Grenoble (France), Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et l'
Environment (LSCE) (France), University of Bern (Switzerland), and the National
Institute of Polar Research (Japan). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIRE grant is
supported cofunded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering and
the Office of Polar Programs.