* 0968726
* RUI: Aspects Of Non-Local Dynamics In String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Vatche Sahakian, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 60,000.00

Non-local dynamics is an emerging interest in physics across many disciplines,
from condensed matter physics to particle physics to quantum gravity. This
project explores the effects of non-local dynamics as realized in the context of
a certain class of string theory models of particular interest to cosmology. The
string theory embedding of these models assures that the exotic frameworks
encountered are physically and logically self-consistent. Yet, such non-local
systems remain poorly understood, with many counter-intuitive features and
apparent paradoxes. This project aims to unravel general features of non-local
dynamics as they arise in this class of string theory models, and apply these
results to modeling the primordial plasma of the universe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also involves undergraduate education as an
integral part. This is achieved through a two-pronged approach: (1) through the
direct participation of undergraduate students in the research within a program
that has already proven to be highly successful in involving undergraduate
seniors in string theory research; and (2) through the development of a senior-
level undergraduate course and textbook to help prepare students for competitive
graduate programs in theoretical physics. The project also includes a multi-
pronged community outreach component involving a web-based instructional
resource, and a public lecture series on current topics at the frontier of
theoretical physics.