* 0968965
* CSEDI: Testing Resolution of Deep Earth Seismic Structure Under the Pacific Using Geodynamic Models
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,11/30/2015
* Scott King, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 11/30/2015
* USD 295,900.00

The temperature and composition structure in the Earth's lower mantle provides
important clues to the chemical differentiation and dynamics of the planet,
especially in regard to how heat is transported from the core to the mantle. A
large-scale, slow seismic-velocity anomaly in the lower mantle beneath the
Pacific has been imaged in tomographic studies. The thermal and compositional
structure of this anomaly remains poorly understood. This research integrates
seismological and geodynamical efforts to investigate important issues in
understanding the structure of this deep seismic anomaly. We will use
thermochemical convection models to develop candidate mantle structures that can
be investigated with seismic wave propagation simulations using realistic
earthquake and receiver geometries. This will allow us to identify seismic
phases that are sensitive to differences between the candidate mantle structures
and to investigate whether finite-frequency theory provides additional insight
beyond ray-theory for the geometry of these structures, and how 3-D attenuation
structure affects our interpretation of tomographic images.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses several challenging problems in
understanding the thermal and chemical structure in the Pacific lower mantle
through seismic wave propagation in thermo-chemical plume models with focuses on
(1) the sensitivity of seismic waves to 3-D variations in temperature and
compositional in the lower mantle; (2) the effects of different scaling
parameters in translation between temperature and compositional anomalies to
seismic wave speed and anelastic attenuation and (3) the resolution limits of
current seismic data (including USArray data) and seismic tomographic methods
(ray theory and finite-frequency theory) in imaging the structure of the Pacific
lower mantle and distinguishing between different plume models including 1) the
'standard' isochemical whole mantle model, with a cluster of narrow plumes under
the central Pacific, 2) a thermochemical 'dome' (or pile) under the central
Pacific with plumes arising from the interface, and 3) an isolated, sluggish
lower mantle with upper mantle derived plumes. Seismological challenges,
including quantifying the relative importance of anelastic attenuation and
focusing-defocusing effects, and tradeoffs between elastic and anelastic
structure will be addressed with full wave propagation simulations in a variety
of thermochemical plume models.