* 0968352
* Using Images and Optimized Workflow for Automated Data Acquisition of Mexican Plant Specimens at MICH
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2012
* James Beach, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 09/30/2012
* USD 344,408.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Michigan under the direction of
Dr. Inigo Granzow-de la Cerda to use a high throughput method for capturing data
from herbarium labels from 100,000 plant specimens in the University of Michigan
Herbarium (MICH) that were collected from Mexico and Central America. The
collection at MICH is one of the largest in North America for plants from this
region. The project will expand upon an earlier project and add to an online
catalog for these specimens that can be used by researchers in plant taxonomy
and conservation biology worldwide. A key innovation of the work is to use
software called HERBIS, which uses optical character recognition (OCR) and
natural language processing to automate the extraction of data printed on
existing herbarium labels and compile the information into a database. This is
one of the first projects to employ HERBIS on a large scale, and a module will
be developed for the NSF-sponsored collection software called SPECIFY that will
be made available to the community at large. The project leaders at Michigan
will collaborate with researchers in Mexico at CONABIO, the federal institution
of Mexico charged with studying biodiversity in that country. The
interdisciplinary project will employ students in computer science and
information science. Undergraduate students in the US and Mexico will be trained
in database design and data entry, image capture and processing of textual data,
and herbarium management. The project will enhance the biodiversity data for
Mexico, in which more than 10% of the world's flowering plant species occur.