* 0968295
* Collaborative Research:  SoCS: Analysis of Social Media Driven By Theories of Political Psychology
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* David Redlawsk, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2014
* USD 388,111.00

Understanding how people make decisions in complex settings is crucial in many
application areas, including marketing, intelligence analysis, and political
decision making. Traditionally, human decision-makers are modeled as rational
agents seeking to maximize some mathematical measure of utility. In fact,
however, people are overwhelmed in information-rich environments, and have
developed cognitive and emotional strategies to navigate such environments. One
such strategy is "motivated reasoning", where information is first evaluated
subconsciously for emotional content, with the goal of maintaining an existing
emotional commitment, and cognitive processing of the information is then
conditioned on this emotional evaluation. Political scientists have demonstrated
motivated reasoning in evaluation of both candidates and issues. In general,
decision-making and information-gathering are strongly influenced by emotion,
prior knowledge, and the social communities to which a person belongs. Evidence
suggests that accurate models of human decision-making must be complex enough to
model not only utility, but prior knowledge and beliefs, human cognitive
abilities, and social context. Building such cognitive models requires
substantially extending the state-of-the-art in machine learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past, the ability of researchers in political
psychology to develop such complex models of decision-making was limited by the
amount of data obtainable obtain from surveys or human-subject experiments. The
recent explosion of on-line political communities provides an opportunity to
overcome this limitation. We will model human behavior for socially-driven
information gathering and decision-making tasks - specifically for political
decisions - by combining human-subject experiments with analysis of large
datasets of social media and social interactions.