* 0968534
* Planning Visit for Collaborative Efforts in Research and Education in Advanced Manufacturing between Northern Illinois University and the CSIR in South Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2011
* Federico Sciammarella, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2011
* USD 16,104.00

This proposal is for Dr. F.M. Sciammarella (PI) to travel to South Africa in
June of 2010 with an NIU postdoctoral student to visit the South African Council
for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR). This visit will help solidify the
existing relationship that the PI cultivated with the CSIR and strengthen their
laser materials processing research proposals for future NSF funded projects.
Dr. Sciammarella's research in laser assisted machining is just one of the
research efforts that he will present to the National Laser Center (NLC) of the
CSIR. The NLC conducts research on the laser deposition of advanced alloys,
under the guidance of Herman Burger, director of the NLC's laser materials
processing group. The PI will present micromanufacturing research results from
NIU to other CSIR divisions. CSIR will make presentations on their research in
laser cladding and host round table discussions on current trends in advanced
manufacturing capabilities available in South Africa. This type of exchange will
facilitate the discussion on how to proceed with future collaborative efforts
and facilitate the exchange of research approaches and
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the goals of this visit are to 1) discuss a
model that can be used to create an international, interdisciplinary experience
for both undergraduates and graduates; 2) work on generating at least two
proposals to NSF in laser materials processing to the Materials Processing and
Manufacturing (MPM) Division; 3) make available any initiatives and/or outcomes
generated during this planning visit to the manufacturing industry in the US and
South Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Creating three
dimensional structures (i.e. biomedical implants, gears, turbine blades) using
lasers for all aspects of manufacturing is relatively new. The main advantage of
laser processing is that it is possible to make the properties of the new parts
better than the original ones. One drawback to laser technologies is that
repeatable properties even within the same batch are often times difficult to
obtain. This is attributed to the lack of a comprehensive analysis on
laser/materials interactions. This planning visit would establish an
international collaborative effort to resolving this and other issues related
with laser materials processing. With the wide range of experience between Dr.
Sciammarella in laser assisted machining using diode fiber lasers and Mr.
Burger's in laser cladding usingCO2 and Nd: YAG lasers a great deal of laser
materials interactions can be put into a comprehensive research effort. One such
interaction that is important to understand is net power absorbed in laser
material processing. This net energy determines a majority of the metallurgical
and mechanical properties of the material undergoing laser
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This planning visit will result
in a series of research proposals that will enable continued growth in laser
materials processing. This will benefit the U.S. and South African manufacturing
industry, as they will be able to build very intricate components with relative
ease at lower costs. Furthermore, new channels of communication between these
two continents will create more opportunities for industrial growth. The
educational component will have a high impact since a postdoctoral student will
be involved for this planning visit. With this trip, the postdoctoral student
will gain the necessary experience to work on future collaborations with the
CSIR. This project will also have a direct impact on younger African American
students from Chicago's Austin Polytechnical Academy a public engineering high
school. The PI has done volunteer work with them in the past and served as
mentor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Office of International
Science and Engineering, with co-funding from the Engineering Directorate's
Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation.