* 0968583
* SoCS:  Collaborative Research:  Leveraging Others' Insights to Improve Collaborative Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Sara Kiesler, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2015
* USD 265,915.00

This research seeks to improve collaborative analysis in fields such as criminal
justice, intelligence, and epidemiology by developing tools that capture and
represent essential elements of analytic conversations. The work has three major
aims: (a) understanding how team hypotheses, insights, and problem orientation
are reflected in their conversations; (b) developing and testing natural
language processing (NLP) techniques to detect teams? hypotheses, insights, and
problem orientation; and (c) developing and testing methods to communicate the
results of NLP analyses to provide teams with feedback on their own and other
teams? reasoning processes. These goals are addressed through behavioral
studies, NLP research, and tool development and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The project provides unique
contributions in four areas: (a) understanding how team analytical processes are
evidenced in team communication; (b) advancing the state-of-the art in NLP by
developing discourse analysis techniques for use in collaborative analysis
applications; (c) applying NLP techniques to the support of team analytical
processes; and (d) designing interfaces to provide feedback within and across
teams. The research also furthers the training and education of undergraduate
and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The project has the potential
to improve collaborative investigative analysis in many fields of critical
importance to society, including criminal justice, intelligence, science, and
epidemiology. The results will provide new tools for analysts, recommendations
for organizational practices to improve the quality of collaborative analysis,
new methods for training professional analysts, and new learning tools for
graduate programs in fields such as epidemiological analysis and criminal
justice.