* 0968561
* SoCS:  Crowdsourcing Creativity:  Experiments in Design
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Jeffrey Nickerson, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2015
* USD 747,708.00

The Internet makes possible a different kind of design, based on a new
phenomenon: crowdsourcing creativity, where many individuals perform small
design tasks for fun, nominal compensation, or both. What if the iterative
application of a crowd's energy is used to generate, combine and refine ideas
and possible solutions to social and technical problems? If the sequential
application of crowdsourcing to idea generation works well, then many difficult
design challenges might be addressed. If crowdsourcing has limits, then finding
these limits will provide a more focused path for the growth of peer production.
During the course of this project, participants, drawn from the general public,
will generate initial ideas, then combine the many different ideas of their
peers, seeking to solve difficult and open-ended design problem through a large
scale process of combination, evaluation, selection, and combination again,
cycling through these steps until a solution is converged upon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this research lies in the design
and results of experiments that study crowdsourcing in the idea discovery
process. The Broader Impact of this research lies in its potential harnessing of
human intellectual power to attack challenging problems whose solution will
affect every one of us. The project is potentially transformative, in that the
crowdsourcing of important problems might accelerate by orders of magnitude our
progress on pressing social and technological issues.