* 0968254
* Prototype Systems of Multidimensional Conservation Laws
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Barbara Keyfitz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 07/31/2013
* USD 147,707.00

This project studies two-dimensional Riemann problems for systems of
conservation laws, including the Euler equations of gas dynamics. The theory of
multi-dimensional conservation laws is in its infancy, and this analysis of
Riemann problems is a first step that will indicate the types of singularities
that arise in multi-dimensional systems. Recent numerical simulations have
presented evidence of unexpectedly singular behavior at the formation points of
Mach stems. These studies call for analytical confirmation, and insight will be
gained from simple prototype examples. In the self-similar approach, the systems
change type -- hyperbolic far from the origin ("supersonic flow") and of mixed
hyperbolic-elliptic type near the origin ("subsonic region"). Analysis of the
subsonic solution gives rise to free boundary problems in mixed-type partial
differential equations with mixed boundary conditions (Dirichlet and oblique
derivative). Earlier work solved such free boundary problems locally near shock
reflection points, but only for one simple interaction (regular reflection) and
only for simplified systems (where the elliptic equation decoupled from the
hyperbolic system). The current project will develop new techniques for the more
complicated problems that arise when the boundary condition is not uniformly
oblique, and when the equations in the subsonic system do not decouple. Finally,
study of a prototype example of diverging rarefactions problems will shed light
on singular Mach stem formation points.

Conservation laws model fundamental problems in aerodynamics and continuum
mechanics. Better understanding has consequences in real world applications. For
example, the large-scale numerical simulations that form the basis of weather
and climate prediction and of nuclear reactor safety analysis are based on
partial differential equations in the form of conservation laws. Theoretical
advances, particularly in the analysis of singular behavior, will find their way
into making numerical codes more efficient and more reliable. In carrying out
this research, the investigators will build on success in introducing beginning
researchers, including members of groups underrepresented in mathematics, to the
theory of conservation laws, and in expanding their career horizons.