* 0968799
* Coherent and Incoherent Control of Electronic, Vibrational, and Rotational Wavepackets with Ultrashort Laser Pulses
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* George Gibson, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2014
* USD 430,000.00

Coherent control of chemical reactions has been a driving force in laser physics
since the invention of the laser itself. The group will use this full arsenal of
control techniques on molecules to answer basic questions about the interaction
of molecules with intense laser fields. The broadest goal is to understand the
transition from molecular to atomic behavior in molecules as a function of
internuclear separation. In addition, over the past several years, an entirely
new concept has evolved from studies of molecules in intense laser fields that
we call "incoherent" or "dissipative" control. Unlike traditional coherent
control, this new method actually works better at higher temperatures and may
lead to methods for controlling chemical reactions at room
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in high-harmonic generation (HHG),
attosecond physics, and short-pulse x-ray free electron lasers has exploded over
the past decade. However, research in these fields requires huge investments of
time and money. We can study and test many aspects underlying the physics of
these processes more quickly and inexpensively at a small University-based lab
to support projects at large facilities. In addition, the experiments require
state-of-the-art laser systems, giving students hands-on experience with the
latest laser and optical technologies and preparing them for a variety of
research-based academic or high-tech industrial career paths.