* 0968383
* Collaborative Research:  A Pilot Study of Simultaneous Parameter and State Estimation in Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere General Circulation Models Using the Ensemble Kalman Filter
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Zhengyu Liu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 08/31/2016
* USD 559,712.00

Ocean Atmosphere General Circulation Models (OAGCM) exhibit significant model
biases, e.g., the tropical bias in the Intertropical Convergence Zone cold
tongue complex. A significant part of such biases is due to uncertainties in the
model parameters. Thus far, however, parameter tuning in OAGCMs remains
rudimentary. This collaborative project will develop a novel strategy for
systematic parameter optimization in OAGCMs, using an ensemble based data
assimilation strategy, focusing on the outstanding tropical bias problem.
Building on an existing coupled data assimilation system, an adaptive coupled
ensemble Kalman Filter system (AcEnKF) for a simultaneous estimation of model
parameter and state, will be developed. Different assimilation techniques to
search for an effective method of parameter optimization in OAGCMs will be
studied, as also coupled dynamics relevant to parameter optimization in the
tropical climate system for both the climatology and climate variability. The
work is expected to give the first comprehensive evaluation of the ensemble
based strategy for parameter optimization in OAGCMs. The study will also shed
light on the mechanism of the coupled dynamics of the tropical climate system
and its sensitivity to model parameters. In spite of potential difficulties,
this pilot study represents a significant step forward in the improvement of
OAGCMs. This activity has significant broader impacts: it will lay a foundation
for a systematic improvement of OAGCMs and, more generally, future coupled earth
system models.