* 0968982
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC Center for e-Design
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Kemper Lewis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 01/31/2012
* USD 13,000.00

PROGRAM DIRECTOR'S RECOMMENDATION

IIP 0968982 University of Buffalo-SUNY Lewis

The University of Buffalo-SUNY (UB) is planning to join the Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) entitled "Center for e-Design and
Realization of Engineered Products and Systems (e-Design)" which currently is a
multi- university center comprised of Virginia Tech (lead institution), the
University of Massachusetts-Amherst, and the University of Central Florida. The
mission and vision of the existing e-Design Center is to research and develop
methods tools that support the realization of a new design paradigm that can be
used to develop new engineered products and systems.

UB requests funding for becoming a fourth site of the NSF Center for e-Design
under the leadership of Professor Kemper E. Lewis. The research efforts at UB
will support the e-Design center's long term goal of establishing a new paradigm
where products/systems are conceived and produced in a cyber-enabled domain with
the full participation of all key stake-holders including designers,
manufacturers, engineers, OEMs and consumers. There are three areas at UB with
strong technical overlap with the current research program of the existing
center. The fourth thrust, motion simulation and its application to
transportation, is an excellent and unique niche for this site. The innovative
projects in this proposal bridge the four thrust areas and demonstrate the
potential for interaction with the other university partners.

A multi-disciplinary team including six academic departments is engaged. The
research will have broader impact through a strong cohort of industry partners,
including medical, foods and infrastructure companies. The research thrusts
identified will produce tools useful to a wide range of industries. The proposed
effort at UB will contribute to the successful development and preparation of
graduate and undergraduate students. Students associated with the Center will
receive career development opportunities, attendance of and presentations at
interdisciplinary conferences and workshops, as well as training in the ethical
conduct of research. The addition of UB also contributes to the diversity of the
Center, with 40% of participating faculty being women. The PI and other UB
faculty will continue to recruit underrepresented students, including partnering
with a number of university programs aimed at providing research opportunities
for these students. The diversity efforts are leveraged by partnership with
existing programs at UB, such as CSTEP, LSAMP and McNair.