* 0968483
* SoCS: Collaborative Research: Information Farming: Intelligent Interfaces for an Online Production Community
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Loren Terveen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2015
* USD 375,000.00

Social production communities can be powerful engines for harnessing the efforts
of many individuals to produce valuable artifacts and knowledge. However, their
success critically depends on members' ability to effectively contribute. As the
size and complexity of the community grows, so do challenges to members'
understanding of the content and collaboration. These challenges decrease the
ability of the team to work together, and the quality of the work
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers propose partnering humans with
intelligent interfaces that improve contribution effectiveness. They will create
intelligent algorithms and interfaces that go beyond supporting people simply
foraging for information to information farming, in which members of the
community work together to plant the seeds of the information the community
needs, nurture the growth of those seeds into valuable information, and weed out
the information that detracts from the value of the
farm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is based on theories of human
information processing, and will extend those theories to environments in which
people are producing information. The researchers will explore new algorithms
and interfaces based on the extended theories, and will carry out studies to
understand how the theories work in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social
production communities are economically and socially important. Open source
software runs large parts of our economy; Wikipedia is revolutionizing knowledge
production and consumption, providing free access to one of the largest bodies
of knowledge gathered in human history. The proposed research will directly
improve Wikipedia, and will contribute to understanding how social production
communities work.