* 0968682
* CAREER: Artificial Pattern Formation with Synthetic Gene Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Ron Weiss, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 04/30/2011
* USD 104,029.00

Biological pattern formation is an elaborate process that requires
spatiotemporal coordination of cellular activities. To-date, research has
focused on studying naturally occurring patterns either by devising abstract
models that explain the formation of these patterns or by characterizing
relevant genetic circuits and biochemical interactions. The knowledge gained
from understanding how cells form patterns has practical applications in tissue
engineering, biosensing, and biomaterial fabrication. However, to fully realize
the potential of these applications one must be able to form arbitrary patterns,
e.g. tissues with new arrangements of cells. Existing efforts to coerce cells to
form particular patterns have largely focused on setting up scaffolds and
appropriate environmental conditions, but such efforts are limited because they
rely on the cells' existing genetic circuitry. The approach in this project is
fundamentally different: the focus is to engineer de novo patterns by building
synthetic gene networks and in the process gain a greater understanding of
pattern formation. The project strives to create a new engineering discipline
for generating user-specified artificial differentiation patterns. The main
component of this discipline is the tight integration of modeling tools with
experimental work. Based on these models, novel genetic circuits will be built
and validated experimentally. These circuits will direct cells to form stable
and dynamic spatiotemporal gene expression patterns - lines, standing waves,
Turing Patterns, Conway's Game of Life, and branched structures. Results from
the project will serve as the basis for a pattern formation toolkit that will be
used to engineer more complex patterns, enable future applications, and
elucidate the underlying principles governing natural pattern formation.

The research outlined here will have a broad impact both in academia and
industry. This project will advance knowledge in a number of important areas in
systems biology including the understanding of robust gene networks, noise in
gene expression, gene regulation, cell-cell communications, in addition to
providing mathematical models for intracellular and intercellular systems.
Research in multicellular pattern formation is not only fundamental to
understanding organism development and coordinated cell behavior, but also has
practical applications. For example, micro-pattern formation will benefit
nanotechnology where such patterns could be used for bacterial nano-fabrication.
Also, the ability to construct synthetic patterns will contribute to the field
of tissue engineering, where such patterns could be utilized to differentiate
stem cells into tissues and organs. In the long term, knowledge gained from this
research into the coordination of cell behaviors will be applicable to areas
outside of biology, including the design of robust multi-agent systems such as
computer networks. Perhaps the most important contribution will be through the
multidisciplinary education of students and future leaders in the field. This
will be accomplished through various activities including the Burroughs Wellcome
Fund and the Synthetic Biology Summer Program, where the focus is on recruiting
and providing specific funding for underrepresented minorities and women.