* 0968209
* 2010 Electronic Processes in Organic Materials Gordon Research Conference; Mount Holyoke College; South Hadley, MA; July 25-30, 2010
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2011
* Zhenan Bao, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 03/31/2011
* USD 7,500.00

TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Gordon Research Conference on "Electronic
Processes in Organic Materials" is supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry (SSMC) and Electronic and Photonics (EPM) programs and provides an
ideal setting to discuss in depth transformative developments with leading
scientists from academia, government, and industry. The field of organic
electronics and photonics has enjoyed tremendous progress since the discoveries
in the late seventies of conducting polymers and in the late eighties of
efficient electroluminescent devices based on small organic molecules or
polymers. The market for organic electronics-based products is now projected to
reach over $30 billion by 2015. Various sessions will be devoted to the
chemistry, physics, biology, materials science, optical science, nanoscience,
engineering, and device fabrication of electrically-active and optically-active
organic materials. This conference has consistently hosted presentations at the
cusp of important new directions for the field. Meetings have driven progress at
critical stages of developments in areas including organic opto-electronics,
polymer light-emitting diodes, single-molecule studies, organic electronics, and
organic solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key
researchers will be present to address the critical questions through a
combination of presentations and informal discussions. Invited speakers and
session chairs represent the highly interdisciplinary nature of the Organic
Materials field with experts from chemistry, physics, material science and
engineering, chemical engineering, and electrical engineering with both
experimental and theoretical approaches. Speakers and sessions chairs are from a
diverse background, including 7 from outside US and 4 female. A primary goal of
this funding request is to assist researchers in the early stages of their
careers (students, postdoctoral researchers, and/or new faculty) to participate
in the conference and join the "Electronic Processes in Organic Materials"
community. The conference will enhance their research programs and proposals by
inspiring goals and ideas at the leading edge of the field. At the same time,
the intimate atmosphere of the conference will allow them to have more exposure
of their work within the community and make important connections.