* 0968756
* Differential inclusions in quasiconformal analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Leonid Kovalev, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2014
* USD 100,211.00

The proposal focuses on weakly differentiable mappings with first-order weak
derivatives. This class includes, but is not limited to, quasiconformal and
quasiregular mappings. A differential inclusion restricts the essential range of
the derivative to a certain set of matrices. Main sources of differential
inclusions are differential geometry and the theory of nonlinear partial
differential equations. Typically, various notions of convexity and
connectedness in the matrix space drive the analysis of existence and regularity
of solutions. One of basic questions is which differential inclusions imply
local invertibility. Invertibility is often established in two steps: first it
is shown that the mapping is discrete and open (that is, a branched cover); the
second step is to prove that the branch set is empty. Implementation of each
step encounters problems that continue to challenge the available methods of
analysis and topology. The proposal also brings the tools of geometric function
theory into the field of ordinary differential equations. In the presence of
canonical coordinates on the Euclidean space the driving vector field in an
autonomous system of differential equations can be identified with a mapping,
and the geometry of this mapping turns out to be related to the uniqueness of
solution. Thirdly, the techniques introduced in quasiconformal analysis are also
effective in the studies of smooth (e.g., harmonic) mappings, which in turn find
applications in the theory of minimal surfaces&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minimal
surfaces are mathematical models of thin films, for instance soap bubbles. Our
understanding of their shapes develops through the solution of extremal
problems. For example, how far apart can one move two boundary curves of a
minimal surface before the surface breaks down? The principal investigator will
apply the techniques of geometric function theory to such extremal problems.
This approach is not limited to models of thin films and is also relevant in the
studies of elastic deformation of solid materials. Another part of the proposal
addresses uniqueness and stability of solutions of ordinary differential
equations, which are commonplace in physics and engineering. They appear as
equations of motion for one or several particles, with the number of particles
affecting the dimensionality of the problem and the geometry of vector fields
involved. Geometric function theory allows one to establish the uniqueness of a
solution in situations where the standard results of the theory of ordinary
differential equations do not apply. The PI works with post-docs and graduate
students and organizes the Syracuse Analysis Study group.