* 0968749
* Clean-Slate Security-Driven Architecture Workshop and Information Session
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Nicholas Feamster, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2011
* USD 99,306.00

Among the activities in CISE/CNS related to security are Trustworthy Computing
(TC) , and Future Internet Design (FIND). For the former, one of the five
emphasis areas declared in the TC solicitation is Security Architecture. For the
latter, one of the objectives of the NSF activity towards a future Internet is
security. GA Tech. proposes to run two related workshops: the first on Security-
Driven Architecture (SDA) and the second an information meeting in connection
with future directions for FIND towards research on architectures wherein one of
the design objectives is security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, co-funded
by NSF and DARPA, is providing travel expenses attendant to two workshops, which
took place July 28-29, 2009 in Arlington, VA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
workshop, called Secure-Driven Architecture (SDA) is driven by the possibility
of redesigning systems (hosts, networks, applications) to be secure from the
start; this is in contrast with the current industry practice of patching
systems when vulnerabilities are discovered (mostly by attackers) and with the
current research practice of studying ?point? solutions that address particular
security issues. The premise of the workshop is that by starting from scratch it
could be possible to design a system far more secure than is promised by the
current research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is organized into the
following six sessions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Multi-faceted architecture,
which considers new design paradigms &lt;br/&gt;2. Cryptography as an enabler of
security through a system &lt;br/&gt;3. Network security, where the intention is
to secure the network and for the network to help mitigate attacks on end-
points. &lt;br/&gt;4. Host security &lt;br/&gt;5. Formal methods and other
mostly theoretical concepts in support of security &lt;br/&gt;6. Wrap-up and
next steps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second workshop, concerned with New
Directions in Networking, had as its purpose informing the community of new
opportunities for the funding of substantial projects to design new network
architectures where security is one of several objectives. The opportunities
would be an expansion of NSF?s current FIND (Future Internet Design) activity
towards actual architectures. Through the discussions of the workshop, a follow-
on meeting, called a Summit, is planned wherein actual architectures would be
presented and evaluated. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;