* 0968844
* Collaborative Research:  I/UCRC for Water Equipment and Policy
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2010,04/30/2016
* Daniel Zitomer, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 04/30/2016
* USD 348,992.00

I/UCRC for Water Equipment and Policy

0968887 University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee; Erik Christensen 0968844 Marquette
University; Michael Switzenbaum

The Center for Water Equipment and Policy (WEP) will focus on improving water
quality and understanding related technologies. The University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee (UWM) AND Marquette University (MU) are collaborating to establish the
proposed center, with UWM as the lead institution.

The proposed Center will focus on improving water equipment based on recent
advances in materials, sensors, and control hardware/software. The Center will
conduct policy studies including water demand and risk analysis. A goal is to
improve the profitability of water equipment manufacturers and to improve the
industry competitiveness and ability to adopt new technology for enhanced
economic development. The five potential research thrust areas that form the
basis of WEP include: Advanced Sensor and Control System Technology, Novel
Materials, Autonomous Inspection and Repair, Environmental Systems Design, and
Regulation, Legislation and Water Policy.

The proposed Center will stimulate growth and economic development. The teams of
researchers from both universities will work with the industrial advisory board
to select high priority projects that should benefit society through improved
water quality and availability, not only in the Great Lakes region but elsewhere
in the US and world. Underrepresented students will be hired to work on these
research projects that are of direct industrial relevance. The PIs plan to work
with the Society of Women Engineers (SWE) and the National Society of Black
Engineers student organizations to attract highly qualified minority students.