* 0968596
* US-Slovenia Workshop: Formalization of Modeling Languages
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2010,11/30/2012
* Barrett Bryant, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 11/30/2012
* USD 24,750.00

OISE 0968596&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bryant&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This computer
science workshop will be held in Slovenia to examine formalization of modeling
languages which are central to reliable software tools and based on sound,
fundamental programming principles. Participating senior and junior U.S.
researchers will meet counterparts from two leading Slovenian universities to
discuss five major challenges associated with formalization and the construction
of automated software tools from such formalizations. The goal of U.S.
organizer, Barrett Bryant from the University of Alabama-Birmingham, and his
counterparts, Marjan Hericko of the University of Maribor and Viljan Mahnic of
the University of Ljubljana, is to foster long-term collaboration between
members of the U.S. and European research communities who are identified with
computing and communication foundations and information systems. The intent is
to identify promising approaches to: 1) inventing more easily used behavioral
semantics formalisms; 2) extending models and metamodels with semantics; 3)
generating different modeling tools constructed with tool specific information
and generative algorithms like debuggers or simulators; 4) mapping to formalisms
in ways that are transparent to end-users of modeling language; and 5) inventing
tools or model checkers that are otherwise not possible without formal
semantics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop results should help define an agenda
for future study of fundamental concepts and techniques for more efficient
automatic modeling approaches, programming language semantics, grammar-ware, and
graph grammars. If successful, this could lead to wider consensus on the need
for formalization in modeling language specification while strengthening
cooperation between U.S. and European researchers who are language experts and
software tools experts. This U.S.-Slovenian cooperative activity, organized in
conjunction with the European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming,
fulfills the overall objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
experts in the United States and Europe to combine complementary talents and
share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
Broader impacts include new insights arising from the timely interaction as well
as the early career introduction of participating U.S. graduate students to
researchers who lead current efforts to understand the relationships between
models, metamodels and grammars that are considered key to increasing
productivity and reliability in software engineering.