* 0968911
* Time Dependent Creep Deformation of Non Polar Mixed Conducting Ferroelastic Perovskites
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,10/31/2014
* Nina Orlovskaya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 10/31/2014
* USD 336,573.00

The proposed research and educational project focuses on time dependent creep
deformation of mixed ionic electronic conducting (MIEC) perovskites at room and
elevated temperatures. Because a basic understanding of the origin of the time
dependent creep is not currently available for lanthanum cobaltites, manganites,
chromites, ferrites, and other MIEC conductors, we propose to study creep as a
function of external load, loading rate, time, temperature, domain wall
mobility, as well as materials composition, crystal structure and grain size.
Both experimental and modeling research is proposed to study the mechanisms of
time dependent creep deformations, to define driving forces responsible for the
phenomena, and to develop new strategies that will allow minimizing the effect
of time dependent deformation in MIEC perovskites. A fundamental understanding
of time dependent creep in MIEC perovskites is of major importance for further
successful development of highly reliable and precise devices such as sensors
and actuators, or different electrochemical devices where linear, time
independent mechanical output is desirable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present
research program provides an ideal basis for Mechanical and Materials
Engineering students to actively participate in project-based learning.
Integrated research and educational activities include outreach to a diverse
group of high school students and research opportunities for undergraduate
students. Graduate students will be involved in research, presentations at
technical meetings, and will mentor undergraduate and high school student
researchers. Special efforts will be made to attract underrepresented students
to pursue their careers in materials science and engineering through high school
outreach and undergraduate research.