* 0968587
* US-Gabon Workshop 2011: Evolution and conservation of Central African biological diversity: new approaches and avenues for international collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2011
* Mary Katherine Gonder, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2011
* USD 59,984.00

The main goal of the workshop is to provide a forum for collaborative exchange
between key US and foreign scientists actively engaged in research on the
evolution of biological diversity in the equatorial rainforests of Central
Africa. The proposed workshop will take place in Gabon in 2011 and will be
jointly organized by the PI and US scientists (Dr. Gonder, State University of
New York-Albany, NY; Dr. Lahm, Ecology and Environment Inc., DC) in cooperation
with foreign collaborators (Dr. Mickala, Université des Sciences et Techniques
de Masuku, Gabon; Dr. Jeffery, Station d'Etudes sur les Gorilles et Chimpanzés,
Gabon; Dr. Abernethy, University of Stirling, UK and Prof. Bruford, Cardiff
University, UK).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the biological significance of the
Congo basin and the conservation challenges this region faces, this workshop
will not only strive to present a coherent synthesis of our current
understanding of the evolution of biological diversity in the region but also
provide recommendations for future evolutionary research and its application to
conservation. The 35+ participants selected by the steering committee comprise a
broad array of evolutionary biologists, natural resource specialists and
university educators. Their collective expertise and current research activities
span most major taxonomic groups and countries in the region. The specific aims
are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) assess our current knowledge of
evolutionary patterns and processes underlying the distribution of biological
diversity in the Central African equatorial rainforest &lt;br/&gt;(ii) establish
common research priorities and identify important gaps in our current knowledge
base&lt;br/&gt;(iii) identify novel avenues for cross-disciplinary research,
data sharing and ways of applying genetic approaches to conservation management
and policy&lt;br/&gt;(iv) explore innovative ways of combining tropical
evolutionary research with student education&lt;br/&gt;(v) explore the potential
for future collaborative granting opportunities between US, European and African
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The advent of novel PCR
based technologies, non-invasive sampling methodologies, faster computers and a
vast proliferation of freeware promises to revolutionize our understanding of
the evolution of central African biological diversity. Despite these conceptual
and technological advances, most evolutionary research in Central Africa has
been limited to single species studies from a limited set of plant and animal
taxa. Moreover, many of the most exciting advances in molecular ecology and
multi-disciplinary evolutionary studies (e.g. landscape genetic analyses,
barcoding initiatives etc.) have yet to be applied across the region. The
present workshop therefore seeks to address this need by bringing together US
and foreign scientists to establish a set of common research objectives for
future research and explore opportunities for collaborative exchange and
education. By bringing academics, resource managers, conservation practitioners
and educators together, the workshop will also strive to identify ways that
genetic data can make a concrete contribution to regional conservation efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: (1) Enhance collaboration between U.S.
and foreign scientists engaged in evolutionary biology and conservation research
in Central Africa; (2) Identify opportunities for overseas training and research
for U.S. investigators and students; (3) Lay the groundwork for large multi-
investigator grant applications such as the NSF PIRE award program; (4)
Establish a set of recommendations on future avenues for research and ways of
using genetic data to inform conservation management and policy; (5) Publish a
synthesis of workshop discussion and collate educational materials for
distribution to workshop participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being
funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering's Africa, Near
East, and South Asia Program.