* 0968277
* SDCI: Data/NMI New/Improvement - Semantic Provenance Capture in Data Ingest Systems (SPCDIS)
* CSE,OAC
* 04/21/2009,08/31/2012
* Peter Fox, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 565,627.00

Semantic Provenance Capture in Data Ingest Systems (SPCDIS)

In analyzing the needs of instrument data providers, several challenges are
clear: - Data is coming in faster, in greater volumes and outstripping our
ability to perform adequate quality control. - Data is being used in new ways
and we frequently do not have sufficient information on what happened to the
data along the processing stages to determine if it is suitable for a use we did
not envision. - We often fail to capture, represent and propagate manually
generated information that need to go with the data flows. - Each time we
develop a new instrument, we develop a new data ingest procedure and collect
different metadata and organize it differently. It is then hard to use with
previous projects. - The task of event determination and feature classification
is onerous and we don't do it until after we get the data.

These statements point to the lack of a comprehensive, re-useable data ingest
framework that consists of a semantically rich set of annotations along the data
ingest workflow and a smart storage, propagation and retrieval mechanism for the
provenance and derivation information. For the purpose of this project,
provenance is defined as: the origin or source from which something comes, its
intention for use, who/what is was generated for, its manner, sense of place,
and time of manufacture, production or discovery, history of subsequent owners,
and documented in detail sufficient to allow reproducibility. Thus, the goal of
this project is to provide an extensible representation for provenance for data
ingest systems. Initially, we limit our focus to the set of solar coronal
physics instruments operated at the Mauna Loa Solar Observatory in Hawaii by the
High Altitude Observatory, National Center for Atmospheric Research. Over time,
we will target the broader area of solar and solar-terrestrial physics,
including the proposed Coronal Solar Magnetism Observatory. This project
leverages innovative work with the Inference Web explanation framework which
provides a set of tools for generating, validating, manipulating, summarizing,
and presenting knowledge provenance. In addition we will utilize its Interlingua
for provenance, justification, and trust representation - PML - the Proof Markup
Language.

Two important concepts to be captured are the data quality and nature of the
processing stages that the data has passed through. Both qualitative and
quantitative encodings of data quality are very important to a scientist
determining if the data of interest are useful, applicable or accurate enough
for the intended use.

The provenance work will have broad applicibility since it will include domain-
independent portions geared for any data ingest system as well as a domain-
literate module aimed at solar and solar-terrestrial physics. This project is
expected to generate a science-driven extension to PML that will provide
representational primitives required for scientific provenance. The project will
also contribute to community standards by adding meta data to ontologies
developed in related projects with a wide degree of applicability to similar
community and government programs.