* 0968730
* From Compressed Sensing to Collective Sensing: a Complex Network Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2010,12/31/2014
* Xin Li, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 12/31/2014
* USD 292,470.00

ECCS-0968730&lt;br/&gt;Xin Li, West Virginia University&lt;br/&gt;From
Compressed Sensing to Collective Sensing: a Complex Network
Approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Reductionism-based divide-and-conquer approach has been fruitful to the design
of many engineering systems from sensors and cell-phones to robots and
computers. By contrast, complex systems in nature such as ant colony and human
brain are driven by the collective dynamics involving a large number of simple
units interacting with each other as well as the environment. How those units
form a globally complex behavior in a self-organizing fashion remains a big
mystery in science. Solving this puzzle, even partially, may have profound
implications into the design and optimization of integrative and hybrid systems
that could better serve various engineering applications. This project focuses
on a collective approach toward the integration of sensing and processing.
Unlike compressed sensing whose success is based on ingenious construction of
mathematical norms or basis functions, this project exploits the underlying
organizational principle of sensory signals in the physical world. Upon the
successful completion of this project, there will be an improved understanding
of how the collective dynamics of complex networks interacts with the sensing
component to support complex tasks such as motion perception and pattern
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed research
activities will be integrated into the education through training graduate
students (including ethnics of scientific research), promoting network-science
related learning, developing cyber-space teaching material, and broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups. All collected data, produced codes and
experimental results will be released to the public, which promotes the
principle of reproducible research. The scientific perspective toward
engineering is expected to benefit engineering students both inside and outside
the classroom. The connection between network science and sensor technology
could leverage into the industry of electronic imaging and have potential impact
on the design of integrated sensor systems.