* 0968536
* SoCS:  The Fourth Party: Improving Computer-Mediated Deliberation through Cognitive, Social and Emotional Support
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 749,857.00

This project will develop and evaluate software to support people engaged in
online social deliberation, especially as it relates to dispute resolution and
collaborative inquiry. The software will model and monitor deliberative
processes skills while people are either in collaboration or involved in
settling disputes. Applications will be in three domains that already support
online conversations: 1) online dispute resolution (e.g., eBay and the U.S.
National Mediation Board); 2) collaborative learning in open-ended inquiry
learning environments; and 3) dialog and deliberation on civic and ethical
issues. The project will scaffold situations, adding structure or focusing
attention on social processes, support improvement of individual skills, and
facilitate a. Wisdom of crowds that enables participants to produce improved
results. This project involves faculty across five departments: legal studies,
psychology, political science, computer science and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This research advances
social issues (collaboration, dispute resolution, and critical thinking) and
computation techniques (online dispute resolution, argumentation and
collaboration). It furthers research into building social communities, explores
issues of coaching and collaboration and develops evaluation tools for measuring
the effect of online support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Societal Impact. This
project advances the understanding of online human-human communication. It will
enable more people to access social deliberative tools, promote interest in
discussion among more people and improve the quality of on-line disputes as well
as collaborations. The project lays the groundwork for more intelligent
communication in online communities, creates new understandings of the
complexities of collaboration and produces new modes of synergistic online
discussions.