* 0968638
* Positron and Positronium Collisions with Simple Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Sandra Ward, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2014
* USD 164,516.00

Two projects are to be performed in the area of theoretical atomic physics. The
first project involves using a well established method to study low-energy
scattering of an exotic atom, positronium (Ps), from the conventional atoms
hydrogen (H) and lithium (Li). This project is of interest since Ps-H scattering
is a fundamental four-body Coulomb process and Ps-Li scattering is an effective
four-body Coulomb process. A graduate student will work on the project for his
Ph. D. dissertation. The project involves an international collaboration with
Dr. Peter Van Reeth, who is in London, UK. The second project concerns the
search of vortices for positron-hydrogen ionization. It is timely due to the
recent explanation of the previously unexplained minimum in results for
electron-impact ionization of helium and the development of positron reaction
microscopes. The project is in collaboration with Dr. Joseph Macek and Dr. Serge
Ovchinnikov who are at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville.

Positronium scattering has applications in astrophysics, biophysics and
condensed matter and vortices are important in many fields of physics such as
fluid dynamics, astrophysics, condensed matter and nonlinear dynamics. The plan
is to present results through publication, at national conferences and at an
international conference. To provide the graduate student a broad exposure to
inquiry-based and other pedagogical methods, the graduate student will assist
Teach North Texas (TNT), a program at UNT that prepares future secondary
mathematics and science teachers. Novel program features developed by TNT will
be disseminated at conferences concerning teacher preparation for science and
mathematics.