* 0968538
* SoCS:  Modeling Agency and Intentions in Dynamic Environments as a Precursor to Efficient Human-Computer Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2011
* Brian Scholl, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2011
* USD 250,000.00

People recognize dramatic situations and attribute roles and intentions to
perceived characters, even when presented with extremely simple cues. As any
cartoon viewer can attest, two animated shapes are sufficient to describe a
scene involving tender lovers, brutal bullies, tense confrontations and hair-
raising escapes. These basic notions of agency and intentionality are
foundational to our social perception of the world. They provide the first
discriminations between agents and objects, delineate which elements of the
world can move with goal-directed purpose, and provide the primitive structure
for describing cause and effect. Extensive laboratory experiments have described
many of the basic properties that produce these perceptions on controlled
stimuli. However there have been only limited attempts to quantify these
processes and no attempts to see if these same properties hold on real-world
activity patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project models our human ability to
perceive agency, intentionality, and goal-directed behavior in dynamic real-
world environments. Using off-the-shelf real-time localization systems, the
movements of people and objects are recorded as they engage in unstructured
activity and staged group games. Drawing on both this empirical data and
theories drawn from the psychophysical data, computational models are
constructed that quantify, explain, and predict real-world social and goal-
directed behavior. The benefits of this work include: (1) modeling tools for use
within behavioral studies, (2) a real-world grounding for psychophysical
studies, and (3) a computational model of social and intentional behavior that
would enhance human-computer and human-robot interfaces.