* 0968369
* PIRE: Bilingualism, mind, and brain: An interdisciplinary program in cognitive psychology, linguistics, and cognitive neuroscience
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2017
* Judith Kroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,824,500.00

This PIRE project, a collaboration between three U.S. and seven foreign
institutions in Europe and Asia, will investigate the cognitive and neural
consequences of bilingualism to understand the ways in which multiple languages
are learned and used. Recent behavioral and neuroscience evidence suggests that
there is more extensive processing interaction between the two languages of a
bilingual than previously thought, and this is true even when bilinguals are
using only one language. Bilingual science therefore provides a tool for
revealing fundamental principles about the mind and the brain otherwise obscured
in research focused on monolinguals. The next stage of research on bilingualism
calls for national and international collaborations to unify our understanding
of the nature of the bilingual mind and brain, the process of bilingual language
development, and the consequences of bilingualism for cognition. International
collaboration is essential for accessibility to widely differing bilingual
populations of several spoken, written, and signed languages. This award enables
an international network of collaborators with common research goals and methods
to exploit unique and complementary opportunities to investigate properties of
human languages. Leveraging the diverse perspectives inherent in
interdisciplinary and cross-cultural research will facilitate the establishment
of a world-class research context for investigating bilingualism science, enable
generalization of research findings, and exploit bilingualism as a tool for
investigating the representation and processing of language in the mind and
brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIRE project will bring together the
complementary international expertise of collaborators studying bilinguals who
communicate in a variety of languages (e.g., Spanish, Catalan, Welsh, and
Chinese). A unique feature of this project is the partnership of U.S. and Dutch
scientists exploring the consequences of bimodal bilingualism in deaf people.
The NSF-funded VL2 Science of Learning Center at Gallaudet University, a world
leader in education for deaf students and research on topics related to deaf
people, focuses on issues of visual language processing recognizing deaf readers
as bilinguals using a signed language for communication yet reading a written
language. Researchers in The Netherlands also study sign language and gesture,
deaf literacy development, and speech-sign translation but using different
signed and written languages. The convergence of these projects provides a
unique opportunity for cross-linguistic collaboration and training that would
not be possible in the U.S. alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enthusiasm for
bilingualism research naturally draws an unusually diverse group of students,
scientists, and research participants. This PIRE project will be committed to
harnessing that excitement to create opportunities for broadening participation
in science by research participants from a broad spectrum of ages and linguistic
abilities, and by students and researchers from groups under-represented in the
sciences. This PIRE project will provide training and research opportunities to
students and scientists not possible without the international collaboration,
such as conducting research abroad, participating in virtual international
colloquia, developing and sustaining international collaborations, and training
by industrial partners with specific expertise in speech, literacy, and
neuroimaging. The project also provides institutional opportunities for research
with diverse populations, enriching undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral
training, and increasing opportunities for early career faculty to develop
research programs globally engaged and solidly grounded in cross-disciplinary
collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of the science of bilingualism
is inherently interdisciplinary and cross-cultural and this project provides
opportunities for the participating U.S. institutions to strengthen
international offices and activities, develop survey tools to evaluate student's
international experiences, and provide energy and synergy for integration and
for strengthening links across disciplinary units. This project will strengthen
the U.S.'s scientific capital through international training not otherwise
available in the U.S. U.S. institutions will benefit from attracting
international visiting researchers and students to enrich the internationalizing
initiatives and cultures on their campuses. The U.S. population is also
increasingly bilingual with ever-diversifying demographic and cultural
characteristics so research results are expected to reach well beyond
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. project partners include The Pennsylvania
State University, Gallaudet University (D.C.), and Haskins Laboratories at Yale
University (CT). International partners include ESRC Centre for Research on
Bilingualism in Theory and Practice, Bangor University (Bangor, UK), the Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences (Leipzig, Germany),
Universidad de Granada (Granada, Spain), Universitat Pompeu Fabra (Barcelona,
Spain), Radboud University Nijmegen (Nijmegen, The Netherlands), Beijing Normal
University (Beijing, China), and the University of Hong Kong (China).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was jointly funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences.