* 0968711
* Multi-Scale Modeling of Interdependent Critical Infrastructure System Performance During Hurricanes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Seth Guikema, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2013
* USD 306,615.00

Critical infrastructure systems such as water and electric power networks
provide essential services that underlie the economic prosperity, security, and
public health of the U.S. These complex, interdependent systems are prone to
failure during hurricanes. Improved modeling of the ability of these systems to
meet the needs of society after a hurricane makes landfall would substantially
improve our ability to manage the risk of these systems failing. However, there
are fundamental research needs of both conceptual and computational natures in
the area of risk analysis for critical infrastructure systems in hurricane-prone
areas. Conceptually, we do not yet have modeling frameworks that allow for
accurate prediction of the performance of large-scale interdependent
infrastructure systems during hurricanes, a necessary starting point for
accurate risk assessment and management. Computationally, many of the available
tools that aim to model infrastructure performance at the scale of large
metropolitan areas require long run times on large computer clusters, limiting
their usefulness for practical infrastructure planning and management. Recent
advances in both statistical methods and computing based on graphical processing
units (?graphics cards?) enable advances that can address both the conceptual
and computational limitations inherent in current approaches for risk analysis
for interdependent infrastructure systems in hurricane-prone areas. The focus of
this project is on developing methods for accurate performance and risk modeling
for interdependent infrastructure systems, methods that are practical for
infrastructure managers to use. While the focus of this project is on coupled
water and power systems, the advances will have application much more broadly.

This project will enable significantly more accurate and rapid risk analysis for
interdependent infrastructure systems, allowing highly limited public
infrastructure funds to be spent more efficiently and helping to better protect
economic and public health during disasters. The models developed in this
project will be practical for use on desktop computers with existing higher-end
graphics cards, greatly enhancing the ability of infrastructure managers to run
these models on their existing computer hardware. In addition, this project will
yield insights into the factors that lead interdependent infrastructure systems
to be more resilient during a hurricane, helping engineers and utility system
managers better understand how to strengthen their systems. In parallel with the
research efforts, this project will aim to interest students traditionally
underrepresented in engineering programs in pursuing engineering as a career.
This will be done through outreach at multiple educational levels.