* 0968748
* Student Travel Support for the First USENIX Workshop on Sustainable Information Technology (SustainIT 2010)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Erez Zadok, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 12/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

The USENIX Association is one of the premier groups addressing research issues
in information technology and systems (e.g., the LISA conference, OSDI, FAST,
NSDI, and more). USENIX recently created the Workshop on Sustainable Information
Technology (SustainIT 2010). This proposal requests funding to assist
approximately 15 U.S.-based graduate students to attend this first workshop.
This workshop brings together researchers and industry practitioners in a forum
which presents the latest research and practices. The workshop will discuss
energy-related issues and their tradeoffs (e.g., security, performance,
reliability, etc.--all vs. energy). The workshop especially encourages papers
which discuss not just energy issues alone, but how they interact with other
dimensions, and look at the overall long-term sustainability of computing. The
scope of this workshop is broad, covering research, theory, hardware, software,
applications, techniques, etc.--all related to making computing systems greener,
from construction to use to disposal. Participation in SustainIT and similar
conferences is a valuable and vital part of the graduate school experience. It
provides students with the opportunity to interact with more senior researchers
in the field, and exposes students to leading edge work in the field. Such a
workshop can steer students to a life-long involvement with sustainability
topics, and create a new workforce for decades to come. This is all the more
urgent given the importance of sustainability for humanity as a whole.