* 0968941
* Green's Functions and The Nuclear Many-Body Problem
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Willem Dickhoff, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2013
* USD 495,000.00

This research project has the overall goal of increasing our knowledge of
nuclear systems both finite and infinite. Particular emphasis is placed on the
physics of nuclei with large neutron or proton excess with the intent to provide
theoretical support and predictions for experiments at rare isotope facilities,
including the new generation at RIKEN Tokyo, GSI Darmstadt, and NSCL/MSU East
Lansing. Since most experiments at such facilities employ strongly interacting
probes, an improved analysis of such reactions is proposed in order to extract
new physics. The serious discrepancies between heavy-ion knockout and transfer
reactions make this development urgent. The tool for this research project is
the dispersive optical model, based on the Green's function method, which
provides a bridge between nuclear reactions and nuclear structure information.
Ab initio microscopic calculations of heavier and exotic nuclei are proposed
based on the Faddeev random phase approximation (FRPA) formulation of the self-
consistent Green's function method. This many-body approach appears to be one of
the most promising strategies to deal with medium and heavy nuclei for the
calculation of the ground state as well as spectroscopic data. The proposal also
outlines concrete steps to clarify the phase diagram of nuclear matter around
saturation density, as a function of temperature and nucleon asymmetry.

The research intends to raise the standard of the analysis of nuclear reactions
and is intended to have a significant impact on the experimental program at
facilities like the planned Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB). The ab
initio FRPA method practiced in the group provides interdisciplinary links with
other fields and involves international collaborations with institutions in
England, Japan, Spain, and Belgium. The continued exposure of graduate students
and young scientists all over the world to the many-body theory book of the PI
fosters improved understanding of exciting new phenomena in nuclear physics in
other disciplines. The mentoring of graduate assistants and post-doctoral
associates in the process and ethic of scientific research is an integral part
of the project. Their development toward independence as original and productive
scientists is a central objective of the program and will continue to prepare
them for industry or academic institutions.