* 0968898
* High-Resolution Spectroscopy of Heteronuclear Alkali Molecules: Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* A. Peet Hickman, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2015
* USD 269,017.00

This project is a joint experimental and theoretical research program addressing
important questions in the areas of high-resolution molecular spectroscopy and
collision dynamics. The spectroscopic studies involve measurements of the ro-
vibrational energy levels of triplet states of NaCs, and other heteronuclear
alkali molecules, and the investigation of fine and hyperfine structure of these
levels. The goal is to map out potential energy curves, study spin-orbit and
nonadiabatic coupling between states, and to use the pattern of energy levels,
particularly the level-by-level changes in the fine and hyperfine structure, to
infer fundamental molecular interactions. By comparing data with theoretical
models, we have already identified many important dynamical effects. The NaK
molecule, in particular, exhibits a fortunate combination of properties that
make it an intriguing "laboratory" for the study of molecular hyperfine
structure. For example, our recent observations have revealed that different
electronic states (and even different ro-vibrational levels within the same
state) exhibit several different angular momentum coupling schemes, including
both pure and intermediate cases. These level-to-level variations in the fine
and hyperfine structure contain information about subtle changes in the
electronic wave functions as a function of internuclear separation. Experimental
and theoretical techniques have been developed to extract this information.
Further high-resolution studies will be done to probe vibrational levels closer
to the dissociation limit; data in this range will provide information about
long range interactions and will lead to a better understanding of the delicate
changes in the electronic wave function as the system makes the transition from
the separated atom to the molecular regime. We will also study NaCs, which is of
interest for cooling and trapping and for proposed quantum computing schemes.
The large spin-orbit interactions in this molecule, leading to strong
perturbations and avoided crossings, provide interesting new challenges for both
experiment and theory. Our program also studies a variety of collision processes
including excitation transfer, transfer of molecular orientation, and velocity
changes in collisions that change atomic hyperfine level or molecular
rovibrational level. Such studies will provide stringent tests of atomic and
molecular collision theory. Broader impacts are that spectroscopic studies of
heteronuclear molecules such as NaK and NaCs are of wide interest. Ultracold
heteronuclear alkali diatomics, which have permanent dipole moments, can in
principle be oriented in an optical lattice, suggesting applications in quantum
computing schemes. Na-Cs and Rb-Cs mixtures are being used in mixed species atom
traps, and knowledge of the molecular electronic states is of particular
interest for understanding photoassociation spectra. Improved understanding of
atomic and molecular collision dynamics will lead to progress in modeling a wide
range of environments, from high temperature plasmas to the ultracold regime.
The work will contribute to the education of many students. Three or four
graduate students will write Ph.D. dissertations based on the projects described
in this proposal. At least six undergraduate students will work with the co-PIs
during the summers through Lehigh University's REU program. Over the past 25
years, 60 undergraduate students have worked with the co-PIs on various research
projects. More than half of these students are female and six belong to
underrepresented minority groups; that pattern is likely to continue. The co-PIs
will continue to send both graduate and undergraduate students to the APS DAMOP
and other national meetings.