* 0968645
* Open Frameworks of Transition Metals and Transition-Metal Complexes Linked with Multifunctional Linkers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Slavi Sevov, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2014
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Novel materials with neutral open-framework structures made of transition metals
or transition-metal complexes that are interconnected with multifunctional
organic linkers will be synthesized and characterized. The linkers will be
mainly sulfonates or disulfonates, often combined with carboxy- and amino-
groups, and phosphonates and carboxylates will be used as well. Many of the
systems will involve multiple charge-assisted hydrogen bonding between cationic
transition-metal complexes and the anionic sulfonates; others will also involve
direct coordination to the transition-metal centers. This research, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program of the Division of Materials
Research, aims at discovering diverse materials with new inorganic-organic
framework structures that exhibit diverse properties based on their inorganic
(magnetic, optical, mechanical and thermal stability, etc.) and organic
(diversity, structural flexibility, etc.) parts. This potential integration of
the properties makes these compounds of great interest for a wide range of
potential applications. The synthetic techniques, structure characterization,
and properties measurements will provide opportunities for training graduate and
undergraduate students in cutting-edge tools and methodologies for doing
research in both solid-state chemistry and solution chemistry. The project, in
combination with the existing University of Notre Dame infrastructure and
programs for recruiting students from underrepresented groups, will be used to
attract minority and female coworkers.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The proposed novel materials with open-framework structures will impact various
important areas of the economy such as the development of new catalysts, new
membrane materials for separation and ion exchange, petroleum cracking,
nanotechnology, and optical and sensor materials. Many of these applications
will, in turn, lead to better chemical processing and to higher energy-use
efficiencies. An example is the potential use of these materials as safe and
environmentally benign containers for gas storage and transportation. The
project will also provide highly educated and practically trained Ph.D. students
and postdoctoral fellows to advance high quality research at the forefront of
science and engineering.