* 0968456
* Collaborative Research: CSEDI--Grand Challenge for Experimental Study of Plastic Deformation Under Deep Earth Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Yanbin Wang, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2014
* USD 499,731.00

The main goal of this joint project is to further develop the experimental
techniques of studying plastic deformation under deep Earth conditions. When a
large force (stress) is applied to minerals or rocks under shallow Earth
conditions, they will be deformed by brittle fracture. In the deep interior of
Earth, temperature is higher and then plastic deformation becomes possible. This
plastic deformation helps material circulation by convection that cools Earth
and causes most of geological activities including mountain building and deep
circulation of water and other materials. However, to date very little is known
on the plastic flow properties of materials under deep Earth conditions due
mainly to the technical difficulties. For example, in the deep interior of
Earth, not only is temperature high, but also pressure is high. Usually pressure
suppresses atomic motion and hence plastic deformation becomes difficult under
high-pressure conditions. Does the role of pressure become more important than
temperature and hence the viscosity of materials increases with depth? Also most
of minerals undergo a series of phase transformations. How do these phase
transformations affect the plastic properties? These issues are critical to our
understanding of the dynamics and evolution of Earth and other terrestrial
planets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite its importance, almost nothing was known
about these deep earth deformation as recently as ~ten years ago. Recognizing
this need, the investigators started a group effort to develop new techniques of
plastic deformation under deep Earth conditions in 2002. Based on the studies
during the previous funding periods, they have made major progress including the
development of new types of deformation apparatus and the improvements to the
stress (and strain) measurements using synchrotron x-ray sources. As a result,
we can now conduct quantitative deformation experiments to ~20 GPa and ~2000 K.
However, these conditions correspond only to the depth of ~500 km. Earth's
mantle extends to ~2900 km. Also, there has been very poor control of water
content in materials previously studied. In this new phase of technical
development, the team of investigators will focus on (i) extending the maximum
pressure to ~30 GPa and higher (~1000 km depth), (ii) improving the control of
chemical environment (such as water fugacity) under high-pressure conditions,
and (iii) improving the stress measurements through the use of new hardware and
theory. These developments will allow investigation of the plastic properties of
Earth materials to the conditions equivalent to the shallow part of the lower
mantle under well-controlled chemical environment. Applications of these
techniques will shed important new light into our understanding of dynamics of
whole Earth. The project is a collaboration among teams at four institutions,
and will provide enhanced infrastructure to the experimental geophysics
community, including new facilities at national synchrotron beamlines that will
be available to the broader community. The developments will include training
and mentoring of graduate students and post doctoral scholars.