* 0969816
* Quantum Optical Physics with Nanophotonic Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Hongkun Park, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,760,000.00

This research program is aimed at exploring fundamental physics and potential
applications of controlled quantum systems at the interface of quantum optics
and nano-science. The program involves the synergistic interplay between theory
and experiment. The work makes use of nanophotonic platforms featuring sub-
wavelength localization of optical radiation to explore the interfaces between
isolated AMO-like systems and solid-state systems. The aim is to understand and
control interactions between atoms and photons confined to sub-wavelength
dimensions and to develop new hybrid quantum systems using photons and atoms.
Specifically, a novel system for cavity QED, in which photonic crystal cavities
and waveguides are deterministically coupled to atom-like solid state defects,
the so-called nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond, will be implemented.
This system will be used for fundamental cavity QED studies, for investigation
of nonlinear optical phenomena at a single photon level, and for exploration of
strong coupling between photons and multiple NV centers. In addition, use will
be made of nanophotonic systems to investigate the interface between individual
neutral atoms and nanoscale solid-state systems. The interface is enabled by
optically trapping the atom via the strong near-field generated by a sharp
metallic nanotip. The group will investigate unique properties of this novel
trapping technique, study radiative interactions between isolated atoms and
nanoscale optical plasmons and explore novel realizations of hybrid AMO-solid
state quantum systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical research within the
project focuses on fundamental understanding of atom-photon interactions at sub-
wavelength scales, investigating the use of nanophotonic systems for exploring
novel regimes of atom-atom interactions and studying the quantum dynamics of
strongly interacting atom-photon systems in one dimensional waveguides. The
emphasis is on using coherent and dissipative mechanisms to control the quantum
states of many-body systems. In addition to supporting the group's own
experimental efforts, the theoretical work will provide 'seeds' for new research
projects and directions. Finally, the group will study applications, ranging
from quantum information systems to sub-micron integrated optical circuits and
nanoscale sensors for monitoring dynamics of complex biophysical processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader impacts include development of a new,
interdisciplinary area of physical sciences. This work provides critical
insights into the fundamental physics of controlled, complex quantum systems.
New tools will be developed that make use of coherent quantum phenomena for
applications ranging from information science to biology and medicine. This
collaborative program provides opportunities for education and training in at
the interface of fundamental physics, material science, and device engineering.
Outreach activities include a program to bring young Russian scientists to
Harvard, thus providing them with a unique opportunity to become involved in
cutting-edge research and exposing them to the US educational system. The group
will also continue to develop new and efficient ways for dissemination of
physics knowledge through teaching.