* 0969533
* Collaborative Research: 2+3 Community College to Graduate Engineering Degree Program: An Innovative Pilot Model for Broadened Pathways Into Engineering Careers
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Patricia Mead, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 05/31/2012
* USD 238,853.00

This engineering education research award to Norfolk State University, in
partnership with Central Virginia Community College, Northern Virginia Community
College, Thomas Nelson Community College, and Tidewater Community College will
support research to pilot the establishment of an innovative program to leverage
the community college pathway into the engineering profession. Students
completing a 2+3 community college to university program would receive three
post-secondary degrees: the associate degree in engineering, the bachelor of
science in engineering, and the master of science in engineering. This pilot
program will target two primary audiences. First, the program will be tailored
and marketed to military veterans who wish to complete their educational
training using support from the newly implemented Post 9/11 GI-Bill program.
Second, the program will be marketed to high school students through a popular
team-based robotics program that has a good record of attracting students into
engineering. Project activities are organized into five general categories:
curricular coherence; academic enrichment; mentoring, advising, and support
services; community building and networking; and assessment and evaluation.
Planning phase activities will explore strategies that have been identified in
prior studies on military students and on community college pathways into
engineering as a guide for the program design. The project team will consider
methods to better synchronize curricular and course offerings.&lt;br/&gt;and
will work to develop institutionalized assessment mechanisms that can be used to
collect useful statistics on student performance and success factors. The final
project report will include an overview of the student and program performance,
and it will outline strategies for effective dissemination to other community
college and four-year campuses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analogous to the three
plus two undergraduate programs that bridge physics, math, and science students
attending liberal arts universities into an engineering discipline, this program
is expected to be a model for attracting a larger pool of students into the
engineering profession. It will provide models for alternate pathways that can
increase the number and diversity of engineering graduates needed for a
competitive national workforce.