* 0969003
* Center for Pharmaceutical Development
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Andreas Bommarius, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 01/31/2015
* USD 407,923.00

0968003 Georgia Tech; Andy Bommarius &lt;br/&gt;0968972 University of Kansas;
Eric Munson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to start a new
I/UCRC "Pharmaceutical Manufacturing and Formulation" (CPMF) with a focus on
addressing current challenges in the pharmaceutical industry, and developing
solutions towards more selective and robust manufacturing processes, more stable
formulations, and better characterized and consistent products. The lead
institution of the proposed Center is Georgia Tech with a site location at the
University of Kansas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CPMF proposes to explore areas
important to pharmaceutical manufacturing and improved formulations for
pharmaceuticals. The Center plans to develop methods and technologies that will
produce better pharmaceuticals, make them last longer, be more effective, and
safer. By combining the efforts of Georgia Tech, Duquesne University and the
University of Kansas, the PIs have proposed a number of potentially important
projects that could significantly advance the applied knowledge necessary to
make better pharmaceuticals. CPMF will allow pharmaceutical companies a lower
cost approach to advancing risky research in a cooperative manner such that
important manufacturing needs and innovations can be pursued with shared risk
and mutual gain. CPMF has assembled a very strong group of researchers who are
well-qualified to perform the research outlined in the
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center will promote the rapid
development of safe and efficacious drugs and drug formulations, and will
identify potential problems with proposed drug formulations, with the potential
of improving or even saving human lives. The Center plans to involve graduate
students and post-doctoral associates in performing and presenting their
research, thereby creating an opportunity for them to interact with counterparts
from pharmaceutical and medical areas. Plans for dissemination of results are
well thought out and audiences are appropriate. The proposed Center also plans
to put emphasis on recruiting under-represented groups.