* 0969080
* Effect of Cold Temperature on Shear Strength and Consolidation Properties of Deep Water Soft Marine Clays
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Steven Perkins, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2012
* USD 78,841.00

In the Norwegian Sea and in many other extreme northern or southern latitude
offshore areas, the temperature at the seabed in deep-water locations is
continuously around 0 °C with the salt content of the pore fluid allowing the
soil to remain unfrozen. The design of offshore facilities in these regions is
generally governed by cases involving large lateral loads from waves or floating
ice where the weak surficial soils become critical components. A precise
estimate of soil strength and consolidation properties that avoids unnecessary
conservatism can result in substantial construction and installation savings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work has shown a significant effect of increasing
preconsolidation pressure and increasing undrained shear strength with
decreasing temperature for clay soils. Previous work has not, however, been
performed on samples from cold temperature environments that have been
maintained at cold in situ temperatures during sampling, storage and testing.
Previous work indicates that allowing samples to warm to room temperature and
then recooling to cold in situ temperatures may result in an overestimation of
undrained shear strength and preconsolidation pressure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will compare the effect of temperature on
laboratory strength and consolidation properties for samples taken from cold
temperature environments that have been maintained at cold in situ temperature
during sampling, storage and testing to those that have been stored at room
temperature and then tested at both cold in situ temperature and room
temperature. Two clays of different plasticity indices will be
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will be done in collaboration with the
Norwegian Geotechnical Institute, Oslo Norway, and has the potential to impact
industry through reduced construction and installation costs by recognizing the
effects of cold temperature on strength and consolidation properties. In
addition, results from this project have the potential to impact engineering
practice through sampling, handling, storage and testing practices that can
account for the effect of cold temperature on soft clay properties.