* 0969303
* Search for the Electron EDM using Cs and Rb in 1D Optical Lattice Traps
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* David Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 04/30/2014
* USD 477,000.00

An experiment will be pursued to search for the electric dipole moment(EDM) of
the electron using cold Cs and Rb atoms. The atom processing and apparatus
construction part of experiment will be completed and data collection will
commence. Specifically, atoms will be loaded into a pair of parallel 1D far-off-
resonant optical lattice traps in a magnetically shielded region of space,
laser-cooled and optically pumped. Their EDMs will be measured by observing
their coherent evolution in electric fields that are directed oppositely in the
two traps. It is projected that the experiment will be sensitive to an EDM as
small as 3x10^-30 e-cm, which is a 500-fold improvement over the current limit.
This project is potentially transformative, because if an electric dipole moment
were discovered this would have a profound affect on our understanding of the
laws of physics at the most fundamental level. The work will also push the
limits of sensitivity of measurements of the electron EDM using a novel new
technique based on trapping atoms in a optical lattice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
particle with a permanent EDM implies that both time-reversal invariance and
parity invariance are violated. Both of these symmetries are in fact violated in
the Standard Model of particle physics, which predicts very small, but non-zero
EDMs for fundamental particles. Proposed extensions to the Standard Model tend
to predict much larger EDMs, close to the current experimental upper limit.
Continued non-observation of EDMs would rule out many posssible extensions to
the Standard Model. Conversely, should an EDM be observed in the next several
years, it would be the first experimental result of any kind that cannot be
incorporated into the Standard Model. This experiment addresses a question of
fundamental importance to elementary particle physics. Such questions are
normally addressed with high energy experiments, but in this case, the precision
tools of atomic physics can be applied to a much lower energy system, with a
concomitant lower cost. In addition to these scientific broader impacts, this
work has an important educational component as undergraduates and graduate
students will be trained in the use of forefront research techniques.