* 0969155
* Nanoscale Structural Rearrangement and Strain Softening in Ultra-Pure Nanotube Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Thomas Ihle, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 04/30/2015
* USD 298,960.00

Thin films of single-walled carbon nanotubes show considerable promise for
applications that require flexible conductive coatings, and the deformation
mechanics of nanotube-nanotube contacts is what ultimately dictates the strength
and durability of such films. Electronic type can have a significant impact on
the strength of these contacts through the nature of the van der Waals
interactions between contacted nanotubes. In work supported by this grant, we
are separating nanotubes into metallic and semiconducting fractions and
assembling them as pristine membranes on flexible polymer surfaces. Strain-
induced structural changes will be investigated over a broad range of length
scales using a diverse set of measurement techniques. To interpret these
measurements, we will use coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations of
nanoscale deformation in two-dimensional rigid-rod networks with adjustable
friction and tunable interaction potentials. These simulations allow us to model
anisotropic changes in network elasticity over a wide range of experimentally
relevant parameters, providing critical insight into the local structural
changes that govern the mechanics of flexible nanotube
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work can be found in both
the commercial sector and the classroom. The insight gained will lead to
improvements in the mechanical performance and durability of nanotube films,
with emerging applications in photovoltaic devices and fuel-cell membranes.
Undergraduate research participation is a significant part of this research. Our
group has an established record of mentoring undergraduates, including women and
under-represented minorities, through challenging research projects that
culminate in publications in leading scientific journals. The insight we gain
will also be directly incorporated into the graduate and undergraduate
curriculum in Materials and Nanotechnology at NDSU, a newly established
interdisciplinary program that spans the departments of Physics, Mechanical
Engineering, Civil Engineering, and Coatings &amp; Polymeric Materials.