* 0969069
* Collaborative Research: SNEWS: The SuperNova Early Warning System
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Kate Scholberg, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2015
* USD 44,517.00

World-wide, several currently running detectors are sensitive to a prompt core
collapse supernova neutrino signal in the Galaxy. The Supernova Neutrino Early
Warning System (SNEWS) system will provide a high-confidence early warning of a
supernovas occurrence to the astronomical community using a coincidence of
neutrino signals from these detectors. This alert exploits the prompt neutrino
signal's several-hour lead time over the shock breakout which produces the first
optical signs of the explosion. The SNEWS alert may also be able to serve as a
trigger for detectors (e.g. gravitational wave detectors) which might not able
to trigger on a supernova signal by themselves, allowing extra data to be saved.
Early warning of an impending galactic supernova will maximize the chances of
very early electromagnetic observations of a nearby supernova, a previously
unobserved phenomenon. In addition, the SNEWS collaboration aims to optimize
global sensitivity to supernova neutrinos via such activities as downtime
coordination amongst the participating neutrino experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SNEWS has been operational since 1998, and has been
running in a fully-automated mode since 2005 with near-100% up-time. This award
will provide funds to maintain preparedness for a supernova and to further
expand connections to the astronomical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: SNEWS provides tremendous educational and outreach opportunities. It
has an excellent track record of involving undergraduate and graduate physics
students in the project. Additionally and very importantly, the amateur
astronomer community is an integral part of the early warning system. Amateur
astronomers are skilled and enthusiastic, have wide angle viewing capabilities
and are widespread around the globe. The prompt pointing information from the
neutrino signal may well be insufficient to guide larger telescopes, and it is
not unlikely that the location of a supernova will be first pinpointed by an
amateur. Few programs offer to the general public the chance of making a really
significant contribution to science, as SNEWS does.