* 0969949
* Integrated Framework for 3D Analysis of Soil-Pile Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Monica Prezzi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2015
* USD 202,000.00

This grant provides funding for a theoretical and experimental study of soil-
pile interaction problems. The fundamentals of a framework for the analysis of
piles subjected to combined loading, based on insights into the mathematical
form of the displacement field around the pile, calculus of variations and
energy principles, will be developed. A series of load tests will be performed
on half-section instrumented model piles installed in a half- circular chamber
containing a plexiglass boundary along its diameter. The displacement field in
the soil around model piles will be studied during the installation and loading
stages using the Digital Image Correlation (DIC)technique. The model pile-soil
interface behavior will be captured by both image analysis and conventional
sensors. These experiments will provide data that will be useful in the
establishment of the general mathematical form of the displacement field around
loaded piles. Validation of the general theoretical framework will be done by
comparison with results of a number of load tests on instrumented model
piles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will help bridge knowledge gaps
that currently exist in the understanding of the soil-pile interaction process.
The framework for 3D soil-pile interaction analysis and the results of the
experiments will establish the basis for accounting for the effects of soil
layering and spatial heterogeneity of soil properties on pile resistance, which
will allow future development of theories that will enable engineers to quickly
analyze problems that at present can only be analyzed with very costly and time-
intensive 3D FEA. The availability of an analysis that can take into account
spatial variability in the ground will be useful in a variety of applications,
including the assessment of the need to retrofit existing structures and the
effectiveness of ground engineering interventions to mitigate seismic risks.
This will be particularly useful as the United States works on retrofitting and
building new infrastructure, which requires both the assessment of existing and
design of new pile foundations.