* 0969959
* Superconducting RF (SRF) Development for the Project X Neutrino Beam to DUSEL
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Maury Tigner, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 09/30/2013
* USD 892,260.00

The R&amp;D described in the award Superconducting RF (SRF) Development for the
Project X Neutrino Beam to DUSEL is viewed as highly relevant, and can be is of
national and international importance. The science that could be enabled by this
R&amp;D includes programs at DUSEL, the proposed Deep Underground Science and
Engineering Laboratory in South Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project X is a
collection of experiments proposed to compose a future Fermilab program. A
component of such a program is likely to consist of measurements of neutrino
properties. Physicists now think that neutrinos could provide answers to some of
the puzzling questions not addressed by the Standard Model. In particular,
physicists think that neutrinos might be the reason that we exist: their
interactions could explain why matter is abundant while antimatter disappeared
in our universe. The proposed Long-Baseline Neutrino Experiment aims to find out
whether that is the case. It will explore the interactions and transformations
of the world's highest-intensity (made possible through SRF R&amp;D) neutrino
beam by sending it from Fermilab more than 1,000 kilometers straight through the
earth to the largest particle detectors ever built. The detectors could be
housed in the proposed DUSEL laboratory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Superconducting
radiofrequency is a key enabling technology for state-of-the-art particle
accelerators. It is of critical importance to Fermilab 's Project-X, future
Linear Colliders, and to future accelerators for high-energy and nuclear physics
as well as next-generation light sources such as those based on energy-recovery
linacs and free-electron lasers. SRF applications cover a very broad range of
accelerator and beam parameters; cost savings in SRF can determine the
feasibility of a particular design or whether a project is funded at all. Small
improvements in achievable SRF cavity performance can lead to significant
reductions in construction and operating costs of major accelerator-based
facilities. The basic physics and chemistry governing SRF cavity limits and
behavior at the niobium surface is still insufficiently understood, and it is
still impossible to guarantee that a particular cavity fabricated and processed
according to a particular recipe will actually meet its specifications. No US
vendors can match European or Asian vendors in cavity quality, achievable
gradient, or production reproducibility. US industry on its own cannot undertake
the necessary R&amp;D. Intellectual and practical mentorship of US industry by
university and laboratory experts is a step on a path that American industry can
follow to help it regain leadership in many specialized high-tech areas,
including SRF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The frontiers of science are often shaped by
accelerator physics and technology. As examples, SRF has opened up a new world
in nuclear physics and neutron production; the short x-ray pulses from free
electron lasers will revolutionize atomic and molecular physics, and accelerator
science will determine the future of its progenitor, particle physics, where
inventions are needed to overcome size and cost
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration is positioned to make
substantial progress in understanding, improving, and detailing the important
steps in fabricating and processing cavities. The US vendors who become partners
in this program will benefit in that they can begin to learn how to successfully
compete with the rest of the world on US and international cavity procurements.
It is also worth noting that accelerator science is a very forward-looking area
for a young scientist to pursue.