* 0969257
* Quantum Optics in Cavity QD
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Luis Orozco, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2014
* USD 512,675.00

The goal of this work is to investigate cavity QED with two polarization modes.
The experiments explore quantum feedback on the ground state quantum beats of
the system. Those beats, originating on long-lived ground state quantum
coherences, are only present in the autocorrelation of the un-driven mode. The
ground state superposition will be manipulated and controlled through
conditional measurements and external fields, which shield the coherence and
correct quantum errors through probabilistic error correction protocols.
Investigations of the atomic polarization under strong driving fields will show
the saturation of the atom, despite its multilevel structure, using heterodyne
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project supports two
graduate students in the area of Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics. The
students will participate in the open houses of the laboratory that are
organized by the undergraduate office of the Physics Department many times per
year, as well as help with the Summer Girls Progam. The students are expected to
attend the weekly Joint Quantum Seminar between NIST and UMD, where more than
half of the speakers come from the AMO community and all are interested in
questions related to quantum coherence. There will be undergraduates
participating in the research effort and two Mexican undergraduates will spend
ten weeks in the laboratory. Reports on the progress of the group will be
available on the web page of the JQI as well as on the group's web site, with
explanations geared to the general public.