* 0969301
* Controlled Macromolecular Heterogeneity by ATRP
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2015
* USD 760,113.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current synthetic efforts in polymer
chemistry are focused on preparation of materials with well-defined structures
and low polydispersities. The resulting (co)polymers self-organize during
processing but also often require a very narrow fabrication regime window in
order to exhibit all unique properties. During the past several years, similar
activities were the main of focus of many synthetic laboratories (including CMU
group) and resulted in the successful development of various controlled/living
ionic and, more recently, radical systems. However, it is believed that it is
time to change the focus in synthetic polymer chemistry and explore synthesis of
materials with controlled heterogeneities, instead of a constant race for
polymers with lower polydispersities. Availability of polymers with controlled
heterogeneities may lead to a paradigm shift in preparation of materials for
high value applications. Three major elements of molecular heterogeneity will be
explored and their effect on nanostructured morphology and consequently,
macroscopic properties will be studied. They include chain uniformity
(polydispersity), chain composition (gradients) and chain topology (branching
and crosslinking). Intrinsic correlations between these parameters will be
studied and potential synergistic interactions will be investigated. The
anticipated results might have a broad impact on science, education and our
society. The diminished level of catalyst in ATRP will reduce the environmental
impact of transition metal catalyst and concurrently allow preparation of
materials with enhanced properties. Broadened but controlled molecular weight
distributions should not only provide materials with new properties but also
relax the processing regime and widen the processing window.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
addresses the synthesis, characterization and potential applications of polymers
with controlled heterogeneities. Several components of this proposal can have an
impact on science, education and our society. Teaching undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as training a postdoctoral fellow and visitors from
collaborative groups will take place. Members of CMU group will visit other
laboratories outside CMU and will work together with members of other CMU
groups. Dissemination of information will be accomplished by timely
publications, presentations at (inter)national meetings and at CMU web site.
Members of CRP Consortium at CMU will be encouraged to use the new technology
developed in the proposed research and evaluate the new materials in their
markets. The companies will benefit from knowledge generated by the NSF
supported activities. The anticipated research results can impact not only
synthetic polymer chemistry but also materials science and may lead to the
development of commercially valuable materials such as shock absorbents,
vibration and noise dampening materials, surfactants with enhanced properties,
stimuli responsive hydrogels, nanoporous materials and potentially membranes
with presently unattainable pore morphology.&lt;br/&gt;