* 0969689
* Boundary Effects in Critical Phenomena
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Erika Kaufmann, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2016
* USD 267,705.00

The goal of this research project is to advance the understanding of boundary
effects and their underlying mathematical structures. The project deals with
three models stemming from statistical physics. First, the two-species totally
asymmetric exclusion process, is a discrete version of a system of two coupled
Burgers equations. The PI proposes to determine a conjectured new sub-leading
exponent of this system and to investigate the properties of the phase diagram
in the presence of boundary terms. The second objective is the establishment of
a correspondence between boundary terms in the boundary conformal loop model and
the XX- and XXZ- quantum spin chains with boundary operators. The third subject
is a Markov chain describing a growing and fluctuating interface in the presence
of a wall. The PI will determine the critical exponent of boundary avalanches
and investigate the connection to the discrete Boussinesq equation. The PI will
employ methods ranging from Bethe-Ansatz to conformal field theory, finite-size
scaling and Monte-Carlo simulations. The above projects will provide important
insights into the theory of critical phenomena in the presence of boundary
terms. The project is focused on three important areas, namely the role of
boundaries in phase diagrams of statistical models, the classification of all
boundary terms preserving conformal invariance in boundary conformal field
theories and the influence of boundaries on Markov processes. There is also
evidence that the outcome of the project will have implications for the theory
of quantum computing.

Broader Impact. The PI, holding a joint appointment in mathematics and physics,
is fostering the interdisciplinary dialogue between these two departments by
discussing research projects with colleagues in both departments. She is also
supervising a graduate student working on a joint research project with the
chemistry department. The project broadens the representation of women in the
sciences with the PI actively serving as a role model for women in mathematics
and physics, and her involvement in "Women in Science" and "Women in Physics"
initiatives. She participates in science fairs through the the Science K-12
Outreach Program at Purdue University. She was invited by the mathematics
department to teach an interdisciplinary course as a distance learning class.