* 0969145
* Singularities in Characteristic Zero and Singularities in Positive Characteristic
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2010,10/31/2010
* Karl Schwede, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2010
* USD 105,420.00

The program proposed by Karl Schwede aims to study relations between higher
dimensional algebraic geometry and positive characteristic commutative algebra.
Over the past 30 years, a dictionary has been developed linking, by reduction to
characteristic p, seemingly unrelated concepts coming from these two distinct
areas of mathematics. However, the dictionary as it exists seems incomplete. For
example, while there is a good positive characteristic analog of ``log terminal
singularities'', there is no known analog of ``terminal singularities''. Schwede
will attempt to fill in these gaps. Furthermore, inspired by this dictionary,
Schwede will explore both the local and global geometry of varieties in positive
characteristic and characteristic zero. One problem that Schwede plans to
explore is how the test ideal (a positive characteristic analog of the
multiplier ideal) behaves under birational maps. Another problem that Schwede
plans to study is whether Du Bois singularities
deform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry is a centrally important and
very active field of mathematics with strong ties to many other areas including
fields as disparate as string theory and coding theory. Explicitly, algebraic
geometry is the study of geometric objects (called algebraic varieties) made up
of the solutions to polynomial equations (such as y = x^2). At the most basic
level, Schwede plans to study relations between the geometry of these algebraic
varieties, with algebraic properties of the equations themselves. In the past,
this interplay has led to new insights in both the geometric and algebraic
theories. In algebraic geometry, one of the major areas of research in the last
30 years has been the classification of algebraic varieties -- the "minimal
model program". In order to accomplish this, one must study singular varieties
(an example of a singular variety is the solution set to the quadric cone, z^2 =
x^2 + y^2). The particular questions that Schwede proposes to study will
hopefully lead to a deeper understanding of the varieties and the singularities
that appear in this classification.