* 0969883
* Spectroscopy and Control of Cold Holmium Atoms for Quantum Information and Quantum Optics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Mark Saffman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 05/31/2013
* USD 410,000.00

This project will demonstrate laser cooling and optical trapping of an atomic
species with a very complex internal structure, the rare earth element Holmium
(Ho). Ho has a 128 dimensional ground state manifold, the largest of any stable
atomic isotope. Experiments will demonstrate control of the quantum state within
this manifold using tunable, single frequency lasers, and make basic
spectroscopic measurements of several properties of Ho. These measurements are
motivated by two high impact applications. The first is the possibility of using
collective encoding in the internal hyperfine states of Ho to define a 60 qubit
quantum register. Measurements will be performed to validate the feasibility of
this idea which would have a large impact on the field of quantum computing. The
second application is the possibility of achieving negative refractive index in
a gas of Ho atoms at a wavelength shorter than 1 micron due to the presence of
near degenerate electric dipole and magnetic dipole transitions. Spectroscopic
measurements will be performed to validate the feasibility of achieving
neagative refractive index in Ho. Achieving such short wavelength negative
refractive index with low absorption losses would have a large impact for
photonics applications including superlensing and optical cloaking.

The broader impacts of the project are twofold. First, this research is an
important step towards realizing a scalable quantum processor that exceeds the
capabilities of conventional classical computers. The availability of such a
device has the potential for transforming the state of the art in areas which
include numerical mathematics, information security, and simulation of quantum
systems related to the development of new, technologically valuable materials.
In addition the achievement of negative refractive index at short wavelengths
could have a large impact for imaging and cloaking technologies that are
important in many fields including engineering, and biological imaging. Second,
the research program will contribute to the training of students for careers in
science and engineering. Training will occur via direct participation in the
University based research program. We will also inform the local community about
the importance of atomic physics to information technology, and new developments
in the area of photonics. Outreach to the public will be facilitated by public
visiting days at the UW Madison Physics department, laboratory tours, and
participation in local media programs.