* 0969687
* RUI:  Using Imaging Methods to Expose the Molecular Dynamics Arising from Ultrafast Adaptive Control
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Eric Wells, Augustana University Association
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2014
* USD 144,633.00

Shaped ultrafast laser pulses can powerfully influence molecular dynamics, thus
allowing access to outcomes not typically available by other means. The
complexities of the field-molecule interaction generally make an a priori
determination of the required field characteristics impossible, and so adaptive
feedback algorithms are often employed to identify the optimal pulse. This
technique efficiently selects pulses that enhance the desired pathway. Exactly
how this is accomplished, however, is often obscure. This research examines ways
to extract mechanistic information from closed-loop control by approaching this
problem from the perspective of the feedback signal. By incorporating images
into the feedback loop or using vibrational-state specific feedback we can query
the search algorithm in very specific ways. Correlation of small changes in the
feedback target with changes in the optimal pulse traits can lead to mechanistic
insight. Furthermore, the mechanisms underlying the control can be subsequently
probed with the power of velocity map imaging (VMI) or cold-target recoil-ion
momentum spectroscopy (COLTRIMS). Experiments will be conducted at Kansas State
University with much of the pre- and post-experiment work carried out at
Augustana College. The primary aim of these experiments is to uncover the
fundamentals of the molecular dynamics in these interactions. To this end, we
will construct, test, and incorporate into the feedback loop a Doppler-free
kinetic energy release spectrometer that is capable of resolving specific
vibrational states of CO2+ through its dissociation into C+ + O+. Using this
high resolution feedback, we will seek to manipulate the vibrational population
and thereby gain a window into the dynamics leading to population of the
transient CO2+. Using VMI as feedback allows simultaneous access to angular and
kinetic energy release (KER) information for a given ion species. Shaped pulses
will be used to control the isomerization of the acetylene di-cation into CH2 +
+ C+ and the ethylene cation into CH3 + + CH. Both of these processes can be
probed with VMI and/or COLTRIMS. Understanding how isomerization is controlled
in these benchmark hydrocarbons can provide a foundation for improved control in
larger molecules. A concurrent secondary direction will be the implementation of
new feedback techniques for adaptive control, such as the rapid inversion of VMI
spectra to obtain unambiguous KER data.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This work integrates undergraduates at all levels, from experiment design to
manuscript preparation. Experience has shown that this activity both encourages
students to continue their science training and provides a strong background for
graduate work. The group has a good record of promoting the participation of
women in physics. Scientifically, improved understanding of the molecular
dynamics involved in closed-loop coherent control will benefit several
applications, including detection of trace amounts of materials with undesirable
environmental or national security traits and the use of shaped pulses for the
creation of molecular qubits for quantum computing. Improved understanding of
how isomerization dynamics can be manipulated could further enable the
development of molecular switches and laser-controlled chemical synthesis.
Dissemination of results will occur through peer-reviewed publications,
conference presentations, and seminars and symposiums that often feature
students.