* 0969986
* Studying Jet Modification using New Techniques in Direct Photon-Jet 2-Particle Correlation Measurements at RHIC/PHENIX
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Justin Frantz, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 08/31/2013
* USD 404,645.00

This award will fund research conducted at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
at Brookhaven National Lab which will study the exotic state of matter called
the quark-gluon plasma, created through collisions of large and highly energetic
nuclei. The properties of this matter should be described primarily by the
theory called Quantum Chromodynamics as manifestations of the same Strong force
that not only holds protons and neutrons together within the atomic nucleus but
also smaller particles called quarks and gluons together within the protons and
neutrons themselves. But little is known about how the quarks and gluons behave
collectively when in the plasma state at high temperatures. Specifically the
investigator will study interactions of the plasma with various probes. Very
high energy versions of X-rays called direct photons produced in the same
collisions can penetrate the plasma and can thus provide important information.
Most promisingly, these photons can be compared with quarks produced at similar
high energies but which should interact strongly with and mostly be stopped by
the medium, in order to deduce major features of these interactions which are
currently unknown. Analysis of such phenomena using a number of techniques
including especially correlation measurements will be performed by the
investigator, with both graduate and undergraduate students in training, on data
collected by the PHENIX experiment at RHIC.

In addition to these analysis projects, the investigator's group at Ohio
University will support the upgrade of computing, analysis, and data-taking
capabilities of PHENIX through software development and leadership of groups and
projects of detector development and analysis. The project results in a number
of broad benefits to society beyond the important goal of educating and training
students: organizations are developed in the state of Ohio and beyond to
exchange Heavy Ion knowledge; international collaboration of RHIC and other
nuclear/particle physicists is strengthened; finally the project contributes to
many general benefits to the development of future computing in the nation.