* 0969704
* Searching for and Discovering New Physics at the Large Hadron Collider, the Tevatron, and in Cosmic Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Ilya Kravchenko, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,960,000.00

This award provides continued support for the frontier collider-physics program
of the experimental high-energy physics (HEP) group at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) for a three-year period. The intellectual merit follows
from the new era of discovery and understanding which has and will continue to
progress in the fields of particle physics and astrophysics. The research effort
is focused on operations and data analysis for the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS)
experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), where the UNL group has
leadership roles in Tier-2 computing, operation of the forward pixel detector,
and tracker and trigger upgrades. In addition, the group will complete ongoing
analyses and continue its service commitments to the D0 experiment, principally
the luminosity measurement. The group will also maintain complementary efforts
in ultra-high energy cosmic-ray physics through contributions to the Pierre
Auger Observatory and the Radio Ice Cherenkov Experiment (RICE) and the Neutrino
Array Radio Calibration (NARC) experiment. Broader impacts result from the
extensive education and outreach efforts of the group. These include the NSF-
funded Cosmic Ray Observatory Project (CROP), a Bilingual English Speaking Tutor
program (BEST) for elementary school children, networking with rural schools to
bring the excitement of particle physics to the classroom and integration of
high-school teachers and students with cosmic-ray research.