* 0969172
* Analysis and Observations of Particle Size Distribution in Supercell Thunderstorms
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2010,11/30/2014
* Katja Friedrich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2014
* USD 363,399.00

Supercell-type thunderstorms, which embody a complex arrangement of long-lasting
rotating updrafts and intense downdrafts, are known to be responsible for
generating most intense tornadoes. However, considerable uncertainty exists
regarding mechanisms culminating in the actual focus and downward extension of
stormscale rotation in the form of a damaging tornadic vortex. Some working
hypotheses link this process to the strength, thermodynamic stability
(temperature) and spatial configuration of downdrafts in the lowest reaches of
these storms, which are in-turn dependent on rates of evaporative cooling
influenced by the type and size distributions of falling hydrometeors (chiefly
rain and hail.) Rigorous attempts have not yet been made to investigate the
range of these microphysical precipitation characteristics beneath supercell
thunderstorms. The overarching goal of this project is to i) deploy multiple
mobile disdrometers (instruments that measure the characteristic sizes and
fallspeeds of precipitation particles) beneath supercell thunderstorms during
the second Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes EXperiment
(VORTEX2; a field program conducted over the central United States known as
"tornado alley") in Spring 2010, ii) conduct a comprehensive analysis of both
existing and newly-obtained disdrometer observations to determine microphysical
characteristics in tornadic compared to nontornadic supercell thunderstorms, and
iii) relate these results to contemporaneous high-resolution polarimetric
Doppler radar observations. Both disdrometers and polarimetric Doppler radar can
detect (or in the case of radar, infer) the size distributions of falling
hydrometeors. While preliminary analyses have provided some insights about
hydrometeor distributions and their impacts on evolution of supercell storm
features, a comprehensive analysis of a number of cases using well-placed high-
resolution measurements has yet to be conducted and will be achieved in the
course of this work.

Intellectual Merit: This project will augment our knowledge about microphysical
processes within supercell thunderstorms and may lead to improved short-term
forecasts and warnings of life-threatening severe weather. Since VORTEX2 hosts
the largest number of polarimetric Doppler radars to ever monitor the full
lifecycle of supercell thunderstorms, this experiment is an ideal laboratory to
address these scientific questions. At present, the lack of skill in forecasting
and understanding microphysical processes is largely due to both the inadequate
representation of microphysical processes and the lack of measurements. This
mobile deployment of disdrometers in VORTEX2 will provide by far the most
comprehensive dataset of disdrometer and radar observations and analysis in
supercell thunderstorms ever collected.

Broader Impact: The improvement of short-term forecasts and warnings of severe
weather is strongly linked to the representation and understanding of the
microphysical processes, which will be substantially extended by this work.
Results will be shared with the modeling community and integrated with other,
existing VORTEX2 data sets. Results will also be disseminated through
presentations at conferences, seminars, and workshops as well as through
publications in relevant professional journals. Additional Broader Impacts will
come through direct involvement of graduate students in collection and analysis
of field datasets, as well as through enhanced classroom education at both
undergraduate and graduate levels.