* 0969676
* GOALI/RUI: Development of Innovative New Highway Bridge System
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2015
* Nabil Grace, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 316,952.00

In this investigation, an innovative and corrosion free decked bulb-T beam
bridge system will be studied. The new side-by-side decked bulb-T beam bridge
system consists of (a) decked bulb-T beams prestressed and reinforced with non-
corrosive strands (carbon fiber reinforced polymer, CFRP), (b) integral
transverse diaphragms post-tensioned with unbonded CFRP, and (c) an integral
wearing surface. This investigation consists of a number of phases that will be
carried out on four full-scale decked bulb-T beams and on one bridge model.
Service load, cracking load and ultimate load carrying capacity of the new beams
will be determined. Finally, the developed decked bulb-T beam bridge system will
be tested and evaluated. A comprehensive finite element analysis will be
conducted.

The combination of newly developed CFRP with high strength concrete in the
decked bulb-T beam bridge system will enhance its capacity, durability, and
life-span as well as reduce the cost of maintenance. Introduction of this
innovative bridge system will deliver a cost-effective infrastructure system to
meet America?s present and future needs. Interaction with composite and
construction industries as well as with state engineers and concrete precasters
will be a significant benefit to the highway bridge industry and to LTU
students. This project requires multidisciplinary research, in new materials,
structural engineering, instrumentation, load analysis, computer simulation and
construction and bridge economics.