* 0969875
* RUI:  Modular Black Hole Entropy
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Rolf Schimmrigk, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2013
* USD 124,799.00

The goal of this project is to apply results on geometric Calabi-Yau modular
forms obtained recently by the PI and Co-PI to the problem of black hole entropy
in string theory. The project rests on the observation that the Siegel modular
forms considered so far in the black hole context can be constructed in terms of
ordinary modular forms that have a geometric interpretation because they are
derived from the cycle structure of Calabi-Yau manifolds. These geometric
modular forms provide a more general reservoir of modular forms than, for
example, the elliptic genera considered in the literature. The project addresses
one of the open questions in black hole physics: how the results obtained so far
for N = 4 supersymmetric models can be extended to systems with fewer
supersymmetries. Such theories are given by compactifications on generic Calabi-
Yau manifolds instead of special cases that have been the main manifolds
considered at this point. The investigators plan to use their previous work on
the construction of geometric modular forms for deformation families of Calabi-
Yau threefolds as ingredients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This
project can be formulated in such a way that it is easy to involve undergraduate
students in the work, and hence is ideal for the PI and Co-PI who work as
theorists at a Predominantly Undergraduate Institution.The physics department at
IUSB has recently introduced a series of upper level classes that teach some of
the techniques used in theoretical research, such as quantum field theory and
string theory courses. The students are prepared for the research experience
through a combination of attending these courses and guided independent work.
IUSB is the only public university in the region with a physics major, hence
provides the only opportunity for a large section of the student population to
be involved in research in this field. To recruit more students to IUSB and into
STEM fields, the investigators regularly talk to high school physics classes
about their research and participate extensively in outreach activities
organized by the physics department and IUSB.