* 0969328
* Dynamic Scheduling and Resource Control in Stochastic Processing Networks: Beyond Priority Rules
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* David Yao, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 05/31/2014
* USD 325,000.00

The goal of this project is to study resource control that extends beyond the
classical priority rules, and to do so in the general setting of stochastic
processing networks, allowing features such as concurrent occupancy and sharing
of resources. Dynamic allocation of resources to serve different kinds of
customers or job classes is a central issue in the design and analysis of many
complex systems. The research plan is to investigate the asymptotic behavior of
the system under a general class of resource control, which optimizes in each
system state a utility function (e.g., a "fairness" measure as in the case of
the Internet protocol, also prevalent in many service systems). This will be
carried out by deriving the limiting regimes of the main performance processes,
such as workloads and congestion levels, under fluid and diffusion scalings.
These limits are useful in evaluating the system performance. They also
establish the connection between the utility function, which the control
maximizes locally (or "greedily") in each state, and the performance objective
that is optimized by the control globally over any given planning horizon,
finite or infinite.

Results from the project are expected to help the design of dynamic resource
control rules in stochastic processing networks in two ways: given a control
scheme, its performance can be evaluated; and conversely, given a performance
objective, one or several control schemes can be identifed to optimize the
objective. More broadly, the project will add to the mathematical foundation of
stochastic networks, enhance the understanding of the implications of utility-
maximizing resource allocation schemes on network performance, and lead to new
decision tools and computational techniques for systems design and optimization.