* 0969456
* Nuclear Reaction and Structure Studies with Radioactive and Stable beams
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* James Kolata, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,181,707.00

This project involves the study of nuclear reactions utilizing beams of short-
lived radioactive nuclei, together with the development of instrumentation and
techniques to facilitate these investigations. Specific experiments will
emphasize the study of neutron- and proton-rich nuclei near the limits of
nuclear stability. Several of these weakly bound systems have been shown to
develop an exotic "nuclear halo" structure, leading to an effective nuclear size
that is much larger than expected based on the properties of more normal
systems. Our interest is in the effect that this structure has on nuclear
reactions induced by "halo" nuclei." The development of deuterated-scintillator
neutron detectors for this project may have applications to national-security
programs. In addition, we plan to use specific nuclear reactions to probe the
structure of nuclei that are important for the understanding of neutrinoless
double beta decay. Several massive and expensive experiments are underway to
search for this exotic decay mode, which would represent physics beyond the so-
called standard model of particle interactions. If observed, this decay mode
would also present a means to directly measure the mass of the neutrino, which
is important for subjects such as high-energy physics, astronomy, and cosmology.
However, this application requires much-improved knowledge of the structure of
the nuclei involved in the beta-decay process. The experiments we are planning
to carry out will contribute to the development of this understanding.

In addition to the already-mentioned contributions of instrumentation
development to national-security issues, the broader impact of this project
extends to the development of a scientifically-literate workforce via the
involvement of students at the graduate, undergraduate, and high-school levels
in world-class scientific research. These groups are afforded opportunities for
hands-on training in nuclear accelerators, superconducting ion-optical systems,
radiation detection, and other technologies. The undergraduate students come
from Notre Dame and the University of Michigan, and also from several primarily-
undergraduate universities and colleges in the Midwest. The high-school program
includes public lectures and other outreach activities designed to highlight
nuclear science and its applications to other fields such as archaeology and
medicine. Finally, the program has an international component involving close
collaborations with physicists in Mexico and Brazil, and new collaborations
including the UK, France, and Italy are proposed.