* 0969966
* RUI: Investigation of Heavy Quark Energy Loss in Relativistic Nucleus-Nucleus Collisions at the CERN LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Jennifer Klay, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2014
* USD 294,505.00

Shortly after the Big Bang, the Universe was composed of a plasma of free
particles called quarks and gluons. As the Universe expanded and cooled, the
quarks and gluons condensed into the protons and neutrons which now make up the
cores of all atoms. This phase transition from a hot, dense plasma to a gas of
normal matter is similar to that of steam condensing into liquid water. Using
large particle accelerators, scientists are recreating this subatomic soup in
the laboratory by colliding gold or lead atoms at very high energies and
studying the intriguing properties of this unusual state of matter. One of the
most important discoveries to come from experiments at the Relativistic Heavy
Ion Collider (RHIC) is that the dense matter is opaque to very high energy
quarks and gluons produced in the collisions. These `partons' suffer tremendous
energy loss as they make their way out of the collision zone, depositing a large
fraction of their initial energy in the medium. The strength of this energy loss
is directly related to the density of the quark gluon plasma and varies
according to the type of parton. From observations at RHIC, the heavier quarks
appear to be more strongly coupled to the quark gluon plasma than was previously
expected. High energy electrons are produced by the decays of particles made
from heavy quarks, so their presence within the cluster of particles that
comprise an observed jet is strong evidence for the jet to have originated from
a heavy quark. The energy loss of these electron-jets can be used to investigate
the properties of the quark gluon plasma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CERN Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) in Switzerland will collide nuclei at energies 30 times
higher than at RHIC, producing an even hotter, denser, longer-lived medium. This
RUI project will utilize the ALICE experiment to explore the properties of this
matter using the energy loss of heavy quark jets as a probe. Undergraduate
students working on this experiment will be trained in the most advanced data
collection, reduction and analysis techniques at the cutting edge of high energy
nuclear physics. They will be able to apply these skills in a wide variety of
careers, whether they choose to pursue an advanced degree in basic science or
not. Their contributions will also help us develop new insights into the
fundamental interactions among the basic building blocks of the universe,
leading to a deeper understanding of the world around us.