* 0969962
* Analytical and geometrical problems in calculus of variations and partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Alessio Figalli, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2013
* USD 167,988.00

The research of the principal investigator will be focused on different
mathematical areas. First of all, he plans to work on optimal transport theory.
This problem, which consists in finding the cheapest way to transport a
distribution of mass from one place to another, has recently found many
applications in meteorology, biology and populations dynamics, or for instance
to study the antenna design problem. The investigator has already worked on this
subject for several years. He also intends to study Euler equations for
incompressible fluids and to work on problems of semiclassical limit coming from
quantum physics. Finally, he wishes to apply some of his recent results on some
"improved" version of the classical isoperimetric inequalities to study the
stability of the shapes of crystals under the action of an external
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research described above has applications in
many different areas: the optimal transport problem has obvious application to
economics, but it has also shown to be very interdisciplinary, with links with
other areas of mathematics like geometry, probability and partial differential
equations, and also with physics and biology. Euler equations and semiclassical
limits are classical problem in physics and quantum physics, and their
mathematical study may increase deeper understanding of the physical phenomena
themselves. Finally, the study of the rigidity of crystals under exterior
potential should help to explain many phenomena which are currently observed in
experiments but not yet completely understood.