* 0969015
* Third International Conference on Porous Media and its Applications in Science, Engineering and Industry to be held in Tuscany, Italy: June 20-24, 2010
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Kambiz Vafai, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2011
* USD 30,000.00

0969015&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vafai&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convective heat transfer
in porous media is important in applications and devices including but not
limited to biological matter, electronics cooling, thermal insulation
engineering, geothermal and environmental engineering, heat pipes, underground
spreading of chemical waste, nuclear waste reposition, fuel cells, direct
contact heat exchangers and petroleum reservoirs. This grant provides partial
support for individuals to attend the Third International Conference on Porous
Media and its Applications in Science, Engineering and Industry to be held in
Tuscany, Italy on June 20 - 24, 2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
This conference will serve as the venue for the exchange of information on new
scientific results and set priorities for future research in the area of
transport in porous media. World experts in various aspects of porous media
research will exchange information through a series of formal presentations and
informal discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. NSF funding provides
partial support for travel by some of the organizing committee, distinguished
speakers, and graduate students. The conference will include the active
participation of a diverse cadre of researchers including students and
individuals from underrepresented groups. As in previous conferences, papers of
high quality will be published in appropriate journals after a peer-review
process.