* 0969062
* Multiscale Study of the Respiratory Airway Mechanics for Cellular Inflammation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Ramana Pidaparti, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 04/30/2014
* USD 373,548.00

Cellular inflammatory responses in respiratory airways during mechanical
ventilation is a complex process dealings airway pressures/strains and cellular
tissue compliance at multiple length scales. In order to gain understanding of
this complex inflammation process and to aid in experiments, building
computational simulations is necessary and may lead to a paradigm shift in
mechanical ventilation for patients with respiratory failures. The overall goal
of the proposed research is to develop a multi-scale model of cellular
inflammation in compliant lung geometry during mechanical ventilation. The
specific research objectives are: (i) Development of an organ level model based
on continuum description for studying the behaviors of the respiratory airway;
(ii) Development of a tissue level model based on continuum description for
studying the stress/strain behaviors of the airway tissue; and (iii) Development
of a cellular level model based on discrete system for studying the behaviors of
the cellular inflammation. Results of these computational simulations at
multiple levels will be used to develop correlations that will be capable of
testing the outcomes of various mechanical ventilation strategies with respect
to airway pressures and stress parameters to minimize the potential for damage
to the lung.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
research come from integrating discrete cellular models of tissue inflammation
with continuum description of tissue and organ level models to capture the
complex pressures/stresses and cellular inflammation parameters in lung geometry
due to mechanical ventilation. Besides developing models to understand the
mechanical ventilation effects, the research results will provide new
computational simulation models of the airway (fluid-solid interactions) and a
rule based inflammation model at a cellular level which might help further to
assess optimal characteristics for lung stresses and cellular inflammation
parameters while minimizing the potential for damage to the lung tissue. The
broad impact of this proposed research stems from the development of multi-scale
computational models which will advance our knowledge on mechanical ventilation
strategies to avoid lung related injuries in patients. The proposed research
pioneers the beginning of a new approach to mechanical ventilation by combining
advances in engineering simulation techniques with clinical applications. The
benefits to society may include repairing lung injury in patients with
respiratory failures resulting from multiple sources. If successful, this
project will open a venue for patient specific computational simulations to
avoid respiratory failures both in children and adults. The research results
will be integrated into PI's educational activities and explore outreach
activities with middle school and high school students through programs such as
Richmond?s ?QUESTERS? program, and YMCA Metro Teens at VCU. Dissemination will
be through journal and conference publications along with a website for carrying
out virtual simulations of respiratory failures and strategies to avoid them.