* 0969153
* Community for Achievement in Science, Academics, and Research (CASAR)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2017
* Charles Hauser, Saint Edward's University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 07/31/2017
* USD 599,867.00

The St. Edward's University (SEU) Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics Talent Expansion Program (STEP): CASAR (Community for Achievement in
Science, Academics and Research)-Science Living Learning Community (LLC) Project
is increasing the numbers and retention of students, particularly women and
underrepresented minorities, in the STEM disciplines through an
interdisciplinary academic living learning community comprised of faculty, staff
and students that supports the academic success of students as they move into,
through and beyond SEU. The LLC students enrich their research skills by working
in multicultural teams on scientific projects that include cross-disciplinary
laboratory experiences. Students begin with a one-week Freshman Accelerated
Research Methods summer program prior to the start of their first academic
sessions, followed by a year residing in the CASAR LLC. At the end of the first
year, interested CASAR students participate in a summer undergraduate research
program on campus, mentored by the faculty. During the second year, the students
have the option of continuing in the CASAR-Science LLC. In their junior and
senior years, students are encouraged to participate in other existing summer
undergraduate research projects both locally and at off-campus sites, and serve
as mentors to incoming freshmen and sophomore LLC participants. Faculty are
intimately involved at all stages of the program along with support staff, such
as academic advisors, residence life personnel, counselors, tutors, and the
Office of Graduate Fellowships. As a Hispanic Serving Institution SEU is
attracting and retaining traditionally underrepresented students into STEM
careers.