* 0969989
* Advanced Accelerator Physics Research on Electron Beam Sources
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Jeffrey Terry, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2015
* USD 490,007.00

This award allows the Illinois Institute of Technology to continue a program of
research undertaken with Argonne National Lab to identify natural or constructed
photoemissive materials that can produce bright electron beams of lower
intrinsic (thermal) emittance than is currently achievable. Lowering the
emittance of bright electron beams is a goal in the field of accelerator physics
for the realization of next generation light sources and linear colliders.
Investigation of samples of varying materials and surface preparations will be
carried out for the purpose of determining optimal photocathode characteristics
for the production of low emittance beams. This research should also lead to an
evaluation of potential surface preparation techniques, such as thin film or
atomic layer deposition, for use in control of emission properties. Another goal
of the research is to aid in design optimization of the Angle Resolved
Photoemission Spectrometer (ARPES), which is being developed for intrinsic
emission measurements at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL). This research has
been designated by the Physics Division as Potentially Transformative Research.
It is challenging in nature yet the results could have major worldwide effects
on accelerator design. Broader impacts include education and impacts on other
fields of research. The research proposed would also provide opportunities for
students at Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) to become involved with a
research effort at Argonne National Laboratory, while allowing them to work on
contributions to the project in an IIT laboratory. The application oriented
nature of this research can help cross the boundary between basic research and
technological advance. Better light sources will advance research in medicine,
geology, environmental science, and the biological, chemical and physical
sciences.