* 0969948
* PARTICLE ASTROPHYSICS WITH VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Rene Ong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2014
* USD 1,426,211.00

High-energy particle astrophysics has been revolutionized during the last decade
as a result of discoveries made by ground-based gamma-ray telescopes. Imaging
atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes and air shower arrays have now detected more
than 80 point sources of gamma-radiation at energies above 100 GeV, the very
high-energy (VHE) regime. In some cases the emitted radiation exceeds energies
of 20 TeV. The detected VHE sources include pulsar nebulae, binary systems,
supernova remnants, the Galactic center, blazars, radio galaxies, and starburst
galaxies. With detailed measurements of these sources, we are making great
strides towards understanding the acceleration and emission mechanisms taking
place in the most energetic objects in the universe. The need to more fully
explore the high-energy sky to search for, and understand, these cosmic
accelerators is now stronger than ever. In space, the Fermi Gamma-ray Space
Telescope surveys the GeV sky with much greater sensitivity than its
predecessor, EGRET. On the ground, VERITAS (the Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System), an array of four large atmospheric Cherenkov
telescopes, is now fully operational at a sensitivity level more than an order
of magnitude better than the previous generation of instruments. Indeed, VERITAS
is presently the most sensitive gamma-ray telescope in the world. It has
operated extremely well during the last two years and is already producing a
wealth of scientific information, including the discovery, and detailed
measurements, of many of new sources of VHE gamma-
rays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the UCLA group's efforts that
will be focused on maintaining VERITAS, taking and analyzing data, and
continuing the scientific harvest. UCLA also plays a leading role in the dark
matter key science project that searches for gamma-ray signatures of
annihilating dark matter. A critical activity in all of these scientific areas
will be to incorporate results obtained from Fermi data and to collaborate with
Fermi scientists. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal
include a commitment of the UCLA group to supporting the overall VERITAS
Education and Public Outreach (EPO) program, which it helped to develop. The EPO
program reaches local audiences at the Whipple Observatory Visitor's Center,
museum audiences at the Adler Planetarium, and the general public through the
VERITAS education web site.