* 0969616
* A Statistical Framework for the Design and Analysis of Multi-Fidelity Computer Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Peter Chien, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 05/31/2013
* USD 227,068.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a new statistical framework
for the design, sampling and modeling of such simulations. Multi-fidelity
computer modeling is emerging as a popular method for studying complex systems
in engineering. This method combines a large number of approximate simulations
with a smaller number of detailed simulations for building prediction models,
calibration and optimization. The research will result in tools and techniques
which are general enough to apply to a large array of engineering problems in
which two computer models are available and one model is more accurate but more
expensive than the other. The research effort is focused on the development of a
new sampling scheme for estimating the expected values of the outputs of a set
of multi-fidelity computer simulations, a new type of statistical design for
efficiently running multi-fidelity computer simulations and novel statistical
methods for modeling multi-fidelity computer simulations with qualitative and
quantitative factors. Challenging real-world problems from the industry and
national labs will be used to test and validate the developed results.

If successful, the results of this research will provide engineers a statistics-
guided framework for efficiently conducting multi-fidelity computer simulations.
Example applications include conceptual design, electronic cooling, hydrology,
impact dynamics, material design, nanotechnology, oil reserve management,
polymer electrolyte fuel cells manufacturing, thermal dynamics and vehicle
multi-body dynamics. Computer simulations are now widely used for solving
several pressing issues faced by the U.S. and the world such as climate change,
energy conservation and renewable/clean energy innovation. The developed results
will potentially enable researchers in these critical fields to use simulations
to tackle problems of much larger scales. The research will be disseminated as
open source software to directly benefit users of multi-fidelity computer
experiments and make a long-term impact. Graduate and undergraduate statistics
and engineering students will benefit through involvement in the research and
new course offering.