* 0969757
* Numerical Studies Of Walking Technicolor For LHC Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Joseph Kiskis, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2015
* USD 90,000.00

The world's most energetic particle accelerator, the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC), has begun operations. This opens a new era of discovery in particle
physics. A major justification for the LHC is to determine why the weak
interaction, which causes many forms of radioactivity and controls the
brightness of the sun, is so much weaker than the electromagnetic interaction.
Ulitmately, this is because the photon, which induces electromagnetic
interactions, is massless while the W and Z particles which induce weak
interactions are very massive. But that begs the question of why the W and Z
particles are so heavy. The standard explanation postulates that this is
accomplished through electroweak symmetry breaking using the Higgs mechanism,
which brings with it the famous but elusive Higgs elementary particle. However,
the Higgs particle has not yet been observed and the Higgs mechanism has not
been experimentally established. Therefore, to guide the interpretation of
experimental results, it is important to study the theoretical structure and
phenomenological predictions of alternative approaches. An appealing alternative
is dynamical electroweak symmetry breaking caused by technicolor interactions.
This project will use advanced theoretical techniques and a massive application
of computing resources to learn how technicolor theories work and whether they
can explain the experimental results that will be produced by the LHC in the
next few years.

Project funding will also provide research opportunities and mentoring to
support the development of a graduate student into an independent researcher.
This funding also provides a unique opportunity for the student to become a
member of the research collaboration, and to have access to resources at the
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, including researchers, super-computing,
and specialized optimized software. At UC Davis, the High Energy Frontier Theory
Initiative has a series of public lectures, several of which been related to LHC
discovery potential. When there are actual discoveries, additional lectures will
make those accessible to the general public.