* 0969061
* Analysis of IceCube Data at UW-Madison 2010-2013
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* John Gallagher, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2013
* USD 4,360,000.00

This award provides continued funding for the UW-Madison group's scientific
analysis of data collected with the South Pole IceCube neutrino observatory.
IceCube will reach a total exposure of a km-squared-year of data within one
year, a target neutrino astronomy has aspired to since the nineteen seventies.
If typical estimates of their flux are valid, they will reach the sensitivity to
observe the flux of cosmogenic neutrinos produced by the interactions of cosmic
rays with microwave photons. If gamma ray bursts accelerate the observed
extragalactic cosmic rays, they will detect the neutrinos produced when the
protons and photons coexist in the fireball. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group
participates in all major scientific analyses; in this project they emphasize
that their goal is to not only increase statistics and better understand the
systematics of the detector, but to focus on improvements of the analysis
methods made possible by a larger and better instrument. UW-Madison scientists
contribute on average half of their time to service tasks required to maintain
and operate the detector. IceCube will undoubtedly enter a phase of
modifications and enhancements of capabilities resulting from experience
operating the detector and from new science opportunities. The group actively
participates in the R&amp;D program that capitalizes on the current IceCube
scientific program. The radio detection of ultra high-energy neutrinos is the
main focus at this time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The mystique of
the South Pole environment and the compelling science are an alluring mix. The
results of IceCube science will enhance scientific and technological
understanding on many levels through broad dissemination of the results and
experiences. IceCube is in a unique class of projects that inspire the
innovative capacity of a new generation of American scientists and engineers.