* 0969576
* New Magnetorheological Actuator with Embedded Hall-Effect Sensor for Hysteresis Elimination
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Hakan Gurocak, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 119,903.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate a new magnetorheological
(MR) brake actuator with an embedded Hall-effect sensor in its flux path to
eliminate hysteresis using closed-loop control. The new actuator will also
incorporate a permanent magnet, coil and serpentine flux path to reduce the
overall size to improve its torque-to-volume ratio. MR-brake actuators have been
implemented in many applications including civil engineering, haptics, exercise
equipment, automobile suspensions and tactile displays. However, their
hysteretic behavior makes control challenging. The research will result in a
systematic methodology to identify the dominant parameters of the actuator and
study their complex interactions. The research approach progresses from
parameterized finite element simulations to analysis of the data with design of
experimental techniques and to verifications with a prototype actuator.

If successful, the results of this research will transform the state-of-the-art
MR-brake actuator technology into a smart actuator technology. Example
applications include automotive industry, aerospace, robotics, civil
engineering, prosthetics, haptics, vibration control, game industry and
rehabilitation. The results will be disseminated to allow the creation of
commercial devices. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will benefit
through classroom instruction and involvement in the research. A new workshop on
smart fluids and actuators will be organized for the underrepresented middle and
high school students during the annual MESA events on campus. The workshop will
allow children to conduct experiments with magnets, coils and MR fluid and
emphasize how research leads to development of new knowledge and products.