* 0969386
* RUI: The Interaction of Radiation with Free and Confined Quantum Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,11/30/2013
* Valeriy Dolmatov, University of North Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 11/30/2013
* USD 68,268.00

This project is aimed at an advanced theoretical study and understanding of
systems known as spherical endohedral fullerenes, designated as A@Cn. These are
systems where a foreign atom A is captured and held inside the hollow carbon
cage consisting of n-carbon atoms, Cn, termed a fullerene (also known as a
bucky-ball). These systems were discovered only relatively recently and their
study is only really beginning. There are a number of possible applications of
these novel systems; thus the study of their fundamental properties is of both
basic and applied (technological) importance. They are regarded as new building
blocks for materials with unique properties, as containers for reversible energy
storage, as ideal building blocks for the qubits of a quantum computer, as
unique drug delivery "vehicles" in medical imaging and cancer therapy, etc. The
current knowledge of their properties is far from complete. It is only over the
latest decade or so that the structure of atoms A encapsulated (confined) inside
fullerene cages, as well as their interaction with electromagnetic and charged-
particle radiation, have fallen under intense scrutiny by theorists. As for
experiment on these formations, it is in its infancy. In this project, various
important aspects of the structure and dynamics of endohedral fullerenes will be
studied. Specifically, the impact of confinement-produced effects due to the
fullerene cage on the structure of the encapsulated atom, as well as ionization
spectra of the atom A captured inside neutral fullerenes Cn, A@Cn, positively
charged fullerene ions (cations, A@Cnz+) and negatively charged fullerence ions
(anions, A@Cnz-). In addition atoms inside of multiwalled, nested, fullerenes
(A@Cn@Cm@...@Ck) known as bucky-onions, will be investigated. Various models
representing the effects of confinement will be used to address the problem at
various levels of approximation. Existing computer programs will be generalized
to include the effects of confinement, electron-electron interactions and
dynamical polarization of carbon cages of endohedral fullerenes by the incoming
radiation on the structure and dynamics of the encapsulated atoms. The research
program is expected to reveal new properties of endohedral fullerenes of
fundamental and technological significance. Collaboration with experimental
groups will be purposefully sought to assure quality of the theoretical study.
Thus, the calculational results will be provided to experimenters on gas-phase
endohedral fullerenes to identify some of the most interesting and/or useful
measurements which could be performed, thereby contributing synergy to the
advancement of this promising, rapidly developing area of research.

The involvement and active participation of undergraduate students in this
project, with a special focus on students from underrepresented groups, will
foster and strengthen integration of quality research and education at the
University of North Alabama, as well as enhance the research infrastructure. The
research will motivate undergraduate students to seek engagement in professional
physics or other science and engineering careers. The results of research will
be disseminated broadly to the scientific community. Society will benefit from
the proposed activity by gaining new fundamental knowledge on natural phenomena
with possibly important applications, and by the training of students who, early
in their careers, will have acquired a unique professional experience. This, in
turn, will significantly contribute to the benefit, health and vitality of
science and engineering and the prosperity of society.