* 0969692
* RUI - Precision Measurements of the Fine Structure of High-Angular Momentum Rydberg States of Rotationally Excited Molecular Hydrogen
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Erica Simoson, SUNY College at Fredonia
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 214,000.00

This work will obtain precise measurements of the fine structure of high-angular
momentum Rydberg states of rotationally excited molecular hydrogen, H2. This
study will lead to precise determinations of such fundamental properties of the
molecular hydrogen ion as multipole moments, polarizabilities and hyperfine
constants. Of particular interest are the properties of the rotationally excited
states (R=2 and 3) of the ground vibrational state (v=0) of H2+ that have thus
far been experimentally inaccessible. There are few existing direct measurements
of H2+ because of the lack of stable excited states. However, an excited
electron, bound to an ion core, in a large nearly circular orbit can act as a
very sensitive probe to investigate electric and magnetic properties of the ion
core. High angular momentum Rydberg states meet this criterion and, therefore,
precise studies of these spectra afford the opportunity to detect long-range
properties of the ion. The basic model in molecular physics, H2+, has been
studied extensively by theorists, but there are comparatively few precise
experimental measurements. The need for accurate models beyond the adiabatic
approximation is increasing, and several theoretical approaches have been
developed. This study will provide an excellent avenue to test the accuracy of
the theoretical models. A novel approach to the detection techniques of Resonant
Excitation Stark Ionization Spectroscopy (RESIS) will allow the first
measurements of the higher rotational levels of H2 that were unattainable in
previous studies due to their fast autoionization rates. This work will provide
precise measurements relevant to the advances in H2+ theory, which are necessary
in other areas such as ultracold molecules and interstellar chemistry. The new
measurements will also provide immediate improvement to the best existing
spectral measurement in H2+. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental program will
have broad impact at three levels. First, undergraduate students at State
University of New York at Fredonia in general would be positively impacted
though the modeling of an active researcher, infusion of current research into
course work, active participation in research, and experience in presenting
research results at multiple levels. Studies in the precise measurement of the
fine structure of high-L Rydberg states offers students the opportunity to gain
experience with several types of equipment used quite universally in research
labs. In addition, the theoretical analysis of these nearly classical high-L
Rydberg systems can be understood by an upper-level undergraduate student. It
clearly demonstrates the use of perturbation theory in quantum mechanics, and
several concepts a student would learn in a typical electricity and magnetism
course, such as the multipole expansion. This research project will be used for
discussion of various topics in the PI's undergraduate classroom, in a range of
courses from algebra-based physics to 400-level physics courses. Second, the
funding of this research program will help establish the career of a new faculty
researcher, increase the on-campus experimental research, develop
interdisciplinary research interests between the Departments of Physics and
Chemistry, and further expand the presence of atomic, molecular, and optical
physics at small undergraduate institutions. Third, the research at a rurally
situated public university of higher education, which is part of the K-16
educational pipeline, positively impacts undergraduate students who are
underrepresented in the STEM pipeline such as women, economically disadvantaged
students who enter higher education through community college and continue
through publicly funded regional universities, first generation college
students, and students who come from rural, geographically isolated areas.
Presentations at local community colleges and/or other regional institutions in
this rural area positively extend the impact of this research into this under-
served area.