* 0969261
* CAREER:  Toward the Rational Design of Multifunctional Nanomaterials:  Synthesis and Characterization of Nanostructured Metal-Organic Frameworks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/08/2009,12/31/2015
* Krista Walton, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 12/31/2015
* USD 421,567.00

0846781 Walton

This NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work
by Professor Krista Walton at Kansas State University to uncover the fundamental
knowledge required to design and synthesize next-generation multifunctional,
porous materials with molecule-specific properties for adsorption applications.
Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) represent a new direction in porous materials
research that could lead to the creation of designer-specific materials. The
rich field of coordination chemistry provides a versatile platform on which
these materials may be assembled using an almost infinite set of building
blocks. This CAREER award presents an integrated research and education plan for
achieving transformative advances in porous materials research.

The goal of this work is to explore the possibilities of MOFs as novel porous
structures that can be chemically functionalized to attain molecule-specific
adsorption properties. Three synergistic research objectives will drive this
work: (1) synthesize a new family of metal-organic frameworks based on
functionalization of trimesic acid to yield structures with hydrophobic, basic,
or acidic adsorption sites, (2) explore multi-component adsorption and humidity
effects in a hydrophobic, mixed?]ligand MOF, and (3) employ molecular modeling
to uncover fundamental adsorption mechanisms in a mixed-ligand MOF. The
fundamental knowledge to be gained from this work does not yet exist for these
materials. The sorbent design criteria that can be extracted from this
information will provide a major advance in porous materials design.

Previous advances in porous materials through solid state chemistry have
proceeded in a largely empirical fashion. This work will focus on exploring
techniques to control the physical structure and chemical functionality of novel
porous materials to achieve targeted adsorption properties. The impact of these
findings will reverberate through various interdisciplinary applications
including hydrogen storage, site-specific catalysis, adsorptive separations,
drug delivery devices, and therapeutic coatings.

The objectives of the education plan are to train graduate and undergraduate
students in nanotechnology and improve involvement of women in science and
engineering by increasing K-6 scientific literacy. Chemical engineering
curriculum will be improved by development of a new graduate course in
nanoporous materials and a new fixed-bed adsorption computational tool to
enhance the undergraduate mass transfer course. A field-training program with
three industrial partners will be developed to provide graduate students with
societal context for their research area and expose them to important research
problems in an industrial setting. A K-6 outreach program will be developed for
K-6 education, with a specific emphasis on increasing the participation of women
in STEM fields. The PI will develop a new porous materials module for
interaction with local elementary schools through both the Women in Engineering
and Science Program and Kansas 4-H Club. Project videos and activity methods
will be uploaded to YouTube and various K-6 teacher resource websites for
broader dissemination. Novel assessment tools will be developed for evaluating
outcomes of the K-6 education plan. Results will be published in educational
journals.

Successful completion of this work will advance the current state of knowledge
in porous materials synthesis and will provide new capabilities for creating
structures with targeted adsorption properties. The potential impact on
adsorption-based technologies is great. A direct impact on adsorption
separations (CO2/methane; olefins/paraffins) is expected. Graduate and
undergraduate researchers will receive excellent training in nanomaterials and
adsorption in the PI's lab and through field-training experiences with industry.
Results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journals and conferences.
Educational activities will create new capabilities and resources for K-6
education in nanotechnology. This program will improve the scientific literacy
of this age group and boost involvement of women in science and engineering.