* 0969413
* Development of a Triboluminescence and Photocatalysis Based System for Intrinsic Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Hsu-Pin (Ben) Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

This research project focuses on developing and validating innovative
technologies for next-generation composite aircrafts and other large structures,
with intrinsic sensing properties to provide complete structural damage
awareness. The work is aimed at creating a paradigm shift in damage sensing
through the development of the novel Triboluminescence and Photocatalysis (TriP)
system that utilizes embedded triboluminescent (TL) sensors to provide real-time
ubiquitous detection of crack initiation and growth at the material level. TL
crystals will be used to manufacture "pain responsive" composite components
containing a novel "nervous system" of embedded nano-optoelectronic (CTiN) rods.
When stressed, triboluminescent crystals emit light, giving an indication of the
location and extent of damage. The emitted light is absorbed by nano-electronic
cells, which consists of nano-sized photocatalyst material in conjunction with
carbon nanotubes to conduct as sensory pathways disseminating information to
sensing stations. The underlying issues to be investigated are the placement of
TL crystals, light conversion, and the subsequent transmission of electrical
signals using the novel CTiN rods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
confidence in aircraft structural health monitoring through systematic
investigations of material systems for embedded sensing, embedded data transfer
and utilization of sensory information, without compromising structural
properties.