* 0969482
* Constraining Gravity Dual Models of Strongly Coupled Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Justin Vazquez-Poritz, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Sher
* 03/31/2014
* USD 60,000.00

The quark-gluon plasma that is being created at particle accelerators presents
theorists with the challenge of understanding the dynamics of strongly
interacting quarks. An emerging approach for modeling strongly coupled plasmas
is gauge-gravity duality. Gravity dual models have already uncovered analytical
connections between a wide variety of dynamic variables that were not realized
with conventional gauge theory techniques. The goal of this project is to place
phenomenological constraints on gravity dual models to such a degree that we can
use experimental data for precision tests of gauge-gravity duality.

The New York City College of Technology CUNY plays a leading role in the
education of minorities in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) and is a Hispanic Serving Institution. The PI will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups by involving students in research
projects. This will enable the students to apply technical skills learned in the
classroom, develop their investigative skills and participate in the scientific
enterprise. In addition, by helping to write papers and presenting the research
at conferences, the students will improve their information literacy, writing
and communication skills. This will help to develop their skill set needed for
lifelong learning and maximize their chances of success in the STEM areas. Since
the majority of City Tech students are the first in their families to go to
college, outreach programs are critical in order to increase family involvement
and support, as well as raise the public awareness about the importance of the
STEM areas. The PI will also organize and develop a series of public lectures
for the local community, which will present physics in a non-technical and
entertaining manner.