* 0969297
* Strange Meson and Baryon Photoproduction
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Kenneth Hicks, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2014
* USD 484,101.00

The goal of this research is to learn how different types of quarks can combine
to form short-lived particles. These data help physicists to understand more
about the fundamental theory of the strong force, called quantum chromodynamics
or QCD for short. This is the same force that binds together protons and
neutrons inside the nucleus of an atom. The particles being studied here have a
heavier quark, called the strange quark, which is not found isolated in a stable
nucleus. Instead, these particles are created using the energy of a collision
between a beam of gamma-rays (high-energy photons) and a stationary target of
protons, called photoproduction. The reason to look for particles with the
strange quark is that the properties of particles with heavy quarks are easier
to calculate than are particles with only light quarks. Even though strange
particles are not abundant in nature, they help us understand the theoretical
calculations of QCD, which also apply to stable particles and the nuclei of all
atoms.

The broader impact of this research is to advance technology and to train young
scientists. Advances in technology come from building new particle detectors,
such as the Pre-shower Calorimeter which is part of the CLAS12 detector being
constructed at Jefferson Lab. This detector measures the energy of charged
particles that strike it. New materials, such as wavelength-shifting optical
fibers, along with high-speed electronics are part of the technology used for
this detector, which is funded in part by the NSF. Young scientists, both at the
undergraduate and graduate levels, are helping to construct and test the
detector. Past graduates of this program have gone on to work at other
laboratories, universities and private industry, both in the USA and abroad.