* 0969201
* Meson Physics at Arizona State University
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,11/30/2013
* Barry Ritchie, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 11/30/2013
* USD 510,000.00

Since our knowledge of the excited states for nucleons and mesons still possess
major gaps and ambiguities, any description of those particles faces severe
handicaps. This research and education program will utilize intense polarized
beams of high energy photons in Hall B at Jefferson Lab to reveal new details of
the structure of protons and neutrons by isolating the distribution of angular
momenta and spin among the quarks and gluons within them. These data are
absolutely necessary for progress in understanding the structure of the proton,
and are specifically aimed at enabling achievement of one of the NSAC critical
milestones for hadronic physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While advancing discovery
and understanding, the project incorporates teaching, training, and learning
through the integrated involvement of undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. Participating students and postdoctoral personnel will
be trained in the techniques of experimental nuclear and particle physics, as
well as be coached and encouraged to participate and make presentations at
professional meetings. The work will strengthen existing collaborative ties
between ASU and institutions around the world. The group will continue to
maintain and operate the tagged photon facility at Jefferson Lab for the user
community. Results will be disseminated through presentations at international
meetings and publications in high-visibility journals. Lay descriptions will be
provided on the group's web site and the ASU Physics Department newsletter.