* 0969747
* Performance Analysis of Closed Queueing Networks with Subexponential Processing Times
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Hayriye Ayhan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 05/31/2014
* USD 119,994.00

The objective of this research is to study a class of closed queueing networks
that are prevalent in telecommunication systems. In particular, we will consider
systems with subexponential processing times since there is strong evidence that
in many telecommunications applications, processing times have subexponential
distributions. This means that the tail of the probability distributions decay
much slower than exponential implying that the probability of extremely large
observations is non-negligible. The intellectual merit of this project involves
analyzing certain characteristics of two key performance measures: cycle times
(time spent in the system) and waiting times (from arrival until joining the
server at each node). In telecommunication systems, one is interested in the
probability that any one of these performance measures is greater than a large
value which is referred as tail asymptotics. The objective is to understand the
tail asymptotics of transient and stationary cycle times and waiting times. An
approach that involves developing upper and lower bounds on these two
performance measures and obtaining expressions on the tail probabilities using
these bounds will be employed.

Even though there has been a growing interest in queueing systems with
subexponential processing times, most of the existing research has focused on
single stage queues. Thus, there is a gap between the types of telecommunication
systems that can be modeled using the existing analytical models and those that
arise in telecommunication settings. If successful, the results of this research
will bridge this gap. Moreover, this research project is long term. The
analytical models developed during this phase will be (eventually) used to
design control strategies for telecommunication systems that will ultimately
lead to improvements in the operations of these systems.