* 0969821
* Math Based Precision Manufacturing and Metrology for Complex Mechanical Assemblies
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Joseph Davidson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 12/31/2014
* USD 422,513.00

The objective of this research is to integrate the three sequential stages that
typically are required to get complex mechanical assemblies to function and
assemble properly. The first of the three stages is the setting of limits on the
geometric variations by design engineers. The second is conversion of these
limits by manufacturing engineers to process plans, the step-by-step procedures
used in a factory to accomplish the manufacture of a part or an assembly. The
third is the conversion of measured points on the surface of a part during
quality control inspection to a form that may be used for direct comparison with
the limits set by the designer. The method is to extend the concepts of a newly
developed mathematical model for design both to complex geometries and to the
domains of manufacturing and inspection of mechanical parts. The new model
represents the design limits as boundaries in multidimensional geometric space.
The boundaries separate smaller variations, which are acceptable, from larger
ones that are not. The new math model is unique because no other model
represents all classes of limits used in the practice of design and
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The benefits from this award, if
successfully carried out, will be a first mathematical model to integrate
manufacturing variations in mechanical parts in a manner that will be consistent
with the standards used in practice. Further, until now, all geometric
manufacturing variations have been attributed to manufacturing processes, not to
the geometry of the feature and the specified limits to the variations. The
proposed use of the new mathematical model for design will enable a new way of
thinking by separating variations that are purely geometric from those that come
from characteristics of manufacturing processes and machines.