* 0969150
* Effective Properties of Multi-phase Materials by Stochastic Reduced Order Models (SROMs)
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Mircea Grigoriu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 04/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The project will develop a probabilistic method for calculating macroscopic
properties of multi-phase and other random heterogeneous materials. Multi-phase
materials are used extensively in practice since their properties can be tuned
to particular applications by altering the volume fraction, geometry, and
physical properties of their constituents. For example, the structural members
of the Voyager aircraft, that has flown nonstop around the world without midair
refueling, were made of graphite fibers; portland and asphaltic cement concretes
are used extensively as structural and paving materials; and carbon fiber cement
matrix composites have been applied successfully in electronics. Stochastic
reduced order models will be used to characterize properties of random
heterogeneous materials at small scale and calculate macroscopic properties of
these materials.

The project will have a notable theoretical impact on both the formulation and
solution of a broad range of problems in science and engineering since these
problems can be described by equations with random coefficients/input, and
stochastic reduced order models provide an efficient tool for solving these
equations. The proposed research is expected to have a significant practical
impact since it can be applied to solve large scale problems in civil and
mechanical engineering. The project will also contribute to both graduate and
undergraduate education. For example, an undergraduate student will be involved
in all aspects of the proposed research and will lecture on his/her work in a
popular undergraduate course on continuum mechanics to gain teaching experience
and motivate undergraduates to do research and consider graduate studies.