* 0969417
* Model reduction in systems biology: the Mori-Zwanzig projection method
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Jianhua Xing, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 466,020.00

The complexity of biochemical networks derives from the fact that they are
governed by nonlinear kinetics far-from-equilibrium. In recent years, systems
biology has emerged as a discipline to examine biological complexity from the
point-of-view of integrated systems rather than separate components (the
reductionists? point-of-view). A systems approach may help to resolve many
fundamental issues in the life sciences that relate to systems-level
interactions rather than individual biomolecular species. To achieve a full
systems-level description, many new analytical techniques and theories need to
be developed, in addition to new experimental advances. One major challenge
concerns computational modeling of biological dynamics by differential
equations. Due to the complexity of any particular biochemical control system, a
large number of variables and parameters are needed to describe its dynamics. To
have the desired predictive power, the values of these parameters need to be
determined with sufficient precision, but for most systems the requisite
experimental data are not available. This is a general problem in many areas of
science, including physics and chemistry, where the powerful Mori-Zwanzig
projection method is widely used for studying Hamiltonian dynamics. In this
method, the complex dynamical system is first separated into primary and
secondary subsystems. Through systematic information contraction, one can focus
on the primary system, which contains the variables of primary interest (in
particular, experimentally resolvable variables). The secondary subsystem is not
treated explicitly, but its effect on the primary system is properly accounted
for mathematically. In this proposal, the researchers will develop a general
formalism and numerical algorithms for non-Hamiltonian systems without detailed
balance, with a focus on cellular regulatory networks. The method will be
especially useful in three cases: 1) where a coarse-grained model is desirable,
or available data prevents a more detailed model; 2) where the network under
study is embedded in a larger network; and 3) where one wants to perform multi-
scale modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed methods will provide a
powerful tool for systems biologists to approach the ultimate goals of
understanding complex biological processes and of improving human health. One
encounters similar situations, of dealing with a complex system with incomplete
information, in many other research areas, for example: financial transactions,
the power supply network, and the spread and evolution of viruses during an
epidemic or a bioterrorist attack.