* 0969322
* Strong Field Quantum Control
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Philip Bucksbaum, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,667,000.00

The motion of electrons and atoms during and immediately following their
interaction with light fields is one of the important and difficult challenges
of quantum physics. The standard methods of quantum calculations that underpin
most current understanding of molecular structure are based on simplifying
assumptions that break down at critical times when molecules absorb intense
light, collide strongly, or are subjected to other strong electric fields.
Without these simplifications, the calculations become intractable even for
molecules of modest size, and the basic connections between atomic motion and
electron motion in molecules are not well understood. The goal of the quantum
control research in this project is to use strong fields to direct quantum
processes towards desired targets, such as rearranging the bonds in a molecule.
Control methods using strong fields can overcome the complexities described
above, through the use of powerful techniques such as learning feedback
algorithms that automatically reprogram the experimental driving fields to seek
to optimize the target yield without guidance from calculations. This project
explores three new ways to improve the effectiveness of quantum control. The
first is a new conceptual framework called a Quantum Resonance Ring that could
help our understanding of many-body quantum problems. The second improvement is
to apply the techniques of pattern recognition to the high-dimensional problems
in quantum control. The third improvement is to extend laser control
investigations to use newly available x-ray laser sources.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In a broader context, quantum control research will ultimately lead
to a better understanding of the actions of electrons in molecular
transformation and chemistry. Electron motion is considered a gateway problem
for progress in areas of nano-materials, chemical science, and energy
technologies. Insights gained from this work could therefore influence problems
such as the energy conversion efficiency of new photovoltaics; the search for a
catalyst to efficiently extract hydrogen from water; or the development of
sustainable biofuel technologies. Quantum control is also the fundamental
technology in the new field of quantum information. Future scalable quantum
computers or quantum information transfer systems will rely on quantum control
for gate operations and for error correction. Some of the most promising
implementations involve the use of electrons as qubits and lasers as control
fields, so the knowledge gained about quantum control of electrons in the
presence of strong laser fields could be directly applicable.