* 0969173
* RUI: Establishing an Undergraduate Research Group in Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Nathan Frank, Augustana College
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 120,769.00

The preparation of undergraduate students for their future careers or graduate
school requires additional experiences outside the classroom. A new faculty
member at Augustana College (a small, undergraduate-only, liberal arts
institution), will address this need by establishing an undergraduate research
group in nuclear physics to perform experiments at the National Superconducting
Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State University (MSU). The primary
experimental goal is to study the atomic nucleus 28F. Determining the structure
of 28F will help to constrain current theoretical models of nuclei.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this study the neutron and charged particle are
detected in coincidence since 28F is so unstable that it immediately falls apart
into 27F and a neutron. Charged particles are bent away from the neutrons with a
large-gap dipole magnet where their properties are measured using a suite of
charged particle detectors. The neutrons are detected in the Modular Neutron
Array (MoNA). MoNA was built by a collaboration of mostly undergraduate
institutions of which Augustana is now a member. The analysis of the experiment
is currently underway. The grant provides support for undergraduate student
research and dissemination of results at conferences. In addition, the grant
will support the investigation of possible improvements to the overall detector
system and performing similar experiments to 28F described above.