* 0969034
* CAREER: Hippocampal place cell plasticity
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Mayank Mehta, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 11/30/2012
* USD 395,054.00

This project focuses on how the Hebbian, or spike timing-dependent plasticity
(STDP), influences the activity of networks of neurons in the hippocampus to
mediate behavioral learning. Using a combination of computational modeling and
behavioral electrophysiology, Mayank Mehta and his collaborators have shown that
there are large, associative, and anticipatory changes in the activity of
hippocampal place-selective neurons with experience, termed place cell
plasticity. The experimental measurements of place cell plasticity are
consistent with Dr. Mehtas and others computational theories of temporal
sequence learning via STDP. Thus, place cell plasticity provides an assay for
understanding network mechanisms of learning.

In this project, Dr. Mehta will develop biophysical computational theories of
learning in networks of neurons via STDP, improving on existing simplified
models. The predictions of these computational models will be tested
experimentally using behavioral electrophysiology. These experiments will help
to isolate the contribution of STDP from other, non-specific mechanisms, to
place cell plasticity and learning. This combination of theoretical and
experimental approaches will enhance our understanding of how synaptic
plasticity modifies the activity of complex networks of neurons to generate
behavioral learning.