* 0969695
* Fiber-Optic Technology for Fully-Distributed Physical, Chemical, and Biological Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Anbo Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,559.00

The objective of the project is to develop an optical fiber sensor technology
that will enable fully-distributed simultaneous measurement of physical,
chemical, and biological parameters in a single fiber. This approach is based on
a novel traveling long period grating (LPG), generated either acoustically or
optically in a single-mode fiber. The spatially-localized traveling grating
couples the guided optical mode in the fiber core to cladding modes, which then
interact with functional coatings on the surface of the fiber to cause the
transmitted optical spectrum to shift. Unlike traditional LPGs, which are
limited to single-point measurement, the traveling LPG enables fully-distributed
sensing. By partitioning of different surface coatings, each of which can have
selective response to different parameters, a variety of physical, chemical, and
biological parameters can be measured with a single fiber. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will culminate in a full system demonstration for
distributed measurement of various physical, chemical, and biological parameters
with one fiber. Future applications of this work include pollution detection in
rivers and lakes, chemical-bio terrorism agent detection for a variety of public
venues, hydrogen detection in future hydrogen energy systems, and leak detection
in long pipelines for various gaseous or liquid chemical delivery.