* 0969287
* Effective Academic and Student Affairs Collaboration to Enhance Student Success in Engineering and Applied Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2018
* Edmund Tsang, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,990,314.00

In this project faculty and administrators in the College of Engineering and
Applied Sciences (CEAS) are teaming with student affairs professionals to create
academic and student support programs that recognize the interwoven nature of
how students' cognitive and affective domains develop. This effort builds on an
earlier STEP Type 1A award that coupled the creation of learning communities for
first-year students in STEM disciplines with professional development and
support activities for faculty to improve their introductory STEM courses. Now,
this STEP 1B project is targeting three student populations: first-time first-
year CEAS students, returning sophomores, and community college transfer
students, particularly those from populations under-represented in STEM such as
women and under-represented ethnic minorities. As a result of the synergy
between the academic and student affairs units the project expects to see a ten
percent improvement in its retention and graduation rates. The project also
includes a recruiting component that builds on the special relationship between
the PI's institution and the community colleges in southwest Michigan to
aggressively recruit transfer students and high school students to increase the
number of under-represented engineering and applied sciences students to the
national average. The intellectual merit of this project lies in current
research on student development which asserts that growth in the affective and
cognitive domains is intertwined, and it draws on best practices regarding
academic and student affairs collaboration. In addition the project is
identifying the cultural, philosophical, organizational, and programmatic
characteristics of these two institutional units and seeks to increase the
number of faculty and student affairs professionals who actively collaborate,
with indicators of success for formative and summative assessment. Knowledge and
practice generated by this element of the project in turn holds potential for
having broader impact by serving as a model to advance collaboration between
academic and student affairs offices at other institutions and in STEM fields in
general. Furthermore, the PI's institution serves a student population with
diverse backgrounds in academic preparation and with a significant population of
community college transfer students that is representative of many state
regional universities. As a result the project offers the opportunity to
validate and then disseminate widely what is the effect of the project's
retention programs on different student populations.