* 0969961
* GOALI: A Multidisciplinary Approach to Simultaneous Market Segmentation and Product Family Definition
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Joseph Donndelinger, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 04/30/2014
* USD 248,588.00

The objective of the GOALI award is to integrate models of customer behavior and
product design constraints in a multidisciplinary design framework to
simultaneously develop marketing strategies and design families of feature-based
products. The relative effectiveness of inferring market segmentation from
discrete and continuous representations of variation in customer tastes will be
assessed in terms of impact on both solution quality and computational
tractability. Information on product design constraints will be used to develop
strategies for simplifying the optimization problem formulation. Heuristic
multiobjective optimization techniques will be applied to determine both the
optimal number of product variants and the configuration of each variant. The
uncertainties inherent in new product technology deployment will be accounted
for by estimating the likelihood of diverting customers to other variants in the
product family - or to competitors' products - when the feature content of the
optimal solution is changed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research
stands to redirect current thinking on optimal market-based product family
design. This integrated and context-specific approach offers inherent advantages
in balancing breadth of market coverage against operational expenses incurred in
engineering and manufacturing a diverse lineup of product variants. This
proposed work is particularly relevant to American manufacturing enterprises as
they can no longer afford to implement exhaustive strategies to product
proliferation. Instead, they must be strategically selective in targeting
products to well-defined customer groups with strong motivations for purchase.
Additionally, the dissemination of this work through creation, circulation, and
ongoing development of a comprehensive library of case study problems will
benefit the entire engineering design research community. Collaboration of
academic and industrial partners is essential to the project?s success as the
complexities encountered through real-world market conditions and design
constraints could not otherwise be identified and addressed.