* 0969143
* Virtual Melting and Amorphization as Mechanisms of Plastic Flow, Fracture, and Phase Transformations
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Valery Levitas, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 06/30/2014
* USD 312,000.00

This proposal addresses the new phenomenon of crystal-crystal phase
transformation and amorphization that can occur through virtual melting at
temperatures significantly below (1000K) the melting temperature. Some
indications were found that virtual melting may serve as mechanisms of various
structural changes: plastic flow under high strain rate loading of metals and
metallic nanowires, fracturing, and sublimation. The objective of this project
is to develop multiple theoretical and computational approaches (coupled to
experiment) to study the main features of virtual melting, and to explore the
generality of the phenomena in various applications. General continuum
thermodynamic and kinetic theories, as well as phase field theory and
quantitative models, will be developed and applied to simulations of phase
transformations, plastic flow under high strain-rate loading, fracture, and
sublimation via virtual melting. Molecular dynamics simulations for the same
phenomena and materials will be performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New mechanisms
related to virtual melting are expected in various material systems, e.g., for
phase transformation in HMX explosive, pharmaceuticals, and commercial nonlinear
optical media and for high-pressure amorphization in geological, electronic, and
superhard materials. Understanding the mechanism-based kinetics will lead to
ability to control the transformations and look for hidden phases that need to
be accessed (or avoided). One graduate student will be trained. Intense
interdisciplinary collaboration will be developed. The PI will develop a new
graduate course on multiscale modeling of phase transformations (available via
distance learning) and will organize symposia devoted to the phase
transformations.