* 0969790
* Microscopic Theory of Many-Particle Systems from Nuclear Physics to Cold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Gordon Baym, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2014
* USD 705,001.00

This award continues an ongoing program to develop fundamental theories of many-
particle systems, ranging from nuclei and nuclear matter to cold atoms, with
applications to astrophysical and condensed matter systems. A major focus is on
understanding new states of matter formed under extreme conditions, especially
quark gluon plasmas produced in ultrarelativistic heavy ion collisions. The
program applies nuclear theory to neutron stars and supernovae, with the aim of
understanding observations and, conversely, using observations to learn the
properties of matter. The research on atomic Bose-Einstein and superfluid Fermi
systems, a vital facet of the study of unusual states of matter, focusses on
atomic states at low temperature, as well as under extreme rotation. This
research also makes important interdisciplinary connections between ultracold
atomic systems and dense nuclear matter.

The nuclear and atomic systems being studied are very unusual many-particle
systems which provide broad intellectual insights. By working across the
boundaries between nuclear and atomic physics this program enables the building
of bridges and cross-fertilization between the hottest and coldest many-particle
systems in the universe. A vital component of this research program is the
education of young scientists who, through the broad training they receive and
their intimate involvement in the research of the PI's and colleagues, develop
the ability to combine nuclear, particle, astro, condensed matter and cold atom
physics research on forefront problems. The scientists trained in this program
have generally gone on to have significant impact in research at U.S.
universities and national laboratories, as well as abroad.