* 0969541
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: Collaborative Research: Fundamental and Applied Dynamics of Granular Crystals: Disorder, Localization and Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Chiara Daraio, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 07/31/2013
* USD 193,297.00

The research objective of the present proposal is to study nonlinear waveforms
that may arise in granular crystals, including traveling waves, defect modes,
and discrete breathers. It also intends to provide a roadmap for identifying
when these different structures will arise, systematically building up in
complexity, from monomer lattices, to dimmer, trimmer and heterogeneous ones,
and from one- to multiple-defect chains and even random lattices. Granular
crystals consist of chains of interacting particles that deform elastically when
they collide. Their properties (material types, sizes, shapes) are extremely
tunable and their dynamic response may be modified to be weakly or strongly
nonlinear. The project will involve a fruitful cross-pollination of tools and
methods from dynamical systems, nonlinear ordinary and partial differential
equations, asymptotic analysis and numerical computation on the theoretical
side. These will be interwoven with physical experiments that will attempt to
excite and identify the relevant nonlinear waves and to investigate their
properties (amplitude, width, energy, lifetime, interactions, higher-dimensional
analogs etc.). A continuous feedback loop between mathematical theory, numerical
simulation and physical experimentation will be the driving force of the
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that this project will have a
significant societal impact due to the potential discovery of mechanical systems
that may affect aspects of everyday life. In particular, localized modes will be
studied for potential use in energy harvesting systems, delay lines and shock
protective or vibration absorption materials. Additionally, the relevant effort
will involve student researchers with a vigorous educational component including
both formal (associated with coursework and research conferences) and informal
(inter-group exchanges and visits) educational opportunities. It will bring
together students from fundamentally different backgrounds (mathematics and
aeronautical/aerospace engineering) providing them with a rich interdisciplinary
experience that will offer an excellent framework for learning and scientific
exchange/collaboration. The program will also foster collaborations between the
two institutions, but also with other Universities (Oxford University in the UK,
Princeton University and the University of Athens). We expect that several
conference presentations, journal articles and patent applications will emerge
from this study.