* 0969857
* LIGO Observations and Gravitational Wave Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Lee Finn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

This award supports the goal of gravitational wave detection through the
development and implementation of advanced analysis techniques needed by the
advanced LIGO detectors. Specific analysis techniques being developed provide
quantitative and physically meaningful measures of the odds that a given multi-
detector gravitational wave data set includes the detector response to a
gravitational wave burst; enable inference of the properties of an unanticipated
gravitational wave source from its gravitational wave signal; and allow
quantitative analyses to be carried out on data whose positional uncertainty
includes a large fraction of the celestial sphere. Methods employed include
Bayesian statistical analysis and model selection, Monte Carlo sampling and
kernel density estimation methods, and the modeling of non-linear systems
through finite non-linear networks.

Gravitational wave detection will mark the beginning of a new chapter in the
annals of astronomy and astrophysics, and in our experimental understanding of
gravity. Not since Galileo first turned a telescope to the heavens has the
opportunity existed to view the cosmos in such a new and fundamentally different
way. This work's goal is to enable gravitational wave detection using the LIGO
detectors and exploit LIGO observations as a formidable new tool of astronomical
discovery and a probe of fundamental physics. As a frontier of scientific
discovery and accomplishment, the LIGO enterprise excites and motivates students
to pursue careers in physics and astronomy, and captures the imagination and
interest of the lay public. Through its direct contribution to that enterprise
this has broad and historic impact. This project trains a postdoctoral scholar
and a graduate student in frontier interdisciplinary science. The analysis
methods developed under this award have applicability that extends beyond LIGO
to other gravitational wave detection experiments (e.g., the Laser
Interferometer Space Antenna or pulsar timing array observations), and beyond
gravitational wave detection to other areas of science and beyond where
inference need to be drawn on weak or poorly resolved signals (e.g., Auger
cosmic-ray observations).