* 0969856
* Dynamics of Ultracold Neutral Plasmas in the First 100 NS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Scott Bergeson, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 420,000.00

The experiments to be done in this work will push the frontier of strongly
coupled neutral systems. Ultracold neutral plasmas provide an idealized system
in which to probe the effects of many-body interactions and particle
correlations. These correlations are predicted to change the collective behavior
of dense energetic plasmas. They are also predicted to alter fundamental atomic
processes in plasmas such as ion thermalization, three-body recombination, and
collisional ionization. Ultra-cold neutral plasmas occupy a unique place in
phase space, at the confluence of atomic, plasma, and condensed matter physics.
We create these plasmas by exciting laser-cooled atoms to states near the
ionization limit. The initial density, ion temperature, and electron temperature
are independently controlled with high precision. High-resolution spectroscopic
tools are used to diagnose the plasma state. These studies of ultracold neutral
plasmas directly contribute to our understanding other strongly coupled systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work are the training of
undergraduate and graduate students in atomic physics. The PI has a strong track
record of mentoring undergraduate and graduate students, helping them present
their own reseach national meetings, and co-authoring peer-reviewed publications
with them. This work also improves science education outside of BYU. This
project will continue to recruit high school teachers as summertime research
assistants and to interact with BYU's REU/RET program. Some of the laser
facilities will continue to be used in a graduate course in Laser Physics. The
PI also hosts occasional elementary school tours, demonstrating some of the
beautiful and exciting properties of lasers to young and budding scientists. The
research will be important to a number of areas in science and technology.
Strong coupling occurs in some astrophysical environments, high energy density
plasmas, quark-gluon plasmas, the BEC/BCS crossover, the Mott-insulator
transition, non-neutral and dusty plasmas, and other systems. Calculations in
these systems are difficult because of the wide range of important time scales.
These benchmark measurements can be used to guide simulations in these systems.