* 0969865
* Detection of Cosmic Ray Airshowers by Bistatic Radar
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Helio Takai, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2013
* USD 319,256.00

Understanding the sources and chemical composition of the most energetic
extraterrestrial radiation or "cosmic rays" is a major thrust of current
astrophysics research. Particles with enormous energies regularly strike the
Earth from within our galaxy and beyond. Understanding the origins of these
particles will require accurate models of the most violent processes in the
universe. However, progress in the field of high-energy cosmic rays is currently
limited by the rarity of the most interesting rays striking Earth. Indeed, the
continuation of the field beyond the current generation of observatories may
become financially and practically impossible if new ways are not found to
achieve remote coverage over large portions of the Earth's surface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, these scientists will investigate a new
technique: the remote sensing via bistatic radar technology of cosmic ray
induced extensive air showers. They build on experience gained by the MARIACHI
project in developing this technique, the opportunity afforded by the location
of the northern hemisphere's largest cosmic ray observatory, the Telescope
Array, in Utah, and the donation of analog television transmission equipment to
this effort by a local television station. The successful outcome of these
studies would be the development of a new detection technique with the potential
of having a transformative effect on the field of ultra-high energy cosmic ray
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For Broader Impacts, this project has potential
for connecting the local community to the astrophysics research currently being
conducted in Utah. Radar techniques similar to those being used for cosmic ray
studies have long been utilized in the study of micrometeors, and this group has
already hosted public events in which visitors to the Millard County Cosmic Ray
Center "listen" to meteor showers and learn about the cosmic ray project. It
will also connect with their successful ASPIRE program.