* 0969010
* Evolution and Structural Basis of Curcuminoid and Gingerol Formation in Turmeric and Ginger
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2013
* David Gang, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2013
* USD 667,354.00

Two large and important questions in plant metabolism are: what are the
mechanisms that lead to the large array of compounds produced by plants and how
do these mechanisms evolve? Ginger and turmeric contain a large array of
compounds that are similar in structure and that appear to be produced by the
same biochemical pathway. These compounds, including curcumin, other
diarylheptanoids, gingerols and gingerol-like compounds, are produced by
polyketide synthase-like enzymes (PKSs). Because these two species produce such
a large array of related compounds, they are an ideal system to use to study the
molecular and structural basis for differences in production of such compounds
in plants. These compounds were chosen as the focus of this project because of
their importance to plant defense, to plants' adaptation to the environment, and
to human health, and because a large set of genes (41 in total so far) have been
identified in ginger and turmeric related to but distinct from known PKSs (such
as chalcone synthase) that are expressed differentially between tissues and
developmental stages of the two species. This project will focus on identifying
which specific members of this gene family are responsible for production of
specific curcuminoids, gingerols, other diarylheptanoids or gingerol-related
compounds. It will also determine the biochemical function of individual PKSs in
ginger or turmeric. This project will then determine the structural basis for
differential activity among the different PKSs. This information will address
the important questions of how changes in enzyme structure lead to differences
in enzyme function and how these changes evolve in the context of plant
metabolism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;This
project will impact understanding of the evolution of enzyme function,
especially with regard to how enzymes develop new functions. This in turn will
impact understanding of factors that lead to compound diversification in the
plant kingdom and ultimately to plant diversity in the biosphere. This project
will also produce information that could be used to better tailor the production
of specific compounds in target plants, increasing the ability to produce
"designer plants". Undergraduate students and high school teachers will work
with post-doctoral fellows in this research. The high school teachers (supported
by summer internships) will take purified PKS proteins to their classrooms and
then will work with their students to crystallize these proteins. These proteins
will include altered forms of the enzymes, which will be produced to probe the
questions of structure and function in this enzyme class, as well as control
proteins that easily crystallize, so that the students will have a successful
experience. Thus, the high school teachers and their students will work directly
on a research project that will have potentially important findings regarding
enzyme function, and they will learn about structural biology in the
process.&lt;br/&gt;