* 0969852
* RUI: Analysis, Simulation, and Onsite Activities Contributing to the Search for Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay in Tellurium Using the CUORE Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Thomas Gutierrez, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2014
* USD 231,203.00

This award will provide funds for a three-year RUI grant for continued support
for a program of undergraduate student research with the CUORE (Cryogenic
Underground Observatory for Rare Events) experiment at the California
Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo (Cal Poly). CUORE is a next-
generation cryogenic bolometry experiment to search for neutrinoless double beta
decay in tellurium. The observation of this decay would indicate that neutrinos
are Majorana fermions and therefore are their own antiparticle. It also isolates
the scale for the effective Majorana neutrino mass, identifying the appropriate
neutrino mass hierarchy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will have the exciting
opportunity to participate in hands-on CUORE construction at the Gran Sasso
National Laboratory in Assergi, Italy. In addition, they will assist with shift
activity with CUORE-0, an intermediate single-tower of CUORE slated to be online
by mid-2010, designed to demonstrate background, analysis, and material
milestones before full CUORE deployment in 2012. Locally at Cal Poly, students
will explore various proposed detector calibration schemes by running GEANT4
simulations, and test these simulations against existing data from Cuoricino, a
recently decommissioned prototype of CUORE. They will also write and utilize
software to obtain nuclear spectra from the raw data obtained by the earlier
Cuoricino detector and help with software development to process CUORE and
CUORE-0 data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concerning Broader Impacts, experiments such
as CUORE bring together many experimental and analytical techniques from low
temperature, solid-state, particle, and nuclear physics. Improvements in these
technologies may lead to benefits in other areas of science and engineering
where they are applied. Both neutrino and underground physics are subjects that
spark the imagination and provide a unique platform for vigorous public outreach
through Cal Poly's Center for Excellence in Science and Mathematics Education
and the local Central Coast Astronomical Society.