* 0969053
* Workshop proposal for development of a fracture processes facility at DUSEL Homestake
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2013
* Leonid Germanovich, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 11/30/2013
* USD 49,935.00

The Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL) at Homestake
presents an opportunity to conduct a unique experimental program by providing
access to locations with vertical stresses as large as 60 MPa (down to 2400m
depth), more than sufficient to create faults. It also allows facilities at
different depths, permitting experiments to be conducted under different stress
levels. These proposed experiments require a facility providing access to large
rock volumes in the deep subsurface in a controlled setting, and one where
interdisciplinary collaborations are encouraged; all the conditions are met at
DUSEL Homestake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will bring together key members
of the scientific community in a series of two planning workshops with the
ultimate goal to develop a proposal that will be included in the NSF DUSEL Major
Research Equipment and Facility Construction (MREFC) project in
2011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop 1 - The first of the proposed workshops will
bring together 6 investigators in Lead, SD with the objectives of planning the
project, interfacing with other research groups and the facility, and
identifying suitable locations for the experiment. This planning exercise will
take place 30 Sept. to 2 Oct. 2009.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop 2 - A second
workshop is planned for Berkeley, CA in March 2010 with the purpose of reviewing
designs of experiments that will be described in the proposal. This workshop
will bring together 15-20 scientists working on various aspects of the
experiments with engineers working on instrumentation and equipment to address
various aspects of implementation. In addition, experts from appropriate fields
who are not currently involved with the project will be invited to the workshop
to review progress and provide suggestions. The objective of the design workshop
is to finalize scientific objectives and approach of the S5 DUSEL
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;