* 0969867
* Nonlinear Dynamics and Disorder Effects in Bose-Einstein Condensates, Degenerate Fermi Gases and Mixtures
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Peter Engels, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 05/31/2014
* USD 405,435.00

Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs), degenerate Fermi gases and Bose-Fermi mixtures
offer unique opportunities for the investigation of nonlinear dynamics in
quantum systems. The PI and his group have developed new experimental techniques
to generate and observe quantum shock waves in BECs. Extensions of these
techniques will be employed to investigate extreme nonlinear quantum dynamics
and disorder phenomena in new and unexplored regimes. For example, two-
dimensional shocks in BECs are predicted to exhibit intriguing richness of
dynamical phenomena including a proliferation of quantized vortices at the shock
front, a variety of instabilities, a novel phase diagram for oblique shock, and
potentially a transition to a turbulent regime. The quantum shock experiments
will provide much needed benchmark tests for theoretical treatments of quantum
dynamics. In addition, degenerate Fermi gases as well as Bose-Fermi mixtures
will be employed for the investigation of new physics in the presence of
disorder potentials and to address central questions of quantum percolation.

While all the experiments will be conducted with ultracold quantum degenerate
gases, the importance of this research goes beyond the field of atomic physics.
A precise understanding of the dynamics revealed by the experiments is essential
for a variety of other systems governed by a nonlinear equation similar to the
one applicable to BECs. Dispersive shock waves exist in plasmas, shallow water
systems, and nonlinear optical media, to name a few. Nonlinear phenomena in
optical media are of great importance e.g. for high-speed communication. The
investigations of disorder phenomena will be highly relevant for developing a
detailed understanding of complex materials such as glass phases, dirty
superconductors, granular metals, etc. Disorder effects also play important
roles in various nontrivial acoustics and optics phenomena. The experiments
allow students at all levels to gain experience in an unusually broad range of
modern physics and lab techniques. Ongoing cooperation with local, national and
international theory groups provide the students with ample opportunities for
exchanging scientific ideas. The PI's lab is also actively participating in a
variety of educational and outreach activities, including regular visits from
high school classes.