* 0969529
* Particle Astrophysics with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Scott Wakely, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2014
* USD 1,020,000.00

This award provides continued support for this particle astrophysics group to
participate in the operation and analysis of data from the Very Energetic
Radiation-Imaging Telescope Array System (VERITAS). VERITAS is an array of four
12-m Cherenkov telescopes which use the imaging atmospheric Cherenkov technique
to detect and characterize the flux of ~50 GeV to ~50 TeV photons from
astrophysical sources. The VERITAS array has successfully operated for two years
at its new permanent site at the Whipple Observatory basecamp and has already
detected or discovered 21 sources of very-high-energy gamma-rays, including M82,
the prototypical starburst galaxy whose detection by VERITAS this year
represents the discovery of an entirely new class of gamma-ray emitter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Chicago group has been a key participant
in the VERITAS project since its inception. From design and construction to
commissioning and operation and now to analysis and interpretation, Chicago has
assumed leadership roles in all aspects of VERITAS. This award will allow the
group to continue in this capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the area of Broader
Impacts, the field of TeV astronomy has impacts on many other fields of science,
from the study of the high-energy particle acceleration to fundamental physics
questions such as the nature of Dark Matter. The VERITAS project has always had
a strong involvement of both graduate and undergraduate students. The telescope
relocation this summer was accomplished in large part by undergraduate summer
students. While much of the VERITAS outreach activity is concentrated at the
Smithsonian facility at the telescope site, there is also a strong local effort.
At Chicago, they continue to profit from a successful partnership with Adler
Planetarium for producing public lectures and classes for high school teachers.
Members of the VERITAS group frequently participate in these efforts.