* 0969600
* Four Mathematical Programming Paradigms with Operations Research Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Jong-Shi Pang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hearn
* 06/30/2014
* USD 240,000.00

This proposal aims at investigating four emerging modeling
paradigms&lt;br/&gt;in mathematical programming that have gained increased
attention in recent years due to their pervasive applications in operations
research and other engineering fields as well as in economics and finance, but
which have yet to receive wide popularity and lack focused research. These
paradigms are: competition, dynamics, hierarchy, and inverse problems. The
objective of the project is to develop a comprehensive and rigorous foundation
for the sustained treatment and applications of these paradigms in the context
of complex engineering and economic systems. The proposed approach is to study
the mathematical formulations of these paradigms in terms of extended
mathematical and equilibrium programs, constrained continuous-time dynamical
systems, and multi-agent and multi-level optimization. Novel mathematical
theories and advanced computational tools will be developed. This will require
the combined methodology of continuous and disjunctive programming, global
optimization, continuous- and discrete-time dynamical systems theory, and
contemporary mathematical tools such as variational and set-valued
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of the proposed
research will lead to improved understanding and efficient solution of highly
complex engineering, economic, and biological systems characterized by four
intrinsic elements: competition among multiple selfish agents, time evolution
prior to the attainment of an optimum or equilibrium, hierarchical structure of
the optimizing agents, and historical and/or observed data that need to be
respected. Due to its interdisciplinary nature, the proposed activity offers an
opportunity to bring together experts in diverse disciplines to advance their
individual fields and make joint contributions to significant societal problems
such as efficient resource allocation in engineering and economic systems,
congestion in transportation systems, and resolution of conflicts among
competing selfish agents, to name a few areas of applications.