* 0969958
* Probing the Effects of Highly Bent and Twisted DNA on Transcription by RNA Polymerase
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2015
* Noel Perkins, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2015
* USD 430,671.00

Cells contain a large number of genes that are expressed in complex patterns to
ensure proper cellular function and differentiation. It is well established that
regulatory proteins play a central role in transcriptional control and regulate
the activity of RNA polymerases (RNAP). In addition, various lines of evidence
related to supercoiling, looped DNA topologies, and chromatin remodeling suggest
that RNAP activity may also be regulated via the nano-mechanical properties of
DNA. We hypothesize that bending and twisting of the DNA template directly
regulate the activity of RNAPs. To test this hypothesis we will generate DNA
minicircles of a length of about 100 base pairs to introduce bending strain
energy and torsion into DNA templates of a physiologically relevant magnitude in
the absence of repressors or any other regulatory proteins. Using these
minicircle DNA templates and molecular beacon-based transcription assays to
directly detect synthesized mRNA, we will characterize changes in the kinetic
properties of T7-RNAP. We will also develop assays to track the transcription
from single DNA minicircles and to directly modulate torsion in DNA molecules
while recording the activity of RNAP. Lastly, we will utilize computational rod
models to predict the relationship between DNA topology and
transcription.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Our research on the role of DNA template
mechanics on the activity of RNA polymerases has broader implications for the
biological, medical and physical sciences. The work will close an important gap
in our fundamental knowledge of the biology of DNA mechanics. The proposed
assays will facilitate a detailed characterization of the effects that DNA
template topologies and mechanics have on the activity of RNAPs. If successful,
this research expands our understanding of transcriptional regulation and
compels a paradigm shift in how we think about and approach genetic switches and
gene regulation. Thus, the work has important implications for the medical
sciences and will contribute to a rational understanding of cell regulation,
cellular control and tissue engineering. The multidisciplinary approach and
techniques developed here will also benefit the study of numerous other DNA-
binding enzymes, other areas of gene regulation and the study of molecular
motors and the cytoskeleton.