* 0969862
* Precision Measurements with Ultra-Sensitive Magnetometers and Their Fundamental Limits
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Michael Romalis, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2014
* USD 480,000.00

The project will focus on tests of fundamental symmetries using spin-polarized
atoms. A co-magnetometer using K, Rb and Ne-21 atoms will be developed to search
for violations of CPT and Lorentz symmetries. Using Ne-21 atoms with a nuclear
spin of 3/2 will allow searches for anomalous interactions that preserve CPT but
violate Lorentz symmetry. Very high energy resolution of the co-magnetometer
will also allow searches for anomalous spin-spin and spin-mass forces, placing
new constraints on axions and other proposed light particles. It is anticipated
that the experimental sensitivity in many cases will be limited by quantum
fluctuations and a separate set of experiments will be conducted to understand
these limits in dense alkali-metal vapors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
completion of these experiments will result in new constraints on a number of
proposed theories seeking to explain dark matter and dark energy in the Universe
and to develop a fully quantum-mechanical theory of gravity. It will also result
in development of new measurement techniques for magnetic fields and inertial
rotation, with possible applications beyond physics. In particular, detection of
individual single-domain nano-particles at low concentrations will enable new
single molecule counting experiments in biology. A number if graduate,
undergraduate and high-school students will be trained in various research
techniques, ranging from construction of ultra-low noise electronics to
interpretation of atomic measurements in the context of particle physics.