* 0969869
* Collaborative Research: Manipulation of Suspended Microparticles via Localized Fluid Boundary Dynamics: Modeling, Simulation, and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Jeff Eldredge, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 06/30/2014
* USD 201,950.00

This project will advance a novel, biologically inspired method for the
manipulation of solid particles suspended in fluids on a microscopic scale
through complementary theoretical, computational, and experimental research. A
comprehensive mathematical framework will be developed for describing the
control of fluid flows at low Reynolds number through localized cyclic boundary
deformations using concepts from differential geometry and dynamical systems
theory. A high-fidelity numerical approach will be developed for simulating such
problems using a viscous vortex particle method. A pair of experimental
platforms on contrasting physical scales will be constructed, each comprising a
system of reconfigurable resonant probes mimicking cilia observed in nature, and
extensive data will be collected to calibrate both theoretical and computational
models. Algorithmic methods for separating and sorting particles, and for
tailoring the spatial trajectories of individual particles, will be devised and
demonstrated experimentally.

The project focuses on developing and demonstrating a novel technique for
separating and manipulating fragile microscopic objects immersed in fluids,
which has a growing list of applications ranging from the mechanical testing of
macromolecules like DNA to the assisted fertilization of human ova with immotile
sperm to the sustained excitation of fluid-borne abrasive particles for the
precision machining of brittle surfaces. Models will be developed to predict the
trajectories of particles in fluids containing multiple vortex fields. These
vortex fields will be produced experimentally using oscillating fibers. A pair
of experimental platforms with millimeter and micrometer (1/1000 of a
millimeter) physical scales will be constructed. For each platform, a system of
reconfigurable resonant probes will be used to generate steady vortex fields in
particle-bearing fluids. The smallest probes will mimic the microscopic
oscillating cilia observed in nature. Data will be collected to validate the
theoretical and computational predictive models. This project will not only
engender integrated advancements in applied mathematics, computational science,
and engineering, but will also shed light on the physics underlying a
physiological design present in protozoa and humans alike. The micromanipulation
method to be developed represents an improvement over alternative technologies
in simplicity, portability, and cost. The PIs' plan for developing this method
incorporates a multi-institutional collaboration involving the directed
mentoring of at least one postdoctoral researcher, at least two PhD students,
and a number of undergraduates (with a deliberate eye toward promoting
diversity), the curricular expansion of two cross-disciplinary graduate courses
and two undergraduate courses at the PIs' universities, and outreach to biology
students at a third university and to high school students in an ethnically
diverse area.