* 0969043
* Observations of Galactic TeV Sources with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Philip Kaaret, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2014
* USD 359,269.00

Our Galaxy contains astrophysical systems that accelerate particles to energies
beyond the reach of any accelerator built by humans. What drives these
accelerators is a major question in astrophysics, and understanding these
accelerators has broad implications. TeV photons are a key diagnostic of highly
energetic particles. Most simply put, emission of a TeV photon requires that the
emitting electron, proton, or other particle began at an energy of a TeV or
greater. Observations in the TeV band are a sensitive probe of the most
energetic physical processes occurring in a variety of Galactic objects.
Detection of TeV emission from binaries systems containing a neutron star or
black hole is an exciting, new, and unexpected result.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, this group will conduct observations in
the TeV band using the Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System
(VERITAS) to image flashes of Cherenkov light produced when highly energetic
photons strike Earth's atmosphere. They will use VERITAS to study Galactic
particle accelerators including jets from stellar-mass black holes and rapidly
rotating, young neutron stars, supernova remnants, and unidentified gamma-ray
sources. In addition, they will conduct multi-wavelength (X-ray/GeV/TeV)
observations that are the key to understanding the particle acceleration process
in these systems. They will operate and maintain the pointing monitor system and
contribute to the operation of the VERITAS array. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
Broader Impacts, an integral part of the proposed activity will be the broad
dissemination of information on very high energy gamma-ray astronomy to college
and high school students and the general public making use of materials
developed in the VERITAS education and outreach program being led by the Adler
Planetarium and Astronomy Museum. Presentations on gamma-ray astronomy and
specific results from VERITAS will be made to high school classes and to the
general public as part of the "Hawk-Eyes on Science" program of the Physics and
Astronomy Department at the University of Iowa and at the Eastern Iowa
Observatory and Learning Center (EIOLC) located near Cedar Rapids, IA.