* 0969543
* Processing Nanocrystalline Thermoelectric Oxides for High Efficiency Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Jiangyu Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 04/30/2013
* USD 311,649.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a processing technique to
manufacture nanocrystalline thermoelectric oxides for high efficiency energy
harvesting; waste heat can be captured and converted to electricity. This
process will provide a viable manufacturing technique that has the potential to
be both economical and scalable. Thermo-electric oxide material will be
electrospun into nanofibers which will then be consolidated via sintering into
high-density high-efficiency bulk thermoelectric oxides with nanocrystalline
structure. The resulting grain size is expected to be in the range of tens of
nanometers which should substantially reduce the thermal conductivity of the
material and at the same time improve the thermoelectric figure-of-merit (i.e
conversion efficiency). Detailed and systematic characterization of the
resulting structure and properties of thermoelectric nanofibers and bulk
nanocrystalline oxides will also be carried out to investigate the processing-
structure-property relationship of thermoelectric oxides. Thermoelectric
materials that convert heat directly into electricity is promising in harvesting
a vast amount of waste heat lost in energy cycle in an environment friendly
manner.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to thermoelectric oxide
materials with improved thermoelectric figure-of-merit and conversion
efficiency, and will lay a foundation for high efficiency energy harvesting of
waste heat. The manufacturing technique developed in this project can also be
applied to process other nanocrystalline materials for a wide range of
applications. The project will train graduate and undergraduate students. It
will also offer outreach activities to K-12 schools though the Research
Experience for Teachers program (RET), summer internship for high school
students, and science demos at elementary schools.