* 0969346
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Investigation of Consolidation-Induced Contaminant Transport for High Water Content Geo-Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Charles Shackelford, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2014
* USD 210,000.00

The goal of this project is to advance the state-of-the art with respect to our
understanding of the mechanisms and significance of consolidation-induced
contaminant transport for high water content geo-materials. The phenomenon of
coupled consolidation and contaminant transport occurs for a variety of
practical applications in geotechnical and geoenvironmental engineering. Such
applications include confined disposal of contaminated high water content geo-
materials (e.g., tailings, dredgings, sludges, and slurries) in ex situ
engineered impoundments, mechanical dewatering of contaminated high water
content geo-materials, in situ remediation of source zones contaminated with
chlorinated solvents via injection of granular zero valent iron (ZVI) slurry and
soil mixing, and in situ capping of subaqueous contaminated sediments. Research
has demonstrated only very recently that consolidation-induced transport of
contaminants is a valid transport mechanism that may have lasting effects on the
contaminant migration behavior for a given system. However, little is known
about the general significance of this mechanism for practical applications.
Current understanding of consolidation-induced contaminant transport is limited
with respect to: (1) the effects of higher chemical concentrations and
multispecies contaminants, such that typically occur in field sites; (2) the
importance of facilitated transport via colloidal particles, which is likely to
be an important mechanism for natural fine-grained materials with highly sorbed
contaminants; (3) testing of realistic geo-materials, such as mine tailings or
dredged sediments; and (4) absence of work conducted for constant rate-of-strain
or centrifuge loading conditions. The proposed research will consist of a
fundamental experimental and computational investigation of the mechanism of
consolidation-induced contaminant transport for several materials and
conditions, and then assess the significance of these findings for relevant
geotechnical and geoenvironmental applications. The research plan has six tasks:
(1) material procurement and characterization; (2) material property testing;
(3) consolidation-induced transport testing; (4) development and validation of
computational models; (5) computational simulations; and (6) project
collaboration and dissemination of results. The proposed research has both
intrinsic scientific merit in terms of a fundamental assessment of this
transport mechanism and associated parameters as well as practical implications
in terms of improving our ability to predict contaminant outflows from high
water content geo-materials during consolidation. As a result, a better
understanding of the mechanism and significance of consolidation-induced
contaminant transport will be achieved, thereby enhancing the ability of
designers and regulators to protect the public health and the environment from
the effects of contaminants. Results from this research have the potential to
transform the way contaminated high water content geo-materials are currently
characterized, handled, dewatered and/or disposed.