* 0969159
* RUI: Study of Photonuclear Physics with Polarized Beams and Targets
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2015
* C. Steven Whisnant, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 06/30/2015
* USD 171,000.00

This research project uses photonuclear reactions with polarized beams and
targets to investigate the properties of the nucleon and nucleon resonances with
Compton scattering and to study heavy nuclei through photofission. The group
will measure the polarizabilities of the neutron with unprecedented accuracy,
providing data for the first time on currently unknown quantities such as the
nucleon spin polarizabilities. Such data permits precision tests of effective
field theories, lattice quantum chromodynamics calculations and predictions of
the standard model of nuclear physics. The comprehensive program of Compton
scattering on the proton and neutron will extract the electromagnetic
polarizabilities with high accuracy. The photofission studies with polarized
photons exploits the strong variation of the beam asymmetry in the direct
neutron production. The measurements provide a database for developing nuclear
forensics and expand our understanding of this fundamental nuclear reaction. A
collaboration has been assembled to measure beam-target asymmetries for meson
production with polarized neutrons in a polarized HD target at Jefferson Lab.
This group will purify the commercial grade HD gas for target production.
Although the HD target is ideal for use in secondary beams, the JMU group will
also, with collaborators from UVA, investigate the possibility of operating a
dynamically polarized HD target for use in primary beams.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is integrated with the
teaching mission of James Madison University (JMU) on multiple levels. It fits
well with the new Applied Nuclear Physics (ANP) program currently under
development at JMU. The synergy between this program and the ANP curriculium and
our advanced laboratory experience will provide students with an expanded
nuclear physics experience. More advanced undergraduates, particularly those
with off-campus experience, will mentor younger students. The students bring
their knowledge and enthusiasm to teaching middle school students in our annual
demonstration show. Program continuity and solid student work habits are
fostered by student communication through a variety of venues including
technical notes on the web and paper presentation at conferences. This program
will be integrated with the four NSF REU programs in the college to provide an
immersive experience each summer. The on-campus opportunities in low-temperature
systems and gas analysis are unique. Research and teaching at JMU are recognized
as two facets of the same process. This integration of research and education
continues to be one of the hallmarks of the highly rated undergraduate
experience at JMU.