* 0969661
* Neutrino Astronomy and Cosmic Rays with IceCube
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Spencer Klein, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 12/31/2013
* USD 817,000.00

Air shower detectors have observed cosmic rays with ultra high energies.
However, their sources, nuclear composition and acceleration mechanism(s) remain
unknown. Some possible sources include active galactic nuclei, gamma-ray
bursters, and/or supernova remnants. In contrast to charged cosmic rays which
bend in interstellar magnetic fields, the neutrinos that are expected to be
produced in these accelerators travel in straight lines, so do point back to
their sources. The IceCube observatory being built at the South Pole to search
for these sources will soon reach 1 cubic km in volume. The accompanying 1
square km surface array (IceTop) detects air showers with energies above 300
TeV. Combining shower data with measurements of TeV muons from IceCube makes it
possible to study the cosmic-ray composition. By using IceCube to veto events
containing muons, it is also possible to identify photon-initiated showers.

This award will provide funds to study three topics pertaining to the origins
and composition of cosmic rays: a search for a diffuse neutrino flux from the
entire sky, a measurement of the transverse momentum (pT) spectrum of high pT
muons in air showers, and a search for PeV photons from the Milky Way and the
Magellanic Clouds. During the three years of this grant, they will either
observe extra-terrestrial neutrinos or set limits below the Waxman-Bahcall
bound. The pT spectrum of these muons can be calculated using perturbative QCD,
thus avoiding the phenomenological models that are required in other composition
studies. The group will continue contributing to IceCube Maintenance and
Operations work in the areas of optical module simulation and calibration,
detector verification and calibration and in Monte Carlo simulation production.

The Education and Outreach component will communicate this forefront research to
students and the general public, through presentations at elementary through
high schools and public lectures. They educate both undergraduate and graduate
students, by involving them in their research.