* 0969500
* Central Indiana STEM Talent Expansion Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Kathleen Marrs, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,991,855.00

This project at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) is
creating a central Indiana pipeline to increase the number of students from the
greater Indianapolis region (central Indiana) obtaining STEM degrees. Several
activities involve Ivy Tech Community College Central Indiana and Butler
University. The goals of this project are to increase the numbers of students of
all demographic groups who pursue STEM academic and career pathways; participate
in STEM research, industry internships, and honors activities; graduate with an
undergraduate degree in STEM fields; and transition into industry, graduate and
professional programs. The program has set a target of increasing the number of
STEM graduates at IUPUI by 10% per year to produce an estimated 279 additional
STEM graduates in the year 2015.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project
employs and assesses the impact of several program-wide intervention strategies
on student success. These intervention strategies include Summer STEM Bridge
Academies, peer-mentoring and academic advising support for transfer students,
Peer-led Teaching and Learning and Just-in-Time Teaching, Honor seminars, and
Career Development services and internships. Numerous support services already
are in place to assist with this initiative, making it possible for the project
to integrate research and education on effective strategies for student learning
in STEM disciplines. Additionally, the evaluation plan includes mechanisms for
measuring the impacts of the individual initiatives and the effectiveness of the
program as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project takes a coordinated
and systemic approach to increasing undergraduate success in STEM at all levels,
from pre-college, to the important first year experience, to the sophomore year
and onto graduation, through leadership and career development. Dissemination of
the project's results will occur through the web, peer-reviewed publications,
and presentations to the local and national STEM community. A national
conference will be hosted at IUPUI during the fourth year of the project, which
will bring national leaders on STEM education, to share their knowledge of
research and best practices, and for this project to showcase the work being
done at IUPUI and other institutions on increasing the number of students
completing STEM degrees.