* 0969984
* RUI:  Classical and Quantum Studies of Non-Sequential Multiple Ionization of Atoms in Strong Laser Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Stanley Haan, Calvin University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 179,594.00

Desktop computers are employed to model the double ionization of atoms by high-
intensity visible or infrared laser light. Of particular interest is the process
of "non-sequential double ionization", in which two electrons share the energy
from a large number of laser photons and escape an atom. The dominant mechanism
for this process is now accepted to be recollision, a process in which one
electron moves outward from the atom, absorbs energy from the laser, then
returns and shares energy with the other electron. Many parts of this process
are turning out to be describable using classical physics rather than quantum
mechanics, and a significant component of the project involves investigating the
limitations of classical analysis. In addition, the final momenta of the doubly
ionized electron pairs and possible correlations between these momenta are
investigated. Chaotic behavior in the classical system is investigated, as well
as the importance of laser intensity, frequency, and pulse shape in the
ionization process. Recollision lies at the heart of the growing field of
"attosecond science", and the present work helps to provide a solid foundation
for that growing area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impacts of this project emerge from
scientific knowledge that is gained, from computer techniques that are developed
and from educational components. Many systems, particularly molecular ones, are
too complicated for full quantum analysis, but may be amenable to classical
analysis. The knowledge gained in the present study regarding the limitations of
classical analysis should prove useful in these other areas. The computer
techniques being developed in this project are adaptable into other areas and
will be useful to other researchers in coming years. In addition, and very
importantly, the project features extensive involvement by undergraduate physics
students. They benefit not only through increased knowledge of the field and
improved computer skills, but also through the development of thinking skills
and intellectual habits.