* 0969033
* CSEDI: Thermal conductivity of lower mantle minerals and heat flow across the core/mantle boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Abby Kavner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2014
* USD 346,012.00

The heat flow across the Earth's core-mantle boundary controls the thermal
evolution of the whole Earth, which is ultimately expressed on the surface by
plate tectonics. However the thermal properties of the core/mantle boundary are
not well known, leading to significant uncertainties in our understanding of the
temperature and heat profile of the Earth - both currently and in the past. The
goal of this proposal is to determine the thermal properties -especially thermal
conductivity- of the Earth's mantle, through a combination of experiment and
modeling. This information will be used to help constrain the temperature
profile throughout the Earth's interior, the style of mantle convection, and the
timing for the growth of the inner core. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will combine
methods from theoretical and experimental mineral physics and heat flow modeling
in crystalline bulk and in composite materials to measure the thermal
conductivity of the deep Earth. Starting with a data set describing the lattice
thermal conductivity of MgO and MgSiO3 at deep mantle conditions, we will
measure how the presence and behavior of iron changes those values at high
pressures and temperatures. The experimental data will be interpreted with help
from computational models of heat flow in the laser-heated diamond cell, used to
make these measurements. Finally, we examine the implications for the mantle
using a heat flow model for composite materials and including both conduction
and radiation. The overall outcome will be an estimate of the thermal
conductivity of the lower mantle at core/mantle boundary conditions, and how the
thermal conductivity varies with pressure, temperature, and composition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together two scientists from very
different disciplines: a mechanical engineer with expertise in heat transfer and
a geophyscist with expertise in measurements of physical properties under
extreme conditions. This interdisciplinary project will support the training of
a graduate student for three years. In addition, this project will support
summer research for undergraduates at UCLA. Measurements of thermal properties
of materials under extreme conditions are important not only for Earth &amp;
planetary science, but also for engineering, materials science, and physics.
Both researchers are actively involved in science education and outreach at all
levels, and have active research groups including undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral scholars.