* 0969996
* Nonlinear Optical Interactions in Rb-Filled Photonic Band-Gap Fibers
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Alexander Gaeta, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2014
* USD 680,000.00

Photonic band-gap fibers (PBGF) are able to guide light via diffraction rather
than by total internal reflection. Such fibers allow for simultaneous high
confinement of light and a gas in a hollow-core region. As a result, PBGF's
offer a unique advantage over free-space, focused geometries for interactions of
light with gases due to their unmatched ratio of interaction length to cross-
sectional core area. The proposed effort involving PBGF's will entail studies in
two main areas: 1) ultralow power light-matter interactions with Rb atoms, and
2) the propagation of intense ultrashort laser pulses and high harmonic
generation. For the work with Rb atoms, high density vapors will be produced by
the process of light-induced atomic desorption which will allow for exploration
of one- and two-photon nonlinear interactions at extremely low light levels. The
effort on high-harmonic generation will explore the possibility of generating
light in the deep ultraviolet using femtosecond laser pulses at modest pulse
energies by confining both the fundamental and harmonic fields within the core
and through use of quasiphasematching techniques. Such a system would have
immediate applications in the creation of compact fiber-based ultraviolet and
extreme ultraviolet sources, which cannot be realized using conventional silica
glass fiber.

The graduate students supported by this funding will develop a foundation for
understanding a wide range of interactions of light with matter and will acquire
the experimental skills necessary for characterizing such interactions. In
addition, one or two undergraduates per year will work in the PI's laboratory on
projects related to this research effort and gain their first experience of
performing research in optical physics. The PI and the PhD students will
participate extensively in outreach activities at Cornell via the NSF-funded
Center for Nanoscale Systems Institute for Physics Teachers (CIPT) and the
Cornell Center for Materials Research. In addition, the PI will continue to
deliver optics-related seminars to high-school teachers and students.