* 0969666
* RUI: Search for Anomalous Proton Spin Interactions with A Dual-Isotope Rubidium Magnetometer
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Derek Kimball, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 12/31/2013
* USD 310,341.00

This award supports continuation of a research program using a dual-isotope
rubidium (Rb) magnetometer to search for a hypothetical long-range coupling
between Rb nuclear spins and the mass of the earth. It will also support
research to explore use of the dual-isotope Rb magnetometer and related
experimental techniques to search for anomalous intermediate-range (over
distance scales of about one meter) and short-range (over distance scales of
about one nanometer) spin-spin couplings. The dual-isotope Rb magnetometer is
particularly sensitive to non-magnetic, spin-dependent interactions of the
proton so that anomalous interactions of the proton spin produce a differential
shift between the Rb spin-precession frequencies, whereas most sources of
systematic error produce common-mode shifts of the spin-precession frequencies
which can be controlled through auxiliary measurements. The majority of recent
searches for similar effects limit anomalous couplings of either the neutron or
electron spin, so the proposed experiment searches a parameter space to some
degree, depending on the theoretical model, orthogonal to that constrained by
previous experiments. The optimized dual-isotope Rb magnetometer has sufficient
shot-noise-projected sensitivity to improve experimental limits on long-range
spin-mass couplings by an order of magnitude in general and by two orders of
magnitude for the proton spin in particular, and improve limits on anomalous
spin-spin couplings by over an order of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
renewed interest in scalar-tensor theories of gravity with massless
scalar/pseudoscalar fields since they can explain the recent observation of
"dark energy" over cosmological distances. The pseudoscalar component of such a
field generates a long-range interaction between spins and the gravitational
field of the Earth. This interaction in the simplest scalar-tensor theory causes
a shift of the spin precession frequencies smaller than present limits but just
within the range of this experiment. Detection of this type of interaction would
be evidence that gravity violated parity and time-reversal symmetries, as well
as the equivalence principle which underlies the theory of general relativity. A
result consistent with general relativity would still provide new tests of
numerous alternative theories, such as torsion gravity, that hypothesize
anomalous spin-mass and spin-spin couplings. As the only externally funded
physics experiment in the history of California State University / East Bay,
this research program has led to tripling the number of physics majors in the
past three years and sixteen students, including four women and nine
underrepresented minority students, have made meaningful contributions to the
project.