* 0969490
* Studies in Nuclear Physics and Fundamental Interactions at Indiana University
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Rex Tayloe, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 05/31/2012
* USD 2,203,388.00

This award derives its intellectual merit from our leadership in addressing the
following scientific questions: (1) How the angular momentum of the proton is
distributed among its parts. The spinning of the three quarks inside the proton
only accounts for a small part of the proton's angular momentum. The rest must
be somewhere: we search for it in the "gluons" which hold the quarks inside the
proton. (2) Why the Big Bang left the universe with the surplus of matter over
anti-matter that we see today. Instead of an equal mixture of matter and
antimatter, the universe has much more matter: this is not understood. If
extremely small separations of the positive and negative electrical charges
within the neutron or electron are discovered, it could give an important clue.
(3) Whether neutrinos behave oddly at low energy. Hints have been seen in
earlier experiments: we will pursue the leads and develop new technologies to
measure neutrinos. (4) How strong the weak force really is. We will use neutrons
to precisely calibrate the weak force. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As broader impacts
of our work, our research activities educate the next generation of skilled and
innovative PhD scientists for jobs in research and teaching universities,
industry and national labs, and medical and computer technology. We have
participated in the NSF REU program for 22 years and in addition we host several
undergraduate students and visiting faculty from undergraduate institutions who
conduct collaborative research. We mentor our postdocs to facilitate their
future entry into teaching and research institutions and the scientific
community. We develop undergraduate laboratories emphasizing nuclear technology,
bring undergraduates on field trips to IUCF and assist with programs that
encourage pre-college participation in the Indiana University science
curriculum. We reach out to the local community through a variety of activities
that awaken the interest of students in our local public school system, by
visiting local high school science classes, acting as judges in local science
fairs and for the State Science Olympiad, and presenting physics demonstrations
at the Indiana State Fair. We actively recruit female and minority applicants
for positions at all levels within the group and the physics department and
serve on selection committees for graduate research fellowships for women and
for faculty searches. We work to make our activities known to the public at
large through laboratory tours and Open Houses, science caf√© discussions, and
items of public interest in the media.