* 0969781
* RUI:  Precise Atomic Structure Measurements and Tests of Fundamental Physics in Group IIIA atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Protik Majumder, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 299,375.00

In this project, carefully controlled lasers will be used to probe the detailed
atomic structure of a class of heavy atoms including thallium and indium with
unprecedented precision. Atoms, quintessential quantum mechanical objects, have
long been used to confirm and test quantum theory. But in recent years, with
advances in laser, optical, and signal processing technology, extremely precise
experiments on certain heavy atoms have yielded insights into physics more
commonly associated with elementary particles and large accelerators. Such tests
of fundamental particle physics in these "table-top" experiments can only occur
through both precise experiments and also sophisticated quantum mechanical
calculations of these many-electron systems. Experiments in this laboratory
using atoms in both heated vapor cells and atomic beam apparatus will be
completed to test the accuracy of this cutting-edge atomic theory. Finally, an
experiment will probe possible violations of "time-reversal" invariance in
thallium atoms, which would be the signal for new physics beyond the current
Standard Model of particle physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At Williams College,
these experiments serve as ideal research training for undergraduate physics
students at every stage of their education. In the absence of graduate students,
these students grow to become fully engaged junior colleagues. Since NSF support
for this work began in 1998, a dozen students have become co-authors on journal
publications, and twenty young scientists who received their first exposure to
research in this laboratory have completed or are now enrolled in Ph.D. programs
in physics and related fields. Students take active, central roles in completing
laboratory projects through which they develop expertise with optics and lasers,
electronics and control systems, as well as sophisticated data analysis
procedures. Because of the relatively small physical scale of the research, they
can appreciate the entirety of the experimental effort, gain valuable, specific
experimental skills, and yet participate in an exciting cutting-edge research
field which uses atoms to test physical theory at its most basic level. A
continuing effort will be made to include students in this research at this
crucial early point in their undergraduate years, as they begin to make longer-
term career choices.