* 0969820
* GRAVITATIONAL-WAVE ASTRONOMY WITH BINARY COMPACT  OBJECTS:  SOURCE MODELING AND LIGO DATA ANALYSIS
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2010,10/31/2013
* Vassiliki Kalogera, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 10/31/2013
* USD 556,153.00

This award supports research within the framework of the LIGO Scientific
Collaboration (LSC) and the Compact Binary Coalescence (CBC) analysis group. It
includes projects in the area of astrophysical interpretation of gravitational-
wave signals from binaries with two compact objects, through both gravitational-
wave data analysis and source modeling. Effectively the proposed work focuses on
developing a concrete framework and a tool-kit for the processing of CBC
detections (or upper limits) in order to extract the maximal available
astrophysical information for binaries with compact objects with any mass and
spin configuration. The research activity focuses on a number of key questions
the answers to which are important for the interpretation of current and future
gravitational-wave observations with LIGO. The next few years are very important
for the development of gravitational-wave physics and its astronomical
interpretation, and this research focuses on ways of maximizing the gain from
future detections, but also from upper limits expected to constrain current
theories of compact-object formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is of
interest to the broader community of compact-object astrophysics in a wide range
of contexts: e.g., stellar and binary system evolution, neutron star and black
hole formation and evolution, gamma-ray bursts, stellar dynamics of globular
clusters and galactic centers, as in the coming years LIGO observations can
provide uniquely reliable answers to some of the long-standing questions in
astronomy and astrophysics. The Markov Chain Monte Carlo computational tools to
be developed in this project will be made available within and outside the LSC,
and hence can benefit LSC projects beyond the CBC searches and enhance the
research infrastructure for parameter-estimation in other scientific and
engineering contexts. Outreach activities take advantage of the existing
collaboration with the Adler Planetarium &amp; Astronomy Museum with hundreds of
thousands of visitors per year; this connection ensures the broad dissemination
of research understanding in the diverse, urban environment of the Chicago
metropolitan area.