* 0969371
* Collective Spin Control by Quantum Coherent Optical Feedback
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Poul Jessen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 500,000.00

This NSF award will support the development of a new suite of tools to control
and measure physical systems whose behavior is governed by quantum mechanics.
The project will extend current methods for single atom control to a many-body
system associated with a large collection of atoms. The fundamental goal is to
use light as a quantum bus to connect distant atoms, and thus gain direct
control over the quantum state of the combined many-body spin without the need
for individual atoms to interact directly. This will be achieved through
coherent optical feedback, wherein a light beam is passed through the atom cloud
to pick up information about the spin, and then returned in a second pass to
transform the spin quantum state accordingly. One important measure of success
is the degree to which one can reduce (squeeze) the fundamental quantum
uncertainty of the many-body spin. Spin squeezing has direct application in
quantum sensing and metrology, and may be a valuable resource for quantum
communication and computing. Coherent optical feedback has the potential to
produce squeezing that improves exponentially with the product of time and
optical density of the atom cloud, and could be a game changer relative to
existing schemes that improve only linearly. Experiments will be performed to
determine the possible improvement in a real-world situation that includes
decoherence, optical losses and imperfections. Numerical simulation suggest that
a factor of ten reduction in quantum uncertainty should be feasible in the
planned first generation experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quest for control
of complex quantum systems is a grand challenge currently pursued across a broad
spectrum of physics disciplines. The effort is motivated by applications that
range from the simulation of quantum many-body physics to quantum-limited
metrology and quantum information processing, all of which share the goal of
harnessing uniquely quantum properties to perform tasks that are not otherwise
possible. This project will contribute to the knowledge base of quantum
information science, and to the training of future scientists in this highly
interdisciplinary field. Students will be involved in all aspects of the
project, including education, research, and the dissemination of results. The
project will become a cornerstone of the NSF supported Center for Quantum
Information and Control, co-located at the University of Arizona College of
Optical Science and the University of New Mexico Department of Physics and
Astronomy. Weekly video conferencing, an annual research retreat, and joint
participation in conferences will enrich the educational experience and
strengthen the connections between junior and senior participants at both
institutions.