* 0969811
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics and Gravitational Wave Production of Neutron Stars and Black Holes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* David Neilsen, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 280,000.00

Compact object binaries, consisting of neutron stars and black holes, represent
one of the most likely sources of gravitational waves to be detected by LIGO and
future gravitational wave observatories.  This project will design computer
models to study gravitational radiation from compact object binaries.  This will
include studying how the internal structure of neutron stars affects the
gravitational radiation emitted in a binary merger.  Additional work will
investigate opportunities for multiple messenger astronomy, in which data from
several types of observations are combined to obtain a more complete picture.
 In particular, this project will study possible emission of electromagnetic
radiation and neutrinos from the merger of neutron stars and black
holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is of broad interest reaching beyond
physicists to astrophysicists, mathematicians, and the general public (for whom
movies will be posted to the web).  The connection of gravitational,
electromagnetic and neutrino data from black hole and neutron star mergers will
significantly advance our understanding of some of the most intriguing processes
in the universe.  This work will provide valuable candidate waveforms for
gravitational wave observatories, including LIGO.  As part of a multinational
effort to compare such waveforms, this work will be especially valuable to the
gravitational wave community in their efforts to detect this radiation.
 Information that comes from these gravitational waves will lead to a better
understanding of the internal structure of neutron stars and matter at nuclear
densities.  The activities described here will provide educational and training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, including individuals
from underrepresented groups.  This work uses the HAD computational
infrastructure, and thus supports this broadly useful, publicly available
software for scientific computing.