* 0969223
* The Experimental Study of the Hot Electron Interchange Instability in a Magnetic Cusp
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Scott Thomas, Stuyvesant High School
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 9,925.00

The Hot Electron Interchange Instability is a commonly observed phenomenon
associated with the creation of a hot population of electrons in a low density,
collisionless plasma. In this experiment, a pair of high temperature
superconducting magnets are suspended inside an 18" spherical vacuum chamber,
cryogenically cooled using liquid nitrogen and arranged to form an axisymmetric
magnetic cusp. A 2.45 GHz microwave source is used to create a hot population of
electrons in a low density plasma using electron cyclotron resonance heating
leading to the observation of the hot electron interchange instability. Low
frequency fluctuations will be observed using an array of high impedence
floating probes and electron transport will be observed using an array of
particle detectors. Special attention will be given to the role of the magnetic
cusp on the hot electron interchange instability and the conditions for
stabilization of the low frequency fluctuations.

The primary goal is to support a developing program of experimental plasma
physics research in a high-school laboratory. Funds from this project would be
used to procure a 2kW 2.45 GHz microwave power system to augment an existing
facility at Stuyvesant High School. Students would have the opportunity to learn
and apply the experimental techniques used in a modern plasma physics laboratory
to conduct real scientific research.

The research opportunities are to study electron cyclotron resonance heating and
the hot electron interchange instability in a magnetic cusp. Students would
learn to use an array of diagnostics including: langmuir probes, ion saturation
probes, faraday cups, particle arrays, photodiode arrays and high gain op-amps
and will use spectrometers and oscilloscopes to study the hot electron
interchange instability and its transport. The PI would coordinate teams of
students who would be encouraged to design, fabricate and install research
components, to utilize an array of diagnostics to study the properties of plasma
and to write and submit student-centered research papers to various scientific
competitions.