* 0969280
* FORCE: Focus on Occupations, Recruiting, Community, and Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2010,09/30/2016
* Brooke Buckley, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2016
* USD 999,930.00

This project is increasing retention rates of freshmen who declare a science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) major from less than 30% to over
60% and increasing the number of undergraduates (freshmen and transfer students)
who complete a bachelor's degree in STEM at the university from a four-year mean
of about 120 to about 180. The main thesis of the project is that a focus on
STEM related career opportunities and the pathways to obtain them will be of
particular benefit to those students not yet declaring their majors and entering
freshmen who declare their intent to major in STEM fields but are at risk of
dropping out of that major. The project is engaging faculty, upper classmen and
alumni in efforts to interest students in and inform them about STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Activities include: (1) personal
invitations to potential majors to consider a STEM degree path; (2) a learning
community targeting pre-calculus students and centered around a new course
introducing students to a breadth of STEM degree and career trajectories; (3)
the growth of a residential learning community; (4) deliberate and pro-active
horizontal and vertical networking of STEM majors (and alumni) through events, a
portal to connect STEM majors to STEM jobs on campus, and web-based social
networking tools; (5) building a cadre of student ambassadors who represent the
STEM disciplines as peer tutors, recruiters, and emissaries at events; and (6)
expanding participation in undergraduate research projects. These activities are
based on gender equity, STEP and other funded work at the University of Oklahoma
investigating effective mechanisms to increase retention and graduation rates in
(STEM) majors and a recent on-campus survey to determine why students dropped
out of STEM majors or did not consider them as an option as they entered the
university. The interdisciplinary within STEM aspect of this project is enabling
students who had not previously considered a STEM major and those who become
uncertain about their decisions and options to seek an optimal match within STEM
instead of (or at least before) leaving STEM altogether.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The interdisciplinary approach underscores
the power of cross-department partnership so that other institutions might
consider such a unified approach. The literature suggests that the proposed
activities will benefit all STEM majors: women in male-dominated fields, men in
general, and other marginalized populations such as first-generation students.