* 0969312
* UCLA CUORE Neutrino Physics Research Program
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Charles Whitten, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 12/31/2014
* USD 513,000.00

The scientific goal of this award is to address one of the fundamental questions
in neutrino physics: Are neutrinos their own anti-particles, and therefore
Majorana neutrinos? The answer to this question will fundamentally shape the
future direction of neutrino physics regarding the neutrino mass scale and
possible CP violations in the lepton sector. Neutrino-less double beta decay
experiments can have broad scientific impact: they are sensitive to the absolute
scale of the electron neutrino mass and shed light on the nature of the
extension to the Standard Model; furthermore, neutrinos, if they are Majorana
and with CP violation, may provide a viable physical process contributing to the
matter and anti-matter asymmetry of the Universe. The UCLA group is a member of
the CUORE neutrino-less double beta decay experiment at the Gran Sasso
underground laboratory in Assergi, Italy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
effort will focus on understanding background sources and detector energy
resolutions. They will participate in setting up a tower of CUORE TeO2 crystals
and will be involved in the Monte Carlo simulations of the CUORE background and
data analysis. In addition, the UCLA group is responsible for testing,
installation and commissioning of the CUORE electronics system in collaboration
with the University of South Carolina and Milan groups as a part of the CUORE
construction project. The electronics performance will be a key aspect
contributing to the overall detector capability to advance our experimental
determination of the neutrino properties. The corresponding sensitivity to the
effective neutrino mass ranges from 50-70 meV, if latest nuclear structure
calculations are used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the Broader Impacts: it is an
international collaboration between Italy and US scientists; the bolometer and
electronics technology will have applications such as nuclear radiation
measurements for physics or homeland security or applied sciences; and neutrino
physics and the new technology are particularly exciting for undergraduate
students.