* 0969935
* Research on the Thermal Correction System and Thermal Coating Noise
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2010,10/31/2014
* Guido Mueller, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 10/31/2014
* USD 701,285.00

Advanced LIGO is a gigantic laser interferometer that is likely be the first
instrument to detect gravitational waves. Opening this completely new window to
the universe is one of the most anticipated scientific events in the near
future. But Advanced LIGO will only be successful if it is possible to
compensate and correct all static and dynamic radii of curvature errors in all
optical components inside the instrument. These curvature errors would otherwise
reduce the contrast inside the interferometer, increase the losses and the
noise, and limit the reach of Advanced LIGO. These curvature errors will be
caused by manufacturers who have limited control over the surface figure during
polishing and coating of the optics and by thermal gradients inside the optics
which will be caused by residual laser beam absorption. The thermal compensation
system (TCS) is responsible for measuring and correcting these errors. The TCS
uses ring heaters around each mirror to change their radii of curvatures and a
laser projection system to write a specific heating pattern into the optic to
compensate the thermal lens inside the substrate. This award supports a small
testbed to develop and test the TCS, analyze the requirements to be imposed on
the TCS, and train students on this important subsystem. Advanced LIGO will be
limited by the Brownian motion of the atoms which form the dielectric coatings
of the mirrors inside the interferometer. Although the theory of coating thermal
noise is well established, the magnitude of such noise depends on several less
well understood material parameters. Direct measurements of the noise are rare,
hardly systematic, and have never been done across the Advanced LIGO frequency
band. This award will also support an experiment dedicated to measure thermal
coating noise for different coatings, substrates, and different beam sizes to
study thermal coating noise in great detail and across the entire Advanced LIGO
frequency band.

The importance of the detection of gravitational waves for astrophysics and
astronomy can hardly be overestimated. These waves are caused by moving masses
which change the curvature of spacetime. This change propagates through space in
the form of gravitational waves. These waves are a direct consequence of the
speed limit in the universe and their exact form is described by Einstein's
theory of general relativity. Opening this completely new window to the universe
will allow study of the physics behind many interesting astronomical objects
such as neutron star or black hole binaries or supernovae. However, the
experimental challenges to reach the expected sensitivity present an ideal
training ground for graduate students and young scientists. These students will
gain valuable skills by working on a small but challenging laboratory experiment
within the context of Advanced LIGO.