* 0969969
* Differential Geometric Methods for Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Daniel Lidar, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2014
* USD 504,261.00

Quantum information processing (QIP) harbors vast potential scientific and
technological payoff, in the form of algorithms which are fundamentally more
powerful than their classical counterparts. One of the most promising ways of
achieving QIP involves adiabatic processes, wherein a system is slowly tuned
from an initial lowest-energy input state to a final output lowest-energy state
which contains the answer to a computationally difficult problem. This approach
is known as adiabatic quantum computation (AQC). The rate limiting step for AQC
is passage through a regime where the energy gap to the nearest excited state is
smallest. In the limit of large system sizes this passage is usually accompanied
by a quantum phase transition (QPT). AQC can be understood as a flow on the
manifold of control parameters used to tune the system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new differential geometry and
variational calculus tools for an analysis and unification of AQC and QPT. For
AQC this will be done by using two complementary approaches. On the one hand, it
is natural to view AQC as a time-optimal control problem, wherein one attempts
to minimize the time it takes to tune the system subject to the constraint of
adiabaticity. This leads to the formulation of AQC as a variational optimization
problem. On the other hand, optimal AQC can be seen as a geodesic on a manifold
equipped with an adiabatic metric tensor. This project aims to place these two
approaches on a rigorous footing, and to show their equivalence. The
investigators will find new optimal AQC algorithms, by solving the corresponding
Euler-Lagrange and geodesic equations. For QPTs, this project aims to develop a
powerful new differential geometric approach based on the concept of operator
fidelity susceptibility (OFS), which is also a metric, namely a pull-back of the
metric on the projective quantum space onto the control parameter manifold. The
OFS detects the change in fidelity between operators for a quantum system in a
state that is evolving over time as control parameters are varied. This approach
can be directly applied to the problem of QPTs that arise as an AQC algorithm is
taken through a critical region. In this manner the investigators hope to unify
the description of AQC and QPTs using differential geometric methods, and shed
new light on both.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The introduction of
differential geometry into the analysis of AQC is likely to generate new
insights for the larger quantum information science community, as well as bring
mathematicians closer to the plethora of fascinating problems that have arisen
in the field of quantum computation. The unification of AQC and QPTs via
differential geometry will also benefit mathematical physicists working on
problems involving strongly correlated systems in condensed matter physics. The
work provides a significant training and educational opportunity to the graduate
student and postdoc involved. The graduate student, postdoc, and principal
investigators will participate in institute-wide programs to increase the role
of underrepresented minorities in the sciences.