* 0969488
* Design and Characterization of Compact Discharge Units for Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Jens Gundlach, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

One of the remaining risks for the success of the Advanced Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) is excess noise due to charge accumulation
on the mirrors used as test masses in the interferometer. Research funded by
this award will lead to the construction of compact discharge units (CDUs) that
can be used to mitigate the charge on the test masses. Each unit features a
steerable, low-energy electron beam to neutralize positive charges and a wide
angle UV beam to photo-eject negative charges. The CDUs will be optimized for
size, reliability, and discharge current within the UV-radiation level tolerable
for the optical coating of the Advanced LIGO test masses. Testing of the units
will be performed with an existing torsion balance that can measure the absolute
charge on an insulator with conducting surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In fact,
charge mitigation is important for a variety of precision mechanical
experiments, including Advanced LIGO, torsion balances, and inertial masses in
satellites. In all these systems, a sensitive test mass is electrically isolated
from its surroundings. Charge accumulation can lead to spurious coupling between
a test mass and nearby surfaces. This unwanted coupling leads to excess noise,
degrading the performance of the experiments. The compact discharge unit can be
used to reduce this extraneous noise by neutralizing charge on the test mass.
Graduate students will participate in this project.