* 0969863
* Lattice QCD Study of Hadron Excitations Using All-to-All Quark Propagators with Improved Variance Reduction
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Colin Morningstar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2013
* USD 564,000.00

The masses of excited hadron resonances will be evaluated using computer
simulations of quarks and gluons on a space-time lattice. These resonance states
are being studied in several experiments, such as in the Hall B N* program and
the GlueX experiment in Hall D at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator
Facility. Such systems should also provide a wealth of information to help us
understand the physics of quark confinement and hadron formation in quantum
chromodynamics, the theory of the strong interactions and one of the fundamental
forces of Nature. Understanding the physics of confining gluons is an important
intellectual challenge; in fact, it is one of the seven so-called Millenium
Prize problems announced by the Clay Mathematics Institute of Cambridge,
Massachusetts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most reliable means of
investigating such systems is using Markov-chain Monte Carlo computations with
quark and gluon fields defined on a space-time lattice. In the past, such
calculations have been done with unrealistically large quark masses due to
computational limitations. Current calculations have reduced the quark masses to
nearly their physical values, causing the need to incorporate multi-hadron
operators into the computations to become crucial. A new methodology for dealing
with multi-hadron operators has been developed in the recent past, and this
proposal plans to apply the new methodology to carry out the first calculations
of the hadron masses using both single and multi-hadron operators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research incorporates the participation of
two graduate students, and possibly one or more undergraduate students, whose
educations will be enhanced not only by involvement in scientific projects at
the forefront of nuclear theory, but also with high-technology training in the
use of state-of-the-art parallel computing resources. The broader impacts of the
proposed activities will be strengthened by posting results with simplified
background information on publicly accessible web pages.