* 0969405
* High Speed Plasmonic Structured Illumination Microscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Zhaowei Liu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 03/31/2014
* USD 356,000.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to develop a new concept of a high
throughput optical microscopy technique with unprecedented imaging resolution as
well as speed. By combining two emerging fields, surface plasmon interference
engineering with the structured illumination microscopy technique, the proposed
plasmonic structured illumination microscopy (PSIM) takes advantage of the
superior properties of surface plasmons to significantly improve the spatial
resolution. A prototype plasmonic structured illumination microscope will be
constructed with 3-5 fold spatial resolution improvement compared with a
conventional light microscope. The target imaging speed is 50 frames/second and
beyond. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The PSIM is a novel concept and it is the
first ever to utilize surface plasmon interference patterns in structured
illumination microscopy to improve the imaging resolution. Considering both the
high resolution and the high speed, the proposed PSIM will represent a new
standard of optical imaging tools that is difficult to realize through any other
current techniques. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The remarkable performance
improvement provided by this proposed PSIM will make profound influences in a
broad spectrum of fields wherever a high speed high-resolution optical
microscopy is needed. The impact of this research will be far-reaching. The
outreach activities include the involvement of graduate and undergraduate
students in the project as well as the development of new courses which will be
integrated with current under/graduate curricula. More importantly, the PSIM
will also be introduced to local biologists through NCMIR, a national public
imaging facility, to assist in the new discoveries in their fields.