* 0969570
* Fiber-Reinforced Polymeric Material Systems: A Multi-Scale, Elasto-Viscoplastic Homogenization Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Pedro Ponte Castaneda, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 04/30/2014
* USD 306,000.00

This project addresses multi-scale homogenization (averaging) techniques for
fiber-reinforced polymer systems, including long-fiber reinforced polymers, and
thermoplastic elastomers with cylindrical structures. The goal is to develop
general and computationally efficient constitutive models that are capable of
handling coupled elasto-visco-plastic behavior and the effect of microstructure
--and its evolution--at two different length scales. The possible development of
macroscopic and microscopic instabilities will also be investigated. The
techniques to be developed in this work will be of broad application to large
classes of polymeric, metallic, biological and geological material systems, and
will lend themselves to numerical implementation in constitutive subroutines for
use with standard finite element method packages. Once fully developed, they
will replace current models based on linear-elastic analyses, requiring the use
of large safety factors in industrial applications.

This project includes two international collaborations, one with Pierre Suquet
(CNRS, Marseilles) and the other with Javier Llorca (IMDEA, Madrid), on
complementary aspects of the proposed work. They will allow the students
involved in this project to acquire valuable international experience through
participation in multi-country, multi-laboratory collaborative projects. The
principal investigator will teach a course on Homogenization Methods, and is
also writing a book that is based on this course, which aims to make the recent
progress in nonlinear homogenization available to a larger audience.
Improvements in the modeling and performance of long-fiber-reinforced polymers
should lead to significant energy savings in the aerospace and other industries,
while better understanding of thermoplastic elastomers is highly desirable
because of their recyclable properties, and consequent positive implications for
the environment.