* 0969032
* Remote Sensing for Early Detection of Wildfires
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2013
* Stefano Soatto, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 03/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Early detection of wildfires is critical to mounting a successful response, and
a growing need given trends in both urbanization and climate change. As recently
as a few months ago, large wildfires started in inaccessible unmonitored areas
threatened large urban areas for weeks (witness the Station Fire in the Angels
National Forest). Manned observation towers, the method of choice in decades
past, has become unsustainable with the boundaries of urban sprawl growing and
the budgets of local governments under strain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
tackles the problem head-on by developing algorithmic and engineering tools for
remote detection of incipient fires using networked remote optical sensors in
the visible and infra-red spectra. While previous efforts suggested blanketing
the target area with networked temperature and smoke sensors, this approach does
not scale well because it requires sensors to be close to the source in order to
trigger an alarm. Remote sensors can detect events at a distance and are only
limited by the topography of the environment. Thus one strategically placed
camera can monitor an entire valley and would ultimately be suitable for co-
deployment with other infrastructure such as cell towers. However, processing
these video streams is not trivial since events of interest, such as the
inception of a fire, can manifest themselves in a large number of ways depending
on time of the day, season, weather, distance from the sensor, fuel etc. The
challenge is to tease apart these "nuisance effects" and only detect events of
interest. The team will focus on the algorithmic challenge of inferring spatio-
temporal events in video streams, and on the systems trade-offs between
computation, communication and energy resources.