* 0969772
* Strongly Correlated Quantum Gases with Single Site Addressability
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Markus Greiner, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

The quantum gas microscope, developed in the previous three-year grant period,
allows detecting individual atoms on a Hubbard regime optical lattice with
single lattice site resolution and near unity fidelity. This opens many new
possibilities for atomic quantum gas research. The unprecedented imaging
fidelity makes it possible to probe the quantum gas on a single particle level,
which should allow one to directly identify strongly correlated quantum states
such as Mott insulators. In addition, the optical resolution can be used for
creating arbitrary potential landscapes, and to manipulate the quantum gas in
many new ways. This work will involve using the quantum gas microscope to carry
out experiments on non-equilibrium physics in a strongly correlated gas of
atoms. The first goal is to study the dynamics of the superfluid to Mott
insulator transition, and to characterize the flow of entropy in the
inhomogeneous system. The next step is to use the possibility to project
arbitrary potential landscapes for introducing a sharp potential step. The step
forms a 'junction', with different superfluid or Mott insulating domains on each
side. Changing the height or position of the step should allow creating
excitations in a well defined way, generating a new paradigm for inhomogeneous
non-equilibrium physics. In a specific regime, this system can be mapped on a
spin 1/2 Heisenberg model, which allows studying magnetism using just a single
component quantum gas. The final goal is to extend a recently demonstrated
scheme for creating vortices to the quantum gas microscope, which should allow
creating a gas of multiple topological quasi-particles (vortices, skyrmions, and
merons) in a reproducible way. This opens the possibility to study collision,
interactions, and annihilation of such quasi-particles, and to study the change
in the particle dynamics as the strongly correlated regime or the quantum Hall
regime is approached. All of these experiments are uniquely enabled by the
quantum gas microscope.

The work will have broad impact on research, education and technology. The new
experiment will be an important step in the world-wide quest for the
experimental realization of novel strongly correlated quantum states of matter,
and help understand fundamental condensed matter models. This adds an
interdisciplinary aspect, since it is expected that such advances would feed to
material science and lead to the development of new materials such as improved
superconducting, thermoelectric and magnetic materials. The research itself will
generate research opportunities for graduate students, undergraduate students,
and postdocs. The PI is developing a new undergraduate lab series, and continues
to develop a new undergraduate optics course. Graduate students will use the
skill acquired through this research to develop experiments and lecture
demonstrations for these courses. Images and movies of single atoms in optical
lattices as generated in this research are a unique way to bring the fascination
of quantum gas research to a broad audience. Such images and movies of the
experiment will be used (and have already been used) by the PI and by a number
of colleagues in public talks and lectures to a general audience.