* 0969985
* Determination of Heterogeneous Photochemistry Related to Atmospheric Reactive Nitrogen Species
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Lei Zhu, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2014
* USD 555,303.00

Nitrogen oxides (NOx = NO+NO2) play a pivotal role in ground-level ozone
formation, stratospheric ozone depletion, and acid deposition. Understanding
atmospheric chemistry of reactive nitrogen species (NOY, where NOY is defined as
the sum of NOx and the atmospheric oxidation products of NOx) is critical to
pollution prevention and control efforts. While the homogeneous gas phase
photochemistry of a large number of NOY has been studied, much less is known
about the heterogeneous photochemistry of NOY species such as nitric acid (HNO3)
and peroxynitric acid (HO2NO2). The photolysis of adsorbed HNO3 on ground
surfaces has been proposed as a major daytime source of HONO in low-NOx
environments. Little is known in particular about the UV absorption cross
sections and the photolysis quantum yields of HNO3/H2O co-deposited on surface.
The project seeks to characterize heterogeneous photolysis of surface-adsorbed
HNO3 both in the absence and in the presence of water vapor, of HNO3/H2O co-
deposited on surface, and of surface-adsorbed HO2NO2. Wavelength-dependent UV
absorption cross sections of surface-adsorbed HNO3, HNO3/H2O, and HO2NO2 will be
determined using Brewster-angle cavity ring-down spectroscopy. The
photodissociation pathways and product yields from the heterogeneous photolysis
of these species will be measured by combining laser photolysis either with
Brewster angle cavity ring-down spectroscopy (fused silica surface) or with
cavity ring-down spectroscopy (Al or ice film surface). The project will provide
information essential to the assessment of the role of heterogeneous photolysis
in converting NOx reservoirs into active forms and in producing tropospheric odd
hydrogen radicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will directly lead to the
research training of a graduate student and a postdoctoral scholar. In addition
to presenting research findings at national and international conferences by the
project director, postdoctoral scholar and graduate student, and publishing
results in professional journals, the project director, Dr. Lei Zhu, plans to
periodically give lectures in the local colleges and universities in the region
to share the research results with scientists in the area, excite students'
interests in science, and promote intellectual exchanges between different
institutions. The Principal Investigator (PI) also plants to increase outreach
efforts and to contribute to the goal of diversity and inclusiveness in
university education. SUNY-Albany has existing outreach programs such as the
Shepherd Project. The Shepherd Project has the goal of establishing long-term
partnerships with faculty at historically minority colleges. The PI plans to
become an active member in the Shepherd Program at SUNY-Albany.