* 0969810
* RUI: Gravitational waveform recovery from a network of detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Tiffany Summerscales, Andrews University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2014
* USD 105,367.00

This award supports research related to the scientific success of LIGO (the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory) through the following
projects: a) assistance in the development and evaluation of a data analysis
pipeline that uses the maximum entropy method to recover short duration
gravitational wave signals by combining the data from a network of gravitational
wave detectors, and b) using a network analysis method to analyze data from
times associated with astrophysical events. The award will enable the growth of
an undergraduate research program in LIGO at Andrews University to develop
students' skills and enhance their educational experience. The research program
will involve the application of statistical methods that invert the response of
a network of detectors to recover a gravitational wave signal. Astrophysical
event "triggers" will be obtained from databases provided by the astronomical
community. Coding will be done within the MATLAB environment and follow the
programming standards of the LIGO collaboration. Undergraduate students will
collaborate with other researchers both within the group at Andrews and within
the LIGO collaboration. Research will lead to student publications and
presentations. Educational experience from classes such those on relativity and
Advanced Physics Laboratory will flow into research experience and research
experience will enhance learning.

The LIGO interferometers have already taken data at the sensitivity they were
initially designed to achieve. With recent and in-progress upgrades, gains in
sensitivity will bring the first detections of gravitational waves and open the
door to a new era of gravitational wave astronomy. The projects supported by
this award will develop some of the analysis tools necessary to recover the
information content of gravitational waves. In addition, the supported projects
will involve undergraduates in research with an international collaboration and
allow them to make direct contributions to a large experiment. They will also
integrate with undergraduate educational experience by enhancing research
skills, having direct ties with coursework and generating enthusiasm for
research. The PI plans to provide outreach activities on gravitational waves and
LIGO to local junior high students.