* 0969725
* Quantum Optics with Superconducting Circuits
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Robert Schoelkopf, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 350,114.00

This work is a continuation of fundamental experiments in quantum optics using
superconducting integrated circuits. Based on the paradigm of "circuit QED"
developed by the PI's group, in which superconducting qubits are combined with
microwave transmission line resonant cavities to realize the physics of the
Jaynes-Cummings model with ultra-strong coupling, the team is pursuing the
generation, manipulation, and measurement of non-classical states of the
electromagnetic field. Using the tools developed for quantum information
processing with superconducting devices, we have developed a new "two-cavity"
circuit architecture during the current funding period. Here a single qubit,
which provides nonlinearity, is combined with two microwave cavities, allowing
new possibilities for nonlinear optics at the single quantum level. The main
goal with this architecture was to develop a quantum non-demolition measurement
capable of detecting single microwave photons. The team has experiments showing
that they can indeed perform several repeated measurements on single photons.
The main thrust of the continuation program will therefore be to characterize
and understand this quantum measurement, and to observe single quantum jumps of
the field in their solid-state system. This measurement capability can then be
used to study the backaction of the measurement, observe the collapse of the
cavity wavefunction, prepare nonclassical states by measurement post-selection,
and investigate quantum control and feedback on few photon
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work is that it will
open a new area for fundamental studies of the quantum measurement of the
electromagnetic field, as well as develop new technology for integrated circuits
which operate at the single quantum level. The experiments that will be
performed employ the novel features of the circuit QED system to observe and
study phenomena that are mostly inaccessible with traditional AMO systems in
quantum optics. The techniques and capabilities for single photon generation and
detection could have major impact on the prospects for scalable quantum
computation and communication in these superconducting circuits and also
atomic/condensed matter hybrid systems such as ion and molecule chips. This
project will also continue the trend established by earlier work to forge new
connections between the atomic and condensed matter physics communities. This
research will take advantage of the infrastructure and technical knowledge for
fabrication and measurement of superconducting devices developed as part of the
large, applied effort for development of quantum computing at Yale, but allows
new and distinct directions of fundamental physical interest.