* 0969005
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Security and Software Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* V. N. Venkatakrishnan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 01/31/2012
* USD 13,000.00

IIP 0969005&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois at
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;Buy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Chicago at Illinois
(UIC) is planning to join the Industry/University Cooperative Research Center
(I/UCRC) entitled "Center for Security and Software Engineering Research Center
(S2ERC)" which is a multi- university center comprised of Ball State (lead
institution) and Iowa State Univesrsity. The proposed Center has a focus on
improving the management of the software engineering process, the productivity
of software engineers, and the security, quality and timeliness of software
engineering products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center (S2ERC) plans to
investigate integrated methods of engineering practical software systems that
are able to meet emerging security requirements in addition to encompassing
traditional software engineering objectives. This goal is of great importance to
both industry and government in order for them to be able to confidently deploy
real-world software systems that meet their mission goals even in the face of a
broad range of security attacks. Research activities within the umbrella of the
S2ERC will draw on UIC?s traditional strength in formal modeling, analysis, and
verification of concurrent systems. UIC plans to investigate various methods for
managing the challenge of concurrency programming. UIC specifically intends to
design and implement tools that will automatically detect and remove concurrency
errors, such as deadlocks and violations of mutual exclusion constraints from
programs written in high-level concurrent languages such as Java. UIC also
intends to explore existing (sequential) software systems provided by industrial
affiliates for the purpose of transforming those systems into concurrent
programs. Finally, UIC will explore a set of techniques known as managed
execution or run-time monitoring. The purpose of these methods is to transform a
program in such a way that potential concurrency errors are monitored and
avoided during program execution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center will
be an intellectually nurturing environment where discovery and understanding is
advanced to its faculty, students and prospective members. The proposed Center
will provide faculty and students the unique opportunity to work on research
teams in real world security and software engineering applications. The proposed
semi-annual S2ERC showcases will provide an excellent opportunity for all the
students to interact with industrial partners and get a first-hand understanding
of emerging challenges and opportunities in their careers. UIC plans to improve
its level of diversity by reaching out to local high schools and middle schools.
The UIC site intends to run summer camps on introductory computer science
topics, for the benefit of students at these schools.