* 0969113
* A General Framework for Incorporating Choice Models into Operations Management Decisions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Huseyin Topaloglu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Many companies favor offering a large product variety to their customers with
the intention of increasing the customer base. For example, one may see twenty
or more models of a digital equipment at a retailer, each model competing with
others in features and price. Similarly, online travel websites offer a variety
of travel products consolidated from different suppliers. Choosing the right
variety of products to offer to the customers turns out to be a difficult
problem. Offering a low-margin product increases the customer base, but it may
also cause the current customers to switch to the low-margin product, damaging
revenues. Large product variety increases the customer base, but it may also
increase the operational costs. As the inventories are consumed or as the
company learns more about the customer choices, it may be necessary to adjust
the offered assortment. Despite the ubiquitous nature of choice, the interface
between the operational decisions and the customer choices are not well-
understood. The primary goal of this research is to develop a framework for
integrating customer choice into operations management decisions.

This research will focus on both static and dynamic optimization problems with
customer choice behavior. In the static setting, the parameters of the
underlying choice model are known and the objective is to decide which
assortment of products to offer. In the dynamic setting, the parameters of the
underlying choice model are uncertain. One must estimate the parameter values
based on data and adapt the decisions as the knowledge of the parameter values
evolves. Besides methodological contributions, this research will impact the
relevant course offerings in inventory control, supply chain management and
revenue management. Simulation games to validate the findings will be developed
and used as an instruction platform. Students at all levels and from diverse
backgrounds will have opportunities for research experience.