* 0969888
* Multi-Scale Study of Nanoparticle Sintering
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Kathy Lu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 308,245.00

This grant provides funding for a nanoparticle sintering study across multi-
scales through quantifying three-dimensional (3D) structural evolution of
different nanoparticle packings and connecting the microstructural
characteristics with macroscopic shrinkage. The primary issues to be addressed
are particle agglomeration, excessive grain growth, complex nano-/micro-
structural evolution, and non-uniform shrinkage. Sintering is a high temperature
process whereby particles, in this case nanoparticles (with diameters less than
100 micrometers), are consolidated into solid form. The process involves multi-
scale events that range from atomic diffusion to macroscopic shrinkage and
creates stable nanostructures for long term use. Experiments will be carried out
to create homogeneous and agglomerated titanium dioxide and zirconium dioxide
nanoparticle packing structures across all scales. The resulting nanostructure
will be quantitatively described and correlated with grain growth and
macroscopic shrinkage through nanostructural electron tomography and focused ion
beam 3D rendering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will provide understanding to the key issues in nanoparticle sintering.
These include the effects of different nanoparticle packings, excessive grain
growth, complex nano-/micro-structural evolution, and non-uniform shrinkage. The
team will develop theories that link nano-/micro-structural evolution and
macroscopic densification throughout the entire sintering process. The
integrated understanding across multi-scales will provide comprehensive
sintering knowledge and enable the field to challenge the heretofore-accepted
sintering theories and perspectives. With proper adjustment, the methodology and
breakthrough can also be applied to conventional micron-sized particle sintering
which has numerous applications. New theory-guided sintering processes resulting
from this program will also allow for more energy efficient sintering practices.
The research methodology has wide-ranging significance in multi-scale device
integration while improving process reliability and manufacturability.