* 0969423
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Modeling and Optimization of Manufacturing Variability and Product Reliability for Advanced and Evolving Technologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* David Coit, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 230,001.00

The research objective of this award is to develop integrated quality and
reliability models and analysis tools that provide fundamental insights for the
successful development and commercialization of evolving technologies, such as
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) and biomedical implant devices. For many
new and evolving technologies, their continued successful development depends on
the concurrent modeling and optimization of process variability and product
life, which are inherently linked for many of these technologies. The first
research effort is to develop an integrated quantitative methodology to jointly
optimize system quality and reliability. Based on this integrated framework,
probabilistic models will be investigated for predicting reliability of devices
that experience multiple failure processes due to simultaneous exposure to
degradation and shock loads. Competing risk models with dependent failure
processes will be developed and extended. In addition, reliability models will
be developed for complex systems with multiple independent or dependent
components. Multiple user objectives (e.g., quality, reliability, yield, cost,
etc.) will be simultaneously considered by the formulation and solution of
multi-objective optimization problems. Finally, the developed models will be
validated for MEMS and biomedical implant devices through collaborations with
industrial and government partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research will advance the state-of-the-art by contributing new concepts, models
and algorithms. A solid multidisciplinary scientific foundation will be built to
combine methodologies in quality, reliability, statistics and operations
research. In addition, the success of this research will offer fundamental
insights that can be transformed to many newer design and manufacturing
problems, such as nano-technology that also has unique manufacturing challenges.
The integrated methodology can provide timely and effective tools for decision-
makers in manufacturing to economically optimize operational decisions for
improving reliability, quality and productivity. Undergraduate and graduate
students from underrepresented groups will be continuously recruited to work on
this research.