* 0969837
* Collaborative Research: Structural Integrity of Steel Gravity Framing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Judy Liu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 100,000.00

The research objective of this award is provide critical experimental data and
assessment tools essential for evaluating the integrity of common steel gravity
load resisting systems. A combination of system testing and component testing
will be used to assess the behavior of these systems as designed today. These
experimental results will then be used to advance models for the analysis of
such systems under large deformations and to identify critical details that have
a major impact on system performance. Cost-effective details that transform
performance will be developed and tested at the component level and then
incorporated in system tests. At the component level, steel connections will be
tested under combined rotation and tension loading, and important details of the
slab on deck system, such as lap splices, beam anchorage, and the tensile
behavior of the slabs on metal decks in orthogonal directions will be tested.
System tests will involve large-scale push-down tests of gravity frame systems
using current practice details and new concepts developed in this research.

The results of this research will directly impact the safety of almost all steel
buildings by assessing the integrity of ubiquitous structural components and
developing models for engineers to employ. It will also develop transformative
solutions for improving the robustness of common gravity frame components and
systems. Through close collaboration with the American Institute of Steel
Construction, expedient dissemination and rapid implementation will be
facilitated. Graduate students will be directly trained through this research as
they address the challenges associated with unanticipated structural loadings.
Interest and diversity in engineering will be enhanced through partnerships with
the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF) program at Purdue, the
Summer Research Opportunity Program (SROP) at Illinois and the Seattle
Mathematics Engineering Science and Achievement Program (Seattle MESA) at
Washington. These programs will provide for undergraduate (SURF and SROP) and
high school (MESA) research internships.