* 0969109
* Student Retention Enhancement Across Mathematics and Sciences (STREAMS)
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Thomas Kling, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 04/30/2016
* USD 989,631.00

This project is implementing a common approach to improving student retention in
biology, chemistry, computer science, earth sciences, mathematics and physics in
order to increase the average STEM major graduation rate from 120 to 160
graduates. Activities being introduced through this project include: common,
inquiry-based approaches for all STEM introductory courses; structured learning
assistance to gateway courses with pervasive high student failure rates;
development of an electronic portfolio-based mentoring program emphasizing
undergraduate research; establishment of a three week, residential summer bridge
program; creation of a STEM residential learning community; and development of
stronger connections with local community colleges through improved transfer
orientation programming. These six interventions are designed to prepare and
encourage students to take advantage of existing undergraduate research and
internship opportunities later in their careers. They were chosen to overcome
specific barriers to STEM persistence as determined by institutional research
with the current student body. Participating community colleges are Cape Cod and
Massasoit Community Colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
underlying intellectual principle of this project is that a coherent set of
institutional changes known to support the retention of three traditionally
underserved populations (students of color, first generation college students,
and low income students) will result in a substantial rise in the total number
of BSC STEM graduates through all populations. These three traditionally
underserved populations represent approximately 42% of the institution's
students. With the exception of the summer bridge program designed to jumpstart
a group of at risk students from the traditionally underserved population, all
these interventions will be available to all STEM students. Students are being
closely tracked via surveys and focus groups in order to determine the efficacy
of various program components as concerns increasing persistence. These
assessments are being used in real time to improve the delivery components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project allows for a study of best
practices for STEM retention within traditionally underserved populations on
college campuses, an underserved resource for possible STEM graduates, and
therefore has the potential to assist the large number of public colleges and
universities that struggle to serve these students well. Key personnel will
present results of these studies at regional and national disciplinary meetings.