* 0969255
* Collaborative Research: Composite Surfacing of Amorphous Materials by Laser Interference Nanopatterning
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Sandip Harimkar, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 200,521.00

The goal of this collaborative research grant is the development of a novel
laser-based surface engineering technique to enhance the ductility of non-
crystalline materials, primarily metals. Laser interference patterning will be
employed to produce modified regions of periodic lines or dots of localized
ultrafine grain structure with residual stresses on the surface of these
materials. The major objectives of the research are (i) to identify the thermo-
physical effects associated with the interaction of modulated laser intensity
during interference patterning and (ii) to characterize the modulated
microstructure, crystallization dynamics, and distribution of residual stresses
during laser patterning. These objectives will be instrumental in establishing
the role of surface modification on enhancing global plasticity of the non-
crystalline materials. Finally, a computational model based on the thermo-
physical interactions associated with laser interference patterning of non-
crystalline material surfaces for tailoring the effects will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this project on laser
interference patterning will significantly advance the state-of-the-art in
ductilization of inherently brittle non-crystalline alloys leading to wider
acceptance of these materials for advanced structural applications. The research
will elucidate the fundamental mechanisms of plasticity enhancement of non-
crystalline materials through design of periodic surface structures consisting
of original non-crystalline regions and regions of ultrafine grain structure
with residual stresses. Through synergistic computational and experimental
approach, the research is expected to establish a methodology for design and
synthesis of next generation structural materials system. Furthermore, the
collaborative project will provide opportunities for students to work on novel
and advanced processing methods and materials and will help prepare diverse and
capable workforce of next generation global scientists/engineers.