* 0969929
* Community-Driven Proteomics Analysis Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Eugene Kolker, Seattle Children's Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,973,699.00

Seattle Children's Research Institute is awarded a grant to build a community-
driven, high-throughput proteomics analysis environment called SPIRE (Systematic
Protein Investigative Research Environment). SPIRE is designed to be modular,
and will integrate the best publicly available methods and open community
standards. The broad applicability of proteomics analyses in biology is hindered
by low knowledge penetration throughout the community regarding how and why
tools are used and which tools should be used when to produce statistically-
sound results. The proliferation of piecemeal, single-use tools and the absence
of comprehensive approaches places a high integration and management burden on
researchers. A solution is to create an environment that emphasizes integration,
modularity, flexibility, ease of use, and community involvement. The SPIRE
modules will encompass each stage of mass spectrometry proteomics analyses, such
as raw data uploads, experimental design, peptide and protein identification,
protein expression measures, and analysis. SPIRE development will be tailored
to, and driven by, the needs of the research community. SPIRE is a community
science project for proteomics and, as a result, will drastically accelerate
proteomics-based biological and environmental research and empower the community
as a whole.

In conjunction with SPIRE, the team will create InSPIRE, a web-based proteomics
resource for middle-school education. InSPIRE will provide resources, reviews,
and reference materials related to protein science to "inspire" the next
generation of researchers. Additional information about SPIRE and InSPIRE will
be available at www.proteinspire.org