* 0969731
* A Program in Ultra-Low Temperature Atomic Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Wolfgang Ketterle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,216,149.00

Novel magnetic materials are important for many applications. However, magnetism
still has unresolved mysteries, especially in systems involving strong
interactions and strong correlations between the particles. One approach to
study magnetic materials is to realize magnetic phenomena in the simplest
possible systems which are well controlled and well characterized. The simplest
systems are ultracold atoms, which are very dilute gases (a million times less
dilute than air). At very low temperatures, these gases can behave like liquids,
solids, metals, superconductors, or magnets. The work at MIT studies quantum
magnetism in three different systems: Two component Bose and Fermi gases in
optical lattices, and so-called itinerant ferromagnetism of delocalized fermions
in free space or in optical lattices. This work addresses important questions at
the frontier of many-body physics and will have impact on future research in
atomic physics, condensed matter physics and many-body theory.

Broader impact. Research on quantum magnetism using ultracold atoms stimulates
theoretical work on strongly interacting Bose and Fermi gases and will advance
our understanding of macroscopic quantum systems and of magnetic materials. A
deeper understanding of magnetism and superfluidity may lead to new materials
and novel devices in the future. This work provides research training for
several undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs, and prepares them for
successful careers in technology and science. Former students and postdocs
continue to find distinguished positions in the area of science and technology.
All the research will be performed on campus and will be fully integrated in
teaching and education, through research opportunities for undergraduates, lab
tours, and by being used in lectures as illustrations for basic concepts in
physics. Through his public lectures, Prof. Ketterle reaches out to more general
audiences. He regularly gives talks for high school students, e.g. at the annual
RSI (Research Summer Institute) program at MIT, at the TOPS (Teaching
opportunities in the physical sciences) program at MIT, and during visits to
high schools. An additional outreach activity initiated by Prof. Ketterle is the
Virtual Journal of Atomic Quantum Fluids.