* 0969044
* Reliability-Based Design Optimization of Large-Scale Complex Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Sharif Rahman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 03/31/2014
* USD 272,286.00

The research objective of this award is to create new theoretical foundations
and numerical algorithms for large-scale, reliability-based design optimization
(RBDO) of complex engineering systems. The proposed effort will involve: (1) an
extended polynomial dimensional decomposition (X-PDD) method for system
reliability analysis of a general, high-dimensional, stochastic system; (2)
integrated X-PDD and score functions for concurrently calculating sensitivities
of system reliability with respect to design variables; and (3) system-level
reliability-based and robust design optimization algorithms employing X-PDD for
probabilistic response and sensitivities from a single stochastic simulation.
The innovative formulation of system reliability analysis and design
sensitivities will dramatically accelerate RBDO process. Therefore, the research
constitutes a new and possibly paradigm-shifting advance towards solving large-
scale, complex optimization problems in the presence of uncertainty.
Deliverables include development of new theory and algorithms, generation of
modeling and simulation tools, documentation of research results, engineering
student education, and hands-on design experience for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
be applicable to a broad multidisciplinary design optimization methodology.
Potential engineering applications comprise ground vehicle design for improved
durability and crashworthiness, fatigue- and fracture-resistant design for civil
and aerospace applications, and reliable design of microelectronic packaging
under harsh environments. Beyond engineering, potential application areas
include energy, finance, management, scheduling, and transportation and
logistics, where stochastic optimization plays a vital role. The transfer of
knowledge created by this award will take place through organization of
engineering design-related symposia, peer-reviewed journal publications,
presentations at major conferences and meetings, software development, and
student education. Educational goals include graduate student recruitment from
an underrepresented minority group, implementation of software tools to upgrade
existing graduate and undergraduate courses at The University of Iowa, and
active participation in Iowa's Project Lead the Way program for middle- and
high-school students.