* 0969071
* Cluster algebras, critical groups, and tropical curves
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2010,11/30/2010
* Gregg Musiker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 11/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

The PI will pursue three related projects, which highlight the interplay between
algebraic combinatorics, representation theory, and tropical geometry. The first
project involves a study of cluster algebras, defined by Fomin and Zelevinsky,
with an eye towards proving the positivity conjecture that has been open since
the founding of this field in 2001. The second project is an exploration of
critical groups of graphs, also known as sandpile groups, which were
independently introduced by researchers in diverse fields such as graph theory,
dynamical systems, electrical networks, and arithmetic geometry. The third
project considers various objects from algebraic geometry, including linear
systems and Jacobians, and examines their analogues for metric graphs, also
known in the literature as quantum graphs or abstract tropical curves. In
addition to a number of intrinsic questions arising in each of these fields, the
topics of these three projects exhibit intriguing connections to other areas in
both pure and applied mathematics. Some of these subjects are Teichmuller
theory, number theory, and geometric combinatorics, as well as mathematical
physics, combinatorial optimization, and mathematical biology.

At its heart, algebraic combinatorics involves counting, but this enumeration
typically is done while keeping track of certain data. This is similar to the
census, where it is more useful to obtain a detailed breakdown including
demographic information rather than simply a single number stating the number of
Americans. A common theme throughout the PI's research is the use of such
enumeration techniques to provide new approaches for solving problems in other
areas of mathematics. For example, in the theory of cluster algebras, certain
geometric formulas arise through a process called seed mutation. However, these
same expressions can be computed instead by counting, as long as one knows what
features for which to look. The PI will study more phenomena like this, where
complicated expressions can be reduced to more concrete calculations. The above
topics naturally lend themselves to computational projects and undergraduate
research. For instance, the PI plans to use the open source math software Sage
with students to get more of them interested in these topics, while creating
computational packages for other researchers. This work may also lead to the
discovery of new combinatorial patterns motivating further research.