* 0969895
* Next Generation Li-Ion Rechargeable Batteries Featuring Nano-Engineered Anode Architectures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 07/31/2013
* USD 396,092.00

Next Generation Lithium-Ion Rechargeable Batteries Featuring Nano-Engineered
Anode Architectures

Nikhil Koratkar, Catalin Picu and Toh-Ming Lu Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Silicon is one of the most promising anode materials for Lithium-ion
rechargeable batteries because it has the highest known theoretical charge
capacity and is the second most abundant element on earth. However Silicon
anodes have limited applications because of the huge volume change associated
with the insertion and extraction of Lithium. This causes cracking and
pulverization of the anode, which leads to a loss of electrical contact and
eventual fading of capacity. The objective of this project is to develop novel
stress-resistant nanostructured Silicon anode architectures with a high capacity
and long life. We will systematically study various anode architectures with a
view to understanding and controlling failure in nanostructured Lithium-ion
battery anodes. More specifically, we propose to study three categories of
nanostructured anodes: (1) Nano-rod/nano-spring arrays of Silicon and other
promising materials such as Aluminum and Tin, (2) nano-compliant support
structures for conventional Silicon film anodes and (3) Silicon scoops deposited
on nanorods composed of an electrochemically inert material. In addition to the
experiments, atomic scale simulations are proposed to investigate the physics of
Lithium diffusion and stress build-up in nanostructures. This information will
be used to develop continuum models in order to determine the optimal structure
of the nanopatterned electrode.

Rechargeable Lithium-ion batteries are integral to today's information-rich,
mobile society. The proposed work will provide the fundamental understanding
necessary to develop and refine the design of nanostructured anodes to enable
order of magnitude enhancements in charge capacity, charge/discharge rate
capability and cycle life of Lithium-ion batteries. This can lead to
revolutionary new high performance battery technologies which in addition to
portable electronics could also play a central role in next generation wireless
communication devices, stationary storage batteries, microchips, defense
applications, and even in hybrid and all electric vehicles.