* 0970012
* RUI:  Quantum Transport Dynamics with Ultracold Atoms: Localized versus Extended States
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Kunal Das, Kutztown University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2013
* USD 153,755.00

This project will undertake a thorough theoretical study of the essential
properties of coherent transport dynamics of trapped ultra-cold atoms, using a
novel approach based on localized states. Besides being an effective way to
numerically simulate transport of atoms through arbitrary potentials ('devices'
in an atomic circuit), this approach can be directly implemented in atom
transport experiments. Realistic designs for such experiments will also be
developed as part of this study. The focus will be on mechanisms that involve
time-dependent potential, coherent evolution, and features that distinguish
atoms from electrons. The goal is to establish transport research with ultracold
atoms as a flourishing field of study with significant applications. New quantum
dynamical phenomena will be investigated for cold atoms, which are expected to
have cross-disciplinary impact by providing a broader perspective on several
transport phenomena. A new application of atom chips is implied in examining the
flow of atoms, aligned with the functions of semiconductor microchips, with
potential for integration into an atomic circuit. An alternate system that can
probe coherent quantum transport in a controlled setting at the micron scale of
atom chips, instead of the nanoscale of electronic circuits, will be valuable
for testing and applying quantum transport dynamics imminent in future
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the work is its capacity
to strengthen both teaching and research activity at a predominantly
undergraduate institution. This project will enhance the educational experience
of the students working on the project and will help to create an environment
that encourages research for both students and faculty. Undergraduate research
involvement will be an integral component of this project, with an emphasis on
recruiting students underrepresented in science in an effort to encourage them
towards careers in science and technology. Because of the location of the
University, both inner city students and those from very rural areas will be
recruited.