* 0970122
* GOALI: Probabilistic Geomechanical Analysis in the Exploitation of  Unconventional Resources
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Denwood Griffiths, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 286,000.00

The Nation faces simultaneous challenges from increasing demand for energy
coupled with depletion of conventional oil and gas resources. It is expected
that the advanced research described in this proposal will lead to sustainable,
safer, environmentally clean and more efficient unconventional oil resource
recovery techniques. These attributes will be critical to the economy,
environment, and security of the United States in the 21st century.

This research proposal brings together random field theory and finite element
methods, also known as the Random Finite Element Method RFEM, which will be
developed and applied to the unique geotechnical conditions encountered in the
unconventional oil resource recovery industry. The industrial partners at Shell
have developed advanced deterministic modeling technologies for exploration and
production of unconventional oil resources such as heavy oils and oil shale.
This proposal enables Shell to work with academic collaborators at the Colorado
School of Mines to include advanced probabilistic based numerical simulation
methods into their modeling capabilities. In addition, the practical
applications and data made available by the industrial partners will greatly
enhance the usefulness of software developed predominantly in an academic
environment.

This collaborative project will improve industry-university research linkage in
the design and implementation of unconventional oil resource recovery
techniques. The aim is to set a high industry standard for unconventional oil
resources extraction which will undoubtedly be under close public scrutiny due
to the important environmental implications. It is also anticipated that this
research will lead to an understanding and recognition of the importance of risk
and reliability methodologies among the public, including engineers of the
industrial partner.

Developments made in this research will also lead to improved understanding and
implementation of risk and reliability methodologies into more routine
geotechnical design.