* 0970113
* Collaborative Research: Beyond Point Vortices: Moving Singularities and Wave Fields in Fluid Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Stefan Llewellyn Smith, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 09/30/2014
* USD 244,360.00

Kirchhoff's equations of motion for point vortices are a paradigm of reduction
of an infinite-dimensional dynamical system, namely the incompressible Euler
equation, to a finite-dimensional system. Yet the original incompressible Euler
equation itself neglects physical phenomena such as compressibility that may be
important in certain applications. In addition, one can also examine other
generalizations of the point vortex singularity, such as dipoles, and the effect
of boundaries. In this proposal, we aim to derive appropriate equations for such
situations based on physical principles and examine the resulting nonlinear
systems. The natural extension of point vortices to higher singularities using
momentum conservation argument encounters difficulties: the resulting equations
are not uniquely specified and there is an underlying ill-defined
regularization. We tackle this problem using a complementary tool to integral
arguments, namely by exploiting the very differences in scales to obtain
equations governing the large-scale motion of the system while taking into
account the small-scale behavior of the vortices where appropriate. This is an
archetypal Matched Asymptotic Expansion (MAE) problem. These approaches will
provide equations that are new tools for low-order models of fluid flows beyond
the well-known point vortex equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vorticity has been a
fundamental concept in fluid mechanics since its introduction by Helmholtz. The
Scottish school, including Lord Kelvin, sought a theory of `vortex atoms' to
explain the structure of matter. Understanding vorticity dynamics is critical to
an understanding of turbulence, and essentially large-scale flows, whether
environmental, are turbulent. Simplified models a critical tool in physics,
mathematics and engineering to achieve this understanding and point vortices,
two-dimensional singular structures, are an important such model. They have been
called a ``classical applied mathematical playground'' and have been used to
understanding problems in the control of fluid flows, biological locomotion and
geophysics. This project aims to derive extensions of point vortices to more
general systems using physical principles. Such models have applications in
models of aircraft wakes for large modern aircraft by taking into account
compressibility. Reduced-order models such as the ones presented here are an
important first step in the modeling process as well as providing potential
benchmarks to compare to complex CFD (computational fluid dynamics)
calculations. The project will include an international collaboration between
mathematicians and fluid dynamicists.