* 0970079
* Collaborative Research:  Electromagnetic Peening Assisted Laser Micromachining (EPALM) - A Hybrid Micromachining Process with Enhanced Mechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Benxin Wu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2014
* USD 140,000.00

The goal of this collaborative research project is to investigate a novel
electromagnetic peening-assisted laser micromachining process. The research
objectives of the project are to understand responses of a workpiece under the
simultaneous action of laser beam radiation and compressive forces generated by
electromagnetic induction during machining, and to test the hypothesis that,
during the electromagnetic peening-assisted laser micromachining process, the
application of electromagnetic forces can generate a beneficial peening effect,
enhancing the mechanical properties of the workpiece. A physics-based model will
be developed based on continuum mechanics and Maxwell's electromagnetic field
theory, which can predict and help understand the process mechanism. The model
will be tested by comparing with experiments that include both in-situ
observations of the electromagnetic peening-assisted laser micromachining
process and the characterization of the processed workpieces. The machining
rate, microstructures and residual stresses will be characterized using an
optical surface profilometer, scanning and transmission electron microscopes and
X-ray diffraction respectively. The fatigue properties of machined samples will
also be tested.

If successful, this research will provide an improved understanding of material
response under laser radiation and electromechanical forces. The electromagnetic
peening effect is expected to enhance the mechanical properties of laser-
machined workpieces, with a potential to improve product quality. This
technology is environmentally friendly as it does not involve harmful chemicals.
Better product quality and longer lifetime decrease the need for re-
manufacturing and hence imply less energy and material consumption and less
waste generation.