* 0970017
* Collaborative Research: Optimal Gaits and  Design for Locomoting Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Anette Hosoi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2013
* USD 298,563.00

Locomotion is everywhere. The capabilities that animals exhibit in converting
internal joint motions into displacements inspires us to to ask the question:
?How can we imbue artificial systems with the same ease of motion?? We propose
to design, control, and plan motions for a broad class of locomoting systems.
These systems maneuver both on land and in the water, and experience dynamics
and nonholonomic constraints which may change dynamically. Specifically, the
proposed work seeks to: (1) develop tools to design and optimize gaits, cyclic
internal motions that result in a desired net motion and (2) use these tools to
design optimal morphologies for locomoting mechanical systems. To achieve these
goals, the proposed work will draw upon fundamentals of differential geometry to
develop techniques to efficiently design gaits. Specifically, we will develop
tools to analyze and manipulate the reconstruction equation so that it can be
used for gait design. With these new efficient tools, we can design optimal
gaits for locomoting systems, starting with kinematic systems and moving on to
dynamic systems, both with nonholonomic constraints. The proposed work will then
use these gait development tools to design optimal robot morphologies.

An improved understanding of locomotion is vital for mechanisms that can
navigate in challenging terrains, e.g., for applications like urban search and
rescue or searching for IEDs in hard to reach locations, such as the nooks and
crannies prevalent in the ports of major cities. The proposed work will not
provide a system for these tasks, but rather the theory developed in this work
will advance robotic mobility and how to quantify it, so that these applications
can be achieved and the scientific understanding of locomotion is advanced.