* 0970022
* Workshop to be held in Washington, D.C., Dec. 1-2, 2009; Enabling Biodiversity Research:  The Roles of Information and Support Networks
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Margaret Collins, National Council for Science and the Environment/CEDD
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2010
* USD 112,212.00

The vast majority of the Earth's plants, animals and microorganisms still do not
have scientific names, nor do we know their natural history, functional roles,
or the genetic and biochemical resources they contain. Because these organisms
provide human beings with a livable planet by producing oxygen, degrading
wastes, cleaning the air and water, providing food, building materials and
pharmaceuticals, and a whole host of other ecosystem services, there is a
pressing need to determine the dimensions of the unknown biodiversity that
surrounds us. A large proportion of the coordination and support that serves as
the foundation for biodiversity research is provided by non-governmental
organizations and institutions. This project will support a workshop activity to
bring together representatives from this research community to: 1)Develop a
compendium of the kinds of enabling support currently being provided; 2)Identify
significant gaps in this support; 3) Propose mechanisms to fill those gaps; and
4) Develop strategies for strengthening communication and cooperation among the
various elements of the community.

Approximately forty individuals, representing support networks for elements of
biodiversity research from around the world, will engage in two days of
discussions, to consider the key scientific questions that should guide
exploration of the Earth's unknown dimensions of biodiversity. Workshop
participants will examine what is the current capacity (including human
resources) needed to support biodiversity research, and what are the major gaps
in the support infrastructure. The workshop will be held on December 1-2, 2009
at the National Academy of Sciences, in Washington DC. The results of the
workshop will be made available as a report that will be posted for comment soon
after the workshop has been completed and distributed to participants and
interested parties.