* 0970171
* Unravelling the Nature of Dark Matter and Electroweak Symmetry Breaking at Colliders
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Tim Tait, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 09/30/2014
* USD 180,000.00

This is a particularly ripe time for research at the boundary between particle
physics and astrophysics and cosmology. This is due, in large part, to the fact
that data is soon expected to emerge from a plethora of experiments in both
particle physics and astrophysics. These include the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC), experiments seeking the direct and indirect detection of Dark Matter, and
Cosmic Microwave Background probes such as Planck. Indeed, in many instances
these different experiments are complementary to each other, each providing a
different window into the as-yet-unexplored physics beyond the Standard Model.
In this proposal, Professor Tait aims to explore new theories for physics at the
electroweak scale which sit at this interface between particle physics,
astrophysics, and cosmology. His goal is to understand new phenomena which may
be manifest at these experiments, provide theoretical descriptions of phenomena
as they are discovered, and eventually fit them into a larger theoretical
framework. Specific short-term goals of the PI include exploration of the
signals provided by models with weakly bound states of dark matter at colliders
and in cosmology, and exploration of signals of the so-called "Beautiful
Mirrors" model at the LHC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort is also envisioned
to have several broader impacts. First, the PI will continue to participate in
summer schools aimed at instructing graduate students working toward a PhD in
theoretical or experimental high-energy physics. He will also compile a set of
lecture notes which will be regularly updated, and include topics in the areas
of collider physics and dark matter. These notes should provide an important
resource for graduate students (or even postdocs and interested faculty in other
subfields) in these rapidly evolving fields. Second, the PI plans outreach at
the high-school level, to inform students (whose interests may lay outside the
sciences) of the exciting advances taking place, and to encourage students to
pursue a career in research.