* 0970008
* In vivo calibration of kinetic rate constants
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Emmanuele DiBenedetto, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,394,409.00

Many of the most important types of interactions that occur in cells, such as
the binding of transcription factors to chromatin, involve the diffusion of
proteins to their binding site and subsequent capture, with the lifetime of the
resultant complex defined by its characteristic binding constants. In recent
years, the advent of GFP has made it possible to study such binding interactions
in the context of their native environments within the cell. Two fluorescence
microscopy-based techniques, fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP)
and photoactivation, have proved among the most promising ways for biologists to
study the dynamics of intracellular proteins and their interactions with one
another and cellular components. Importantly, these techniques are widely
accessible to an exceptionally large number of experimentalists, and when
analyzed using appropriate models, hold the potential to provide quantitative
measurements of the on and off rates of complex formation, as well as directly
measure the diffusion rate of the bound and unbound species. Despite this, in
vivo analysis of such reaction-diffusion type processes is still in its relative
infancy due to the lack of consensus about how to extract accurate diffusion
coefficients (D) and binding constants from data obtained by confocal FRAP and
related techniques. Even for the case of proteins that are presumed to act as
inert reporters, such as EGFP, reported measurements of D in the cytoplasm and
nucleoplasm of cells vary considerably in the literature. For the more
complicated case of reaction-diffusion behavior, it is even less clear how to
best extract reliable kinetic constants. In addition, the influence of so-called
anomalous diffusion on reaction-diffusion processes in cells has been largely
unexplored. The goal of the studies proposed in this application is to address
this fundamental gap in our current knowledge by developing new methods to
calibrate, measure and quantify reaction-diffusion kinetics in living cells.
This will be accomplished through two aims: (1) to cross-calibrate measurements
of freely diffusing proteins across techniques and assess the degree of
anomalous diffusion in the cellular environment, and (2) to develop and test
methods to robustly quantify reaction-diffusion type behavior from FRAP and
photoactivation experiments using binding of transcription factors to DNA as a
model.

The proper functioning of cells relies on the ability of macromolecules such as
proteins and DNA to undergo reversible binding events. For many years, such
transient interactions have been investigated using purified interacting
partners in test tubes. However, this simplified environment does not fully
reflect the complex milieu found within cells. As such, scientists still lack a
fundamental understanding of how strong many binding interactions actually are
in cells, where in the cell such interactions occur, what controls their
specificity, and how they are regulated. Recently, it has become possible to
address many of these questions using a form of fluorescence microscopy that can
measure the motion of proteins in living cells. In principle, this technique
could be widely used by many researchers, as the microscopes required and tools
to make the proteins visible are already widely available. However, analysis of
such data is complex, and requires careful mathematical modeling. Our proposed
research seeks to develop and test mathematical methods that will enable the
accurate measurement of intracellular binding events using these microscopy-
based techniques. Successful completion of this proposed work should help make
these experimental approaches available to a large number of researchers that in
turn can rapidly and easily apply them to a wide range of interacting molecules.
In addition, related mathematical models are used to describe types of binding
interactions are relevant over all scales of biology, including for example
models of synchronized insect emergence and dispersal, and the geographic spread
of epidemics.