* 0970006
* Direct Neutrino Mass Measurement with Cryogenic Microcalorimeters
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Massimiliano Galeazzi, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2014
* USD 393,011.00

The Microcalorimeter Array for a Rhenium Experiment (MARE) is an experiment for
the direct detection of the neutrino mass by studying the beta decay of 187-Re
with cryogenic microcalorimeters. The experiment is divided in two steps, MARE
I, the heir of the MANU and MIBETA experiments with a sensitivity of ~2 eV and
MARE II with a sensitivity of 0.1-0.2 eV. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
provide funding to continue these scientists' current effort with the MARE I
investigation and to help build a prototype detector for the full MARE II. The
MARE I effort involves the Universities of Miami and Florida in collaboration
with the University of Genoa, Italy. It will ultimately consist of tens of
iridium transition edge sensors (TES) microcalorimeters coupled to rhenium
crystal absorbers. The first detectors are being assembled at this time and data
acquisition was expected to start by the end of 2009. They have been supporting
the development and fabrication of prototype detectors and have started building
an infrastructure for the handling and analysis of the data, including a full
scale experimental simulation. During the proposed investigation, they will
support the acquisition and analysis of the data. The data acquisition is
expected to extend though the second year of this investigation, while the third
year will be dedicated to the data analysis. In parallel to continuing their
support of the MARE I investigation, they plan to work toward the full MARE II
investigation. This is a much larger scale investigation that will ultimately
involve several groups in the US and Europe. The investigation will be carried
out in close collaboration with other members of the collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the value of the electron neutrino mass has a
broad impact on various fields of physics, from particle and nuclear physics and
cosmology. The microcalorimeter technology being developed has direct
applications in dark matter searches, detectors for non-proliferation
investigations, astrophysics and nuclear physics. The investigation will be
carried out with the active support of graduate and undergraduate students that
will be fully involved in all aspects of the investigation. In addition to the
intrinsic scientific merits and broader impact, the investigation is an ideal
tool for the training of the next generation scientists.