* 0970065
* Photoemission By Large Electron Wave Packets Emitted Out The Side of A Relativistic Laser Focus
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Michael Ware, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2015
* USD 296,350.00

The work is a study of the scattering of laser light by free electrons both
theoretically and experimentally. In the experiment, electron wave packets will
be created through ionization in a strong laser field and radiation from the
focus at right angles to the laser beam will be observed. The radiated light
from one or a few electrons is extremely weak and the experiment requires the
unusual combination of quantum-optics measurement techniques and high-intensity
laser technology. To separate this low-level signal from the significant
background, the investigators filter in time (looking only at the signal in a
nanosecond wide window), space (using baffling and a fiber coupling system to
collect only photons originating from the spatial location of the focus), and
wavelength (using bandpass filters to view only the relativistic red-shifted
signal while explicitly masking these frequencies in the compression system).
The investigators will also study the theoretical underpinnings of free-electron
photoemission and how the quantum-field description might be appropriately
related to a semiclassical framework. Initial work has already been accomplished
in the simplified case where the driving laser and the emitted radiation are
treated as plane wave fields. Extending this analysis to describe localized
interactions is non-trivial, but it is necessary to create a theoretical
framework for understanding radiation in this system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts include the study of the foundations of quantum mechanics in the
context of the interface between the particle/wave nature of electrons and the
particle/wave nature of light and seeks to resolve conflicting viewpoints held
by different researchers in the laser-interaction community. This work will lead
to a better understanding of the nature of photons, especially the connection
between emitting and absorbing photons and the quantum measurement process
(involving wave function collapse). The project provides opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students to make meaningful contributions to the work
while gaining valuable experience. &lt;br/&gt;