* 0970112
* Ultrasonic Vibration-Assisted Pelleting of Cellulosic Biomass for Biofuel Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Donghai Wang, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2016
* USD 405,033.00

This award supports fundamental research on ultrasonic vibration-assisted (UV-A)
pelleting of cellulosic biomass in order to enable cost-effective manufacturing
of cellulosic biofuels. Specific research tasks include (1) investigating
effects of ultrasonic vibration on pelleting mechanisms, (2) testing a
hypothesis of the underlying mechanism of how UV-A pelleting can increase
pellets? strength and durability, (3) investigating mechanisms through which
UV-A pelleting enhances sugar and ethanol yields, and (4) testing the hypothesis
that UV-A pelleting can result in improved pretreatment procedures. These tasks
will be conducted over a wide range of biomass types including sorghum stalks,
switchgrass, wheat straw, corn stover, Miscanthus, and grass
clippings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results will provide the knowledge
needed to overcome some technical barriers that have hindered large-scale
manufacturing of cellulosic biofuels. Large-scale manufacturing of cellulosic
biofuels will greatly benefit the U.S. economy, energy security, the
environment, and society in general. This research features a unique
collaboration across manufacturing engineering, biological engineering, and
industry. This collaboration provides excellent synergy for project resources,
ensures the relevance of the research to industry, and expedites technology
commercialization. The interdisciplinary nature of the research will have a
positive impact on engineering education at Kansas State University, an EPSCoR
institution.