* 0970134
* Astrophysics with Very High Energy Gamma Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* David Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2014
* USD 557,691.00

High-energy gamma rays are used to study the most extreme objects in the
Universe, such as pulsars, black holes at the center of active galaxies, and
gamma-ray bursts. Cosmic gamma rays can also be signatures for new physics
beyond the standard models of particle physics and cosmology. At the low end of
the gamma-ray spectrum, the flux of gamma rays is sufficient to detect them with
satellites in orbit above the atmosphere. Studies with very-high-energy (VHE)
gamma rays, above about 100 GeV, require detectors with thousands of square
meters of collection area, which can only be built on the ground. These ground-
based devices detect gamma rays indirectly, by detecting the shower of secondary
particles produced when a gamma ray interacts in the atmosphere.

This award will provide funds for the UCSC group to use the VERITAS (Very
Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System) imaging Cherenkov telescope
array in southern Arizona to study VHE gamma rays. They plan to explore the
extreme behavior of the two most powerful known classes of gamma-ray source:
gamma-ray bursts (GRB) and active galactic nuclei (AGN). The details of how GRBs
work and the role they play in other high energy phenomena (for example, are
they the accelerators of the highest energy cosmic rays?) are still being
explored. Learning whether they are capable of creating VHE gamma rays in
general, in particular circumstances, or not at all, will constrain GRB models
and properties of the burst environment. Similarly, measurements of the VHE
gamma-ray emission from AGN probe properties of the AGN jet, providing crucial
information about the particles being accelerated and how the acceleration
works.

This work has wide-ranging broader impacts, particularly in the areas of
education and technological infrastructure. Graduate and undergraduate students,
including students from underrepresented groups, play an important part in the
research effort. The researchers interact with the California State University
to foster undergraduate interest in research and graduate education. They will
work with their VERITAS collaborators to develop exhibits on gamma-ray
astrophysics for use at science museums and observatory visitors' centers. There
is an important interplay between the VERITAS data and data from other
wavelengths, particularly X-ray and lower energy gamma-ray data from satellite
missions such as Swift and Fermi. More can be learned from both types of data
used together than from either alone.