* 0970059
* Collaborative Research: Reconfiguring Steel Structures: Energy Dissipation and Buckling Mitigation Through the Use of Steel Foams
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Jerome Hajjar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 59,710.00

The research objectives of this award are to characterize the mechanical
properties of novel steel foams and determine whether this new class of
materials presents opportunities for transformative improvement of the
performance of civil structures. Although other kinds of metal foams serve well
established purposes in the aerospace and automotive industries, the advent of
manufacturing techniques for steel foams opens the door to low cost mass
production of a material suitable for civil structural application. The research
program consists of experiments to characterize the structure and mechanical
properties of the material and simulations to establish proof-of-concept
applications of steel foams to civil structures. The target applications are
energy dissipating devices to improve seismic performance of building systems
and selective application of steel foam to improve the strength and ductility of
thin-walled steel structural members.

If successful, this research program will spur increased research and
development work leading to low-cost mass production of steel foams, and will
have identified methods for improving the performance of civil structures during
extreme loading events. The potential benefits accrue to society through
improved structural performance and incentive for the steel industry to develop
new manufacturing capabilities. The research is closely connected to the steel
industry and the practice of structural design through an industrial advisory
board comprising practicing engineers and steel industry professionals. A
vertically integrated, collaborative research team spanning from the
undergraduate to full professor levels across three institutions of higher
learning, and a program of outreach targeting graduate students and high school
students from under-represented groups, ensures that the project will have
significant workforce development and mentorship impacts.