* 0970168
* Using IceCube to Search for Diffuse Neutrino Fluxes at Ultra-High Energies
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Gaurang Yodh, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2015
* USD 800,000.00

At high energies, only neutrinos can directly convey astrophysical information
from the most distant reaches of the Universe or from deep inside the most
cataclysmic, breathtakingly powerful, regions yet identified. Neutrinos provide
a unique view of how nature accelerates particles and can clarify the role of
hadrons in the astrophysical milieu. With 59 (out of 80) IceCube strings
deployed since January 2005, the IceCube collaboration is poised to advance the
state-of-the-art by a significant margin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
provide funds to accelerate the advance of the scientific frontier by developing
and extending data analysis and simulation tools to search for a diffuse flux of
Ultra-High Energy (UHE) neutrinos using the IceCube Observatory. The proposed
work will develop event reconstruction code and will investigate new procedures
to reconstruct events by taking advantage of the information contained within
the complete waveform record. Their proposed research plan includes simulation
studies of UHE neutrino events in IceCube using a supercomputer cluster and they
have started to investigate the performance at UHE energies. They have been
approved for 500,000 cpu hours on the Teragrid clusters. Two years of IceCube
data should improve current flux limits by a factor of 4 since little background
remains in the UHE analysis. If no signal is found, then the flux limits will be
less than any version of the Waxman-Bahcall bound, which implies that cosmic ray
accelerators must be less efficient at producing neutrinos.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal provide an outlet for
curiosity and imagination driven research by graduate and postdoctoral students
who will be given the opportunity to learn about data acquisition electronics,
detector simulation, and data processing. Student training is founded on strong
mentorship.