* 0970125
* Geometrical and Dynamical Effects in X-Ray Interactions with Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Dennis Lindle, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2014
* USD 465,000.00

This award is for continuing support of a program pursuing fundamental
investigations of physical phenomena relevant to interactions between light and
matter. The program's focus is on understanding how geometrical and dynamical
effects influence interactions between small molecules and light in the x-ray
range of the electromagnetic spectrum. Studies of how x-rays ionize electrons
from matter, previously performed by this program, have demonstrated
quantitatively large breakdowns of a simple, yet fundamental, approximation used
in such studies. These surprising results led to a minor paradigm shift within
the scientific community regarding the general validity of this approximation.
In separate studies of x-ray scattering from molecules, the program demonstrated
the importance of ultra-fast atomic motion in such measurements. In the future,
the program will enhance its focus on geometrical and dynamical effects in
interactions between x-rays and matter by expanding to studies of chiral
molecules (i.e., species that have mirror-image counterparts with the same
chemical make-up) and C60, a novel soccer-ball-shaped form of pure
carbon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One broader impact of this work will be to further
fundamental understanding of x-ray interactions with matter. For example, x-ray
interactions with atoms and molecules play an important role in a number of
astrophysical phenomena. Understanding their fundamental behavior also is
important to applications of x-ray absorption, x-ray photoemission, x-ray
fluorescence, and x-ray scattering in many fields. Examples already exist in
materials science, where the importance of certain molecular-scale effects went
unnoticed until results from this program became known. This academic-based
research program also impacts the training of young scientists. Since its
inception in 1994, 14 post-doctoral researchers, 9 graduate students, and over
35 undergraduates have taken part in NSF-sponsored research. Many continued on
to graduate school, academia, or industrial positions in science, and six of
them continue to do research in the same field. Finally, to broaden the local
impact, the research team will participate in a new outreach program at UNLV,
designed to create partnerships with local high-school students and teachers.