* 0970071
* Tailor-made Superhydrophobic Surfaces for MEMS and NEMS
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Victor Yakhot, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2014
* USD 286,143.00

The research objective of this award is to elucidate the mechanisms of viscous
energy dissipation on superhydrophobic surfaces and to enable robust operation
of micro and nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS and NEMS) in water through
surface engineering. MEMS and NEMS are miniaturized mechanical devices, which
are fabricated using semiconductor processes and are suitable for numerous
technological applications, including ultrasensitive bio-sensing. The research
approach is to shrink the solid-water interface area of MEMS and NEMS by
engineering these devices with superhydrophobic surfaces. The research will
combine theoretical and numerical work with experiments. Superhydrophobic MEMS
and NEMS will be fabricated based on the numerical and theoretical surface
designs; the devices will be tested in water to assess the designs. The main
device parameter to be optimized is the quality (Q) factor, which quantifies the
viscous dissipation in water. The deliverables are scalable superhydrophobic
materials and coatings for nanoscale device applications, high-performance MEMS
and NEMS devices in water and a fundamental physical understanding of solid-
liquid-gas interfaces under high-frequency oscillations.

The research will provide an enabling technology for MEMS and NEMS devices in
water. Operation of MEMS and NEMS in water-based biochemical solutions is
crucial for future mass and force sensing applications. MEMS and NEMS sensor
elements can provide powerful new approaches to bio-threat detection, drug
screening, and medical diagnostics in liquids. In scanning probe microscopy
(SPM), force sensitivity of the microcantilever probe can be improved in liquids
by the results of this research. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in a wide cross-section of engineering and physics including nanoscale
surface engineering, nanometrology, and fluid dynamics through classroom
instruction and participation in research. Outreach activities co-sponsored by
Boston University will be used as a platform to engage K-12 students and
disseminate the results of the research broadly.