* 0970049
* Collaborative Research Strain-rate Dependent Properties of Cement-Based Materials: A Multi-Scale Experimental and Modeling Effort
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Kimberly Kurtis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 06/30/2014
* USD 282,115.00

This proposal outlines a joint experimental and computational program aimed at
developing the framework for a multi-scale model of cement-based materials,
which will provide for advances in quantitative descriptions of their
heterogenous structure and an ability to predict the effect of loading rate on
failure in materials ranging from normal strength concrete to fiber-reinforced
ultrahigh performance concrete. Specifically, the proposed activities are
divided into four tasks: 1) quantitative characterization of multi-scale
structure and meso-scale fluctuations in structural descriptors; 2) development
of micromechanical models for predicting strain-rate dependent behavior of
concrete/cementitious materials; 3) stochastic simulation-based modeling of
variations in meso-scale constitutive properties of concrete/cementitious
materials; and, 4) full-scale finite element model of samples under
uniaxial/biaxial compression at varying strain rates, along with experimental
validation using Kolsky bar equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
conducted through the proposed activities will address the important problem of
impact loading on concrete materials, by providing new modeling paradigms and
experimental techniques to address the strain-rate-dependent failure of cement-
based materials. These protocols can form the basis for improved blast-
resistance of materials and more effective structural design. In addition, the
techniques are also expected to be applicable to the broader family of brittle
materials under high strain rates, such as modeling failure of rocks under
mining blasts or ceramic armors under ballistic loading. The proposed activities
represent a multi-institutional collaboration, which will provide students
mentored by the PIs exposure not only to the expertise of both PIs, but also to
the educational research environments at each of the involved institutions. Each
PI will mentor one Ph.D. student and undergraduate researchers who will all be
encouraged to travel to the other institution on a regular basis to share
findings.