* 0970178
* Collaborative Research: Muon Ionization Cooling Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Gail Hanson, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 651,000.00

An important activity toward advancing accelerator capability is research and
development for a high luminosity muon collider. Muons have important properties
compared to electrons and protons when considering a possible next step for a
high energy physics facility. Since radiation by muons is much suppressed
compared to electrons, it is feasible to consider a relatively compact circular
collider in the TeV energy range for muons. However the muon, like the electron,
is a point particle and therefore can explore the same physics regime as protons
with approximately ten times higher energy. Accordingly the muon collider has
attracted increasing interest over the past couple of years. Since the muon is
an unstable particle there are many new facets of accelerator physics and
technology that need to be examined before one can say with confidence that such
a device will work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Muon Ionization
Cooling Experiment (or MICE) is a high energy physics experiment dedicated to
observing ionization cooling of muons for the first time. Such cooling is a
necessary step toward a muon collider. Cooling is a process whereby the
emittance of a beam is reduced in order to reduce the beam size, so that more
muons can be accelerated in smaller aperture accelerators and with fewer
focussing magnets. This might enable the construction of high intensity muon
accelerators, for example for a Neutrino Factory or Muon Collider, which
potentially can attain higher energies than electron-positron colliders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers looking for a method of cooling muons designed
the MICE experiment to test the effectiveness of a technique called ionization
cooling. Ionization cooling takes place when muons are sent through an absorber
in which they lose momentum via ionization energy loss. They are then
reaccelerated in a linear accelerator where their energy is restored only in the
forward direction. MICE will use a single particle beam, with not more than one
muon passing through the detector about every 10 nanoseconds. The experiment
needs to balance the cooling from energy loss with the heating from multiple
scattering of the muons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Muon Ionization Cooling
Experiment will make detailed measurements of muon ionization cooling using a
newly constructed low-energy muon beam at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory
(RAL). The experiment is a single particle experiment and utilizes many detector
techniques from high energy physics experiments. To characterize and monitor the
muon beamline, newly developed scinitillating fiber profile monitors and
scintillator paddle rate monitors are employed. In order to monitor the purity
of the beam and tag the arrival time of individual muons, a dual aerogel
Cherenkov system is used, and a plastic scintillator time-of-flight system will
be used.