* 0970087
* RUI: A High Precision Measurement of the Electron-Antineutrino Correlation Coefficient in Free Neutron Decay
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Alexander Komives, DePauw University
* Continuing grant
* kenneth hicks
* 07/31/2014
* USD 159,702.00

The electroweak standard model describes two of the four fundamental forces
present in the universe. By conducting experiments that probe with increasing
sensitivity phenomena that can be described with this model, it is hoped
discrepancies will appear that will lead to a more complete understanding of the
weak interaction. This interaction is responsible for the decay, or
transformation, of the neutron into a proton, electron and antineutrino. By
studying the correlations between the properties of the neutron and its decay
products, more precise tests of the electroweak standard model can be performed.
One of these correlations, known as little "a," involves the direction of
emission of the electron and antineutrino from the decay region. Other neutron
decay correlations are known to within 1%, but little "a" is only known to 4%.
After several years of planning and construction, the aCORN ("a" CORrelation in
Neutron decay) collaboration is in the process of installing an apparatus on the
fundamental physics beamline at the NIST (National Institute of Standards and
Technology) Center for Neutron Research (NCNR). Production data will be
collected the rest of this year (2010) and into the next that will result in a
2% measurement of little "a." The NCNR will then shutdown for a series of
upgrades resulting in a higher neutron flux. During this period, improvements
and modifications will be made to the aCORN apparatus based on performance for
the 2% measurement to make a sub-1% measurement once the NCNR upgrades are
complete. This grant will provide the support needed for DePauw University
undergraduate students and the Principal Investigator to participate in the
experiment during the 2% measurement, to determine the necessary modifications
for a sub-1% measurement and to perform this measurement. The Principal
Investigator has involved 20 undergraduates extensively in this experiment over
the past several years. Of these 20, 12 first encountered this experiment during
their freshman year and 9 became or already were physics majors. Of these 9, 3
have participated in other research programs via the NSF's REU (Research
Experience for Undergraduates) program at major research universities and
facilities such as Fermilab. Five of the 9 have also had further experiences
working with the PI on experiments at Los Alamos National Laboratory and the
Paul Scherrer Institut in Switzerland. By working on aCORN these students have
been prepared to take on a wide variety of challenges ranging from other physics
experiments to activities in other diverse fields such as biology, computer
science and teaching.