* 0970161
* Probing the Coherent Scattering of Zero-point Photons in the Casimir Force using Diffraction Gratings
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Umar Mohideen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 390,000.00

The Casimir force acts between two bodies placed in empty space (vacuum).
According to the laws of modern physics the vacuum is not an absolute emptiness,
but is filled with an infinite number of virtual particles. The Casimir force
results from the modifications of the properties of these virtual particles due
to the presence of the two bodies. Thus its value and nature is critically
dependent on the shape and geometry of the bodies. The last five years have seen
rapid theoretical advances in the area of the dependence of the effect on simple
geometry, motivated in part by our demonstration of the lateral Casimir force
for sinusoidally corrugated surfaces (gratings). For such gratings, the
diffraction-like coherent scattering effects of the virtual photons cannot be
predicted by standard theories which merely add up the effects of small sections
of the interacting bodies. Our objectives are to completely map the coherent
scattering of virtual photons in the lateral Casimir force with both sinusoidal
and saw toothed (blazed) gratings. Many applications for such lateral Casimir
forces for bringing about noncontact lateral translations in nanoscale gears and
rack and pinion systems have been predicted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI has been involved with many synergistic activities of broader impact. He has
mentored two K-12 students, 12 undergraduates (7 minority), 8 graduate students
and 6 postdoctoral fellows in lab research. Funding for mentoring one minority
undergraduate and graduate student is requested. UCR is a minority institution.
The PI's research is published in leading journals and has also been reported in
many public announcements. The PI has developed teaching modules for high school
and community college students as part of a NSF funded project. He has co-
organized five workshops. The force measurement technique has been transferred
for the development of ultrasensitive microfabricated biosensors.