* 0970175
* Development of Hexagonal Radio Array for the ARIANNA Ultra-High Energy Neutrino Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Spencer Klein, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2014
* USD 800,000.00

The primary purpose of the ARIANNA Ultra-High Energy (UHE) Neutrino project is
to observe about 40 cosmogenic neutrinos per year from the GZK mechanism -
extragalactic UHE protons collide with cosmic microwave background photons,
producing pions that eventually decay to neutrinos - with sufficient precision
to determine their energy spectrum and interaction properties. The energy
spectrum of cosmogenic neutrinos provides important insight on the production
mechanism and source distribution of cosmic rays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ARIANNA
relies on the detection of radio pulses generated in dense media by the Askaryan
effect and capitalizes on several properties of the Ross Ice Shelf near McMurdo
Station, the hub of US operations: (1) the ice is impressively transparent to
electromagnetic radiation at radio frequencies, (2) the water-ice boundary below
the shelf behaves like a good mirror to reflect radio signals from neutrinos in
any downward direction and (3) background noise levels are quite modest in the
frequency band of interest. Nearby Minna Bluff protects the site from
significant anthropogenic radio noise. Its close proximity to McMurdo Station
provides a number of suitable options for logistical support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund the next step toward the realization
of the ARIANNA concept, called the Hexagonal Radio Sub-array: to construct,
deploy and commission a hexagonal arrangement of 7 autonomous detector stations
at the ARIANNA site to assess large-scale feasibility, system robustness and the
ambient noise environment over an extended period of time. These tests will
provide input to optimize the final design of the Phase A component of ARIANNA,
which consists of a 12 x 12 array of stations &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the
broader impacts of this project are an outlet for curiosity and imagination
driven research by students who will be given the opportunity to learn about
data acquisition electronics, detector simulation, and data processing.