* 0970152
* Binary Populations in Gravitational Wave Data Analysis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Shane Larson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 180,000.00

This award supports research to explore how future gravitational wave
observations from ground-based interferometric gravitational wave detectors such
as LIGO and pulsar timing arrays can be used to characterize populations of
astronomical gravitational-wave sources. First, analysis techniques will be
developed to identify the source of a particular class of events without full
parameter searches, particularly eccentric binaries. Further work will explore
how a catalog of detections at high frequencies constrains the plausible
progenitor models that gave rise to the sources observed by LIGO. A second
thrust of the project is to consider the extension of interferometric analysis
techniques to pulsar timing analysis including the development of a sensitivity
algorithm analogous to those used by interferometric detectors, and the
development of the null stream pointing technique for pulsar timing
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational wave astronomy is an emergent
discipline that has recently entered an era where the primary activity is true
astrophysical observation. The LIGO observatory is the first detector with the
real capability for sensing gravitational radiation of astrophysical origin, and
has propelled the field from one dominated by theoretical computations into a
rich research discipline that encompasses the acquisition of data and analysis
of experimental results. Pulsar timing is emerging as a prominent technique for
detecting very-low frequency gravitational waves, and is drawing from a rich
background of analysis techniques and world-wide pulsar monitoring efforts in
the radio astronomy community. In addition, the PI will leverage an existing
public outreach program at Utah State University known as Science Unwrapped, a
synergistic combination of public presentations by active researchers with
direct hands-on science experiences. Three events for the Science Unwrapped
related to gravitational wave physics, including the hands-on science
experiences, will be developed as will a companion Spanish language component to
reach out to the Hispanic communities in northern Utah.