* 0970069
* Holography, Supersymmetry, and Numerics in Quantum Critical and Quantum Lifshitz Theories
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Sher
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This proposal from four physicists at the University of Kentucky concerns recent
theoretical developments at the border between high-energy physics, mathematical
physics, and condensed-matter physics. Over the past decade, the so-called
AdS/CFT correspondence has proven to be a very useful theoretical "tool" for
analyzing strongly coupled theories, i.e., theories for which a standard
perturbative mathematical treatment is ineffective. This tool, which resulted
from developments in theoretical high-energy physics, has already been used in
order to study systems at the interface of high-energy and nuclear physics, such
as the quark-gluon plasma. However, just in the past few years, a new direction
for the AdS/CFT tool has become apparent --- this is to study strongly coupled
systems in condensed-matter physics. This proposal aims to develop teachniques
using the AdS/CFT correspondence in order to address difficult problems in
equilibrium and non-equilibrium many-body systems near or at their critical
points. The PI's also aim to study the entanglement entropy of topological
states of matter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this would represent an
entirely new way of attacking extremely difficult problems in condensed-matter
physics, and has the potential to lead to important new insights in both
condensed-matter physics and for the mathematics of the AdS/CFT correspondence
itself. Thus, this proposal is not only interdisciplinary in its scope, but also
potentially transformative in its research potential, exploiting the synergy
between theoretical high-energy physics, mathematical physics, and condensed-
matter physics. Additional broader impacts of this proposal are focused on the
training of postdoctoral researchers who will work in this newly emerging
discipline.