* 0970048
* Relativistic Heavy Ion Collision Studies at the LHC and RHIC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Thomas Humanic, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,500,000.00

This is a three-year project primarily to carry out experiments with
relativistic heavy ion collisions. The goals for this program are three-fold.
The first goal is to study the space-time properties of the extremely dense
matter created in collisions between heavy nuclei at the highest achievable
energies. It is believed that Quark Matter is created in these collisions,
characterized by a large collection of quarks and gluons, the microscopic
components of normal matter such as protons and neutrons. The second goal is to
study the bulk phase structure of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), believed to be
the correct theory to describe interactions between quarks and gluons. This will
be achieved by varying the conditions of the collision to lower energies in
order to probe the transition(s) between normal matter and Quark Matter. The
third goal is to take the tools developed to study bulk physics in heavy ion
collisions and apply them to proton-proton collisions at similar energies. We
will look particularly for collective behavior, such as hydrodynamic flow, in
these collisions. If our initial reports of such flow in proton-proton
collisions are confirmed at these higher energies, this raises important issues
about the nature of flow, and the nature of the initial state of these
collisions.

In the present project, relativistic heavy ion collisions will be studied with
gold-gold collisions at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven
National Laboratory (BNL), and with lead-lead collisions at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at CERN in Geneva. RHIC, which started delivering beams in Summer
2000, is the highest energy heavy ion accelerator now in operation. In order to
look for signatures that a phase transition to Quark Matter has taken place, one
must study the properties of the particles produced in the collisions, such as
particle momenta and multiplicities of each type that can be detected (e.g.
pions, kaons, protons, and more exotic particles). This will be done at RHIC
using the large acceptance detectors of the STAR experiment, which can sample
most of the interesting particles per collision. The information obtained in
this way can be used to determine, for example, the physical size of the
interaction region (using two-particle interferometry), the temperatures reached
in the collisions (from particle momentum distributions) and exotic particle
production such as strange baryons. In addition, studies of proton-proton and
lead-lead collisions at even higher energies at the LHC with the ALICE
experiment will begin by April 2010. The LHC will provide beams 30 times higher
in center-of-mass energy than RHIC, i.e. cosmic ray energies, making for a
useful comparison with results from RHIC.

There are broader impacts to society of this project in the areas of education,
technology and computing. Since undergraduate students, graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers will play key roles in this project, training will be
provided to these groups in how to carry out research in large collaborations
and in general problem solving skills. This research requires large-scale
computing in order to acquire and analyze data on the teraflop and terabyte
scale, and new methods in information science, such as computing grid systems,
will be developed which can enhance the computing power of society as a whole.