* 0970041
* Measurements of the Parity Non-Conservation Amplitude in Atomic Cesium for Improved Tests of the Standard Model and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Daniel Elliott, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2014
* USD 525,000.00

This research will provide a long-sought independent check of the Parity Non-
Conserving (PNC) measurement in cesium, and especially of the nuclear spin
dependence of these measurements. Tests of the Standard Model, the theoretical
description of the physical world that unifies two of the four fundamental
forces (the weak forces and electromagnetic forces), are critical to our
understanding of matter at the atomic and nuclear level. New laboratory
measurements of higher precision will allow for an even more precise
determination of the weak charge, a fundamental quantity within the Standard
Model. Even more important will be measurements of the PNC interaction on the
different hyperfine transitions, which will probe higher-order effects such as
the nuclear anapole moment. Prior measurements of nucleon-nucleon scattering in
atomic systems have produced constraints of coupling constants that are at odds
with those from high-energy scattering measurements, and the proposed
measurements are designed to help resolve these discrepancies. This work will
(1) advance our understanding of interactions beyond those typically encountered
in atomic physics, (2) lead to advances in detection of weak interactions, and
(3) provide educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in
disciplines of Physics and Engineering. In addition to mastery of topics of
current interest, students in the laboratory learn important technical skills
such as optics and lasers, electronics, data analysis, and computer programming.
The PI is committed to education at the graduate and undergraduate level,
promoting diversity in science and engineering, and integrating research and
education. Participation by undergraduate students in the PI's laboratory is an
active facet of this program.