* 0970114
* Few Body Interactions in the Ultracold
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Chris Greene, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Strides made by our field have tremendously deepened our understanding of
ultracold atomic gases in the quantum mechanical realm. Increasingly, these
gains are being translated into prospects for controlling atomic behavior, for
instance in the development of the next generation of atomic clocks, for
creating novel phases of atomic gases for purposes of quantum information
technology, and for the manipulation of chemical reaction dynamics. Today, the
capability of controlling interatomic interaction in ultracold quantum gases
makes this field of research able to predict and realize a wide range of quantum
phenomena that encompass a number of different physics subfields, notably atomic
and molecular, condensed matter, and nuclear physics. As was fully recognized
after the first dilute Bose-Einstein condensates were created, few-body
processes have paramount importance, since they dictate the lifetime and
stability of condensates as well as their mean-field behavior. Studies included
in this project open up ways to explore and control few-body processes in
ultracold quantum gases, thereby suggesting the likelihood of a new level of
control over chemical reactions, as well as the ability to uncover novel quantum
phases and the new ways to produce stable gases in exotic dynamical
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plans within the project have an
impact on two major fronts. First, control over chemical reactions can be seen
as a longstanding goal having far-reaching scientific and technological
ramifications. Such control can be used, for instance, to study the role of
scattering resonances in chemical reaction dynamics, to explore geometric phase
effects in chemical dynamics, and ultimately to control chemical reactivity.
Second, the search for novel quantum phases of matter, through the use of
controllable interactions, sparks new ways to navigate in one of deepest
territories of modern science.