* 0970028
* Student Travel Support for the 2009 IEEE Conference on Decision and Control. To be held in Shanghai, China, on December 16-18, 2009.
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* John Baillieul, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal requests support for student travel to the 48th IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control (CDC) in Shanghai, China, December 16-18, 2009. In the
pages that follow, it is argued that the proposed use of NSF funds has
substantial INTELLECTUAL MERIT and will have a positive BROADER IMPACT on our
technical community and the field at large.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: It is increasingly evident that current research on many
technological frontiers is heavily influenced by foundational ideas from control
and system theory. This research is creating advances in such diverse
applications domains as communications and manufacturing networks, finance and
risk management, cooperative control of systems of multiple autonomous agents,
and systems biology. The IEEE CDC is the premier annual international conference
on systems and automatic control research. The 48th CDC now has an expected
level of participation over 1700. The overarching intellectual merit of the
proposed use of funds is that graduate students will see firsthand how the
foundations of control and systems are evolving and shaping the frontiers of
research in many applications domains.

BROADER IMPACT: With around 1500 reseach presentations, including several
plenary lectures, numerous tutorial presentations, workshops and exhibits the
CDC provides attendees with exposure to the state-of-the-art in emerging areas
of control research and technology. The broader impact of this travel support is
that it will help train the next generation of control researchers and
practitioners. The future security and well-being of the United States relies on
maintaining pools of trained scientists and engineers in critical areas such as
control technology. The students to be supported under the proposed project
represent the future technological leaders of the IEEE Control Systems Society,
which is the world?s leading professional organization in the discipline.