* 0970137
* QCD Physics and Beyond the Standard Model on the Lattice
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2015
* James Hetrick, University of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 09/30/2015
* USD 270,000.00

The research of the Pacific Lattice Group (PLG) involves investigations into the
fundamental behavior of matter at subatomic scales via supercomputer simulations
and calculations of theoretical physics. There are three complimentary strands
to the program, all involving study of strongly-interacting particles. One theme
is to understand from basic principles how only a few fundamental building
blocks --- the quarks and gluons of Quantum ChromoDynamics (QCD) --- combine in
complex ways to generate experimentally observed states such as the proton,
neutron, and other more exotic particles found at accelerators. The second
strand of the work explores the mechanism of quark confinement, namely the
puzzle of why quarks cannot be observed individually in Nature, but are instead
always restricted to multiple quark combinations by some not-fully understood
aspects of QCD. Finally, the third strand studies the possibility that the new
experimental program at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN might discover a
whole new family of fundamental particles, whose strong interactions have
prevented them from being observed to date, and which combine to form the
``Higgs'' particle, the only remaining particle predicted by the Standard Model
which has not been found. All three strands involve intensive large-scale
computer simulations, requiring high-end computational resources combined with
cutting-edge simulation techniques, developed within the framework of lattice
field theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance of this program is
to advance the current understanding of the fundamental nature of matter.
Specifically, the particle physics community is preparing for major new
discoveries in the near future as new experiments such as the LHC start, coupled
with very large-scale computing power making possible the exploration of
theoretical ideas in new and more detailed ways. This research program sits
precisely at this juncture. These studies are coupled with the development of a
modern data-sharing mechanism and a lively outreach program affecting K-12
schools and the community. This research is also taking place at a predominantly
undergraduate institution, and thus provides an active research site involving
the training of undergraduates.