* 0970047
* Distinguishing Dark Matter Signals from Neutron Backgrounds
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Joseph Formaggio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2013
* USD 405,000.00

The nature of dark matter is one of the great mysteries in physics. Direct
signals for dark matter have remained elusive. As future searches push to
greater sensitivities and smaller interaction cross sections, backgrounds,
especially from neutrons, will necessarily arise. Reducing these backgrounds to
a negligible level through greater underground depths and more shielding will
become impractical for very large detectors. Thus, as we move toward the time
when dark matter searches will be performed at the Deep Underground Science and
Engineering Laboratory, it is likely that we may have to depart from the zero-
background paradigm, instead searching for signals above a well understood
neutron background. This problem calls for a new approach to dark matter
searches.

The research objective of this award is a search for a dark matter signal above
a well understood neutron background, using a liquid Argon (LAr) dark matter
detector (MiniCLEAN) underground in SNOLab. The goals of this research are: (i)
to develop methods for measuring the neutron background in-situ in LAr dark
matter detectors using multiple scattering, inelastic scattering, and neutron
capture on 40-Ar; (ii) to develop an active neutron veto surrounding the dark
matter detector; and (iii) to apply statistical tools incorporating these
neutron background measurements in a dark matter search for signal above
background. The MiniCLEAN design is a new direction for dark matter searches. It
draws on highly successful, proven approaches of solar neutrino physics to
building low-background detectors that scale simply to multi-tonne targets.
Successful demonstration of this approach for dark matter by MiniCLEAN will
break new ground for future, very large detectors. Success depends critically on
background suppression; addressing the difficult neutron component is the focus
of this proposal.

Broader impacts: Measurements of the neutron flux using these new methods will
provide timely input to designing future large dark matter detectors, as well as
shielding for other low background experiments, including neutrino-less double
beta decay and low-energy solar neutrino experiments.