
* 0070666
* Complexity of operations with Pfaffian and Noetherian functions and effective o-minimality
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2000,02/28/2002
* Andrei Gabrielov,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2003
* USD 90,000.00

A. Gabrielov proposes to continue research on the theory of Pfaffian and
Noetherian functions (analytic functions satisfying systems of partial
differential equations with polynomial coefficients), with applications to
quantifier elimination, o-minimality, and computational complexity. The goal of
this research is to establish effective upper bounds for the complexity of
algebro-geometric operations on Pfaffian functions and the sets defined by
expressions with such functions in the real domain. This can be considered as a
quantitative, effective version of the o-minimal theory of Pfaffian functions.
For Noetherian functions, where global o-minimality fails, the goal is to
develop local real and complex analogs of this theory.

Modern computer algebra systems allow one to perform on a computer many
operations with algebraic equations and inequalities previously considered the
domain of abstract algebraic geometry. One of the latests achievements is an
algorithm for the resolution of singularities of systems of algebraic equations.
The results can be applied to such practical problems as visualisation,
robotics, and the coding theory. The complexity of computer codes performing
these operations becomes a practically important problem. This complexity
usually grows fast with the degree of polynomials. The Pfaffian theory allows
one to significantly reduce the computational complexity of operations on
"fewnomials" - polynomials of high degree with few non-zero terms. The goal of
the proposed research is to combine the Pfaffian theory with the algorithmic
resolution of singularities, in order to develop efficient computational
procedures for fewnomial systems.
