
* 0070798
* Rigidity of Quotient Structures
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2000,05/12/2000
* Ilijas Farah,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 03/31/2001
* USD 23,933.00

The project to be undertaken is a research of quotients of structures based on
the set of real numbers. Certain categories of such quotients exhibit a strong
permanence property: a structure reducible to another one is either very simple,
or it inherits characteristic properties of the more complex structure. Via a
theory of liftings previously developed by the investigator, this phenomenon is
now well understood for some classes of groups and Boolean algebras, in the
contexts of both decriptive and combinatorial set theory. (The former
corresponding to the situation in which we study only the simply definable sets
of real numbers and the latter corresponding to the situation in which we accept
the Axiom of Choice and study arbitrary sets of reals in an appropriate ambient
theory.) The investigator plans to further this research into the realm of Borel
equivalence relations induced by Polish group actions. An example of an
important problem that may yield to such a technique is an isolation of a simple
basis for turbulent orbit equivalence relations.

Quotient of a mathematical structure is formed by identifying its elements that
differ "in an inessential way." Different applications require different
understanding of what is "inessential," and therefore single structure gives
rise to a multitude of quotients with rather diverse properties. Some of them
are reducible to the original structure, but the resulting quotient is
frequently, yet somewhat paradoxically, much more complex than the underlying
space. One of the goals of this project is in finding a simple basis for a class
of quotients corresponding to the new notion of "magnitude" introduced in order
to study difficulties of classification problems in mathematics and extensively
studied during the last decade. Basis is a set, typically small, of objects from
a given class that are "critical" in the sense that every object reduces one
from the basis. Canonical objects consisting the basis are easier to understand
than the arbitrary "generic" objects, yet the intrinsic properties of the latter
are reflected in the former. Therefore the basic objects provide a paradigm for
studying the whole class.
