
* 0070723
* Cardinal Characteristics and Related Topics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/2000,06/13/2002
* Andreas Blass,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2004
* USD 102,869.00

ABSTRACT

Recent work in the theory of cardinal characteristics of the continuum has
indicated that one can get more detailed information by working, not with the
cardinal characteristics themselves, but with certain relations associated with
them. This applies especially in cases where these relations are Borel sets.
Part of the planned research concerns the question "Which cardinal
characteristics are associated with Borel relations?" For many characteristics
the answer is known to be positive; for others it appears to be negative, but it
isn't yet known to be negative for any particular characteristic. The
investigator hopes to close this gap by proving that certain specific
characteristics are not associated with Borel relations. A second aspect of the
planned research concerns the sequential composition of relations, which occurs
in many theorems and proofs about cardinal characteristics. A priori, sequential
compositions cannot be Borel relations, but the investigator intends to extend
the theory of Borel relations, using tools from topos theory, so as to cover
sequential composition. The research also includes questions relating
computability theory to cardinal characteristics. Finally, the investigator also
plans to study the use of the groupwise density number (a characteristic
introduced some years ago by Laflamme and the investigator) in partition
theorems.

Cardinal characteristics of the continuum constitute a significant area of
contemporary research in set theory. Not only are they of interest for their own
sake, but for the last two decades they have played a role in applications of
set-theoretic methods to general topology. More recently, there have been
applications (including some due to the investigator) to other parts of
mathematics, particularly algebra. The investigator and graduate students will
extend this theory in several directions. One direction concerns connections
with classical descriptive set theory, dealing with relatively easily definable
relations involving real numbers. A second direction connects this theory with
recursion theory, the study of what is (and what is not) computable in
principle. A third direction establishes connections with combinatorial
information about infinite sets and structures.
