
* 0070724
* The Model Theory of Valued Fields with Analytic Structure
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2000,05/24/2002
* Leonard Lipshitz,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2004
* USD 175,500.00

Lipshitz and Robinson propose to continue their collaborative investigation into
the model theory of valued fields with analytic structure. Classical rigid
analytic geometry is based on rings of strictly convergent power series, i.e.,
power series convergent on products of "closed" discs. The proposers have
introduced new rings of power series convergent on products of "closed" and
"open" discs. These rings of separated power series share many of the desirable
algebraic properties of the smaller rings of strictly convergent power series.
In addition they are particularly well suited for model theoretic applications.
Lipshitz and Robinson propose to continue to develop the commutative algebra of
rings of separated power series and the corresponding rigid geometry in analogy
to the classical case. On the model theory side they propose to broaden their
investigation to consider the model theory of non-algebraically-closed valued
fields with analytic structure and also to consider questions of uniformity over
different fields in the theory of rigid subanalytic sets. The methods to be
employed come from model theory, commutative algebra and algebraic geometry.

The sets of points in Euclidean space over the field of real numbers defined by
systems of equations and inequalities among analytic functions are called semi-
analytic sets. This class of sets is basic to analytic geometry. The projection
(i.e. the shadow) of a semi-analytic set on a lower dimensional subspace is
called subanalytic. There are more subanalytic sets than semi-analytic sets, and
their behavior is more complicated. There is a natural interest in subanalytic
sets. These are exactly the sets that can be mathematically defined from the
semi-analytic sets, in the sense of formal logic. Furthermore, real subanalytic
sets arise in several branches of mathematics such as differential equations and
geometry. Similar classes of sets arise naturally, for example in number theory,
over fields different from the real numbers, where the notion of distance has
rather different properties. Such fields are called non-Archimedean. The
corresponding subanalytic sets, however, share many of the nice properties of
their real cousins. Lipshitz and Robinson will continue their investigation of
the properties of these non-Archimedean subanalytic sets, using methods from
mathematical logic, commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. Having developed
key elements of theory in the Non-Archimedean case, they propose to apply their
ideas to extend the classes of fields to which these results apply. In
particular, they plan to apply ideas developed in the non-Archimedean setting to
the real case, thereby enlarging the class of real sets whose nice geometric
properties can be established by these means. Since many of the procedures used
to extract geometric information about these sets do not vary from field to
field, the also plan a careful study of the nature of this uniformity.
