
* 0070743
* RUI: Research in O-minimality and Related Topics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/15/2000,08/07/2000
* Charles Steinhorn,NY,Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2003
* USD 87,000.00

The project deals with questions concerning o-minimality, extensions of
o-minimality, and classes of finite structures. Some of the problems having to
do with o-minimality relate to expansions of archetypal o-minimal structures and
structures whose domain has as its order type that of the real numbers. Other
have as their focus abelian groups definable in o-minimal structures or the
development of o-minimal analogues of differential and algebraic topological
methods and tools. Problems concerning extensions of o-minimality have to do in
particular with weak o-minimality, local o-minimality, and, in analogy with
Morley rank, the development of a model theory for ordered structures of finite
rank. The third main topic of the project involves classes of finite structures
with dimension and measure. This work has as its aim the development of a model
theory for classes of finite structures that is in analogy with mainstream model
theory for infinite structures. The results obtained to date and the examples
that have been found suggest that there is much to be done.

The research outlined above concerns model theory, one of the principal
subfields of mathematical logic. Model theorists study properties of familiar
mathematical structures that can be expressed in a formal mathematical language
such as predicate logic. This distinctive point of view can provide insights and
understanding into such structures that otherwise might prove elusive. One
aspect of this project focuses on structures that include and behave in
important ways like the ordered field of real numbers, that is, the real numbers
together with the polynomial and algebraic functions that are studied in first-
year calculus and describe many phenomena. Model theory has played a key role in
many of the significant advances that have been made in the last ten years.
These have deepened our understanding of familiar mathematical systems in such
diverse areas of the mathematical sciences as the analysis and geometry of real
functions, neural nets, and relational database theory. Applications also have
been made in economics. A second principal aspect of the project deals with
classes of finite structures. Finite structures in general are central to
computer science: any database can be construed as a finite structure in the
sense in which they are studied in here, and a particular class of finite
structures called finite fields are especially important in cryptology.
