
* 0070407
* Nonstandard Analysis in Additive Number Theory - An Unconventional Approach to Upper Density or Upper Banach Density Problems
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2000,05/25/2000
* Renling Jin,SC,College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2004
* USD 73,157.00

Principal Investigator: Renling Jin

Abstract

This research project is about applications of nonstandard analysis to additive
number theory, especially to upper density or upper Banach density problems.
There are many interesting theorems about Shnirel'man density or lower density
in additive number theory and a few interesting theorems about upper density or
upper Banach density in combinatorial number theory. However, dealing with upper
density or upper Banach density in additive number theory is still an uncharted
area. One of the major untouched problems in this area is finding the growth and
structure of sums of sets of positive upper density or positive upper Banach
density. The principal investigator has been investigating the problem using
nonstandard analysis and has obtained many interesting new results. The first
part of the proposal describes a topological approach to the problem. Using
U-topologies on a hyperfinite Loeb space, the principal investigator proves a
powerful theorem in nonstandard analysis, which implies several new theorems in
some standard mathematical fields including additive number theory. These
theorems reveal a general phenomenon, which says that if two sets A and B are
large in terms of ``measure'', then A plus B is not small in terms of ``order-
topology''. The second part of the proposal describes a measure-theoretical
approach. This approach allows one to derive a parallel theorem about upper
Banach density to an existing theorem about Shnirel'man density or lower density
in a very efficient way.

Additive number theory is classical and studies the properties of addition of
natural numbers like 1,2,3,4... which people use every day. Nonstandard analysis
is relatively new and more abstract. It adds infinitely large numbers into our
number system. A non-expert may be surprised that the study of the elusive
infinitely large numbers has an interesting impact on the study of ordinary
numbers. The principal investigator has already achieved some success in this
direction. By furthering his efforts, the principal investigator will contribute
more innovative ideas and results to additive number theory.
