
* 0070718
* Reverse Mathematics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2000,04/08/2002
* Stephen Simpson,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 81,300.00

The investigator believes that mathematical logic needs to return to its roots
in Foundations of Mathematics, in the great tradition of Frege, Russell,
Hilbert, Turing, and G del. A basic question in Foundations of Mathematics is:
Which set-existence axioms are needed to prove specific theorems of core
mathematics? Here ``core mathematics'' comprises standard topics in analysis,
algebra, topology/geometry, etc. The investigator and his colleagues study this
question in terms of Subsystems of Second Order Arithmetic, as exposited in the
investigator's recently published research monograph of that title. An extensive
series of case studies reveals that (i) many core mathematical theorems are
logically equivalent to the set-existence axioms needed to prove them, (ii) only
a handful of set-existence axioms arise in this way, (iii) the corresponding
subsystems are linearly ordered by logical implication. This gives a far-
reaching classification of hundreds of core mathematical theorems into a small
number of classes, the classes being defined in terms of logical equivalence
over a weak base system. This ongoing classification project is known as Reverse
Mathematics. It has many implications for philosophically motivated foundational
programs such as constructivism (Bishop), computable mathematics (Pour-
El/Richards), finitistic reductionism (Hilbert), predicativism (Weyl/Feferman),
and predicative reductionism. The Reverse Mathematics classification project is
also a rich source of challenging technical problems. The investigator and his
colleagues are pursuing several of these, with emphasis on analysis, geometry,
and countable combinatorics. A direction for the future is to weaken the base
system, in order to greatly broaden the scope of the classification project,
providing significant points of contact with other parts of mathematics such as
number theory and computational complexity.

Foundations of Mathematics is the study of the most basic concepts and logical
structure of mathematics, with an eye to the unity of human knowledge. This line
of research deals fruitfully with fundamental questions such as: What is the
nature of mathematical proof? What is the logical structure of mathematics? What
are the appropriate axioms for mathematics? Foundations of Mathematics is a rich
subject with a long history, going back to Aristotle and Euclid and continuing
in the hands of outstanding modern figures such Frege, Russell, Hilbert, Turing,
and G del. The investigator and his colleagues continue in this foundational
tradition by pursuing a far-reaching classification project known as Reverse
Mathematics. Specific mathematical theorems are classified according to the
axioms needed to prove them. This reveals a remarkably simple logical structure
within mathematics. The existence of such a structure has many profound
implications. The ongoing research contributes to clarification of the role of
the infinite in mathematics, the nature of mathematical constructions, the role
of impredicative definitions in mathematics, and related issues.
