
* 0071437
* Large Cardinals and the Methodology of Mathematics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2000,04/21/2000
* Jindrich Zapletal,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/29/2004
* USD 61,431.00

The principal investigator studies the impact of large cardinals on the
methodology of mathematics. All results stated below use large cardinal
assumptions, and some such assumptions are necessary. One line of research for
the funded project is the investigation of classes of objects with the same
properties, so-called terminal classes. A typical result states that the Ramsey
ultrafilters are a terminal class: roughly, they share all properties invariant
under the Rudin-Keisler equivalence of filters. Open questions under
investigation involve finding further such terminal classes, and more
importantly, the quantification of theproliferation of such classes throughout
mathematics. Another line of research pursued is the construction of models in
which the behavior of cardinal invariants of the continuum is optimal. A typical
result is that the Miller model is the optimal way of increasing the dominating
number d: roughly, all projectively defined invariants which are consistently
less than d, are less than d in this model. The dual result states that there is
an optimal Pmax model in which the bounding number is small. Open problems
involve finding further cardinal invariants which have canonical models
associated with them. More challenging is the investigation of the notion of
duality mentioned above, and the investigation of the limits of the method of
forcing with simply definable partial orders.

Set theorists have for a long time studied certain additional axioms for
mathematics, called large cardinal axioms. While they are largely irrelevant for
solving specific problems in most traditional fields of mathematics, they do
have a strong influence on the methodology used. Typically the large cardinal
axioms allow the mathematician to select an optimal approach to answering a
question only by considering the syntactical form of the question. Frequently
this information can serve to discover the core of a seemingly complex problem.
Three examples are in order. As the first example, it has been known for twenty
years that sets of reals with simple definitions are well behaved from the point
of view of mathematical analysis. Second, the PI has identified several classes
of objects in mathematical practice that are "terminal": all objects in such a
class have the same properties. Such classes have great methodological
significance, and the PI plans to isolate more of them. In still another
development, the PI found that for certain mathematically important classes of
theories, there is an optimal approach to answering the question of whether the
theories contain no contradictions. Again, the PI continues to isolate further
such classes. Generally, the funded project serves to show that such seemingly
esoteric hypotheses as large cardinal axioms have direct impact on mathematical
practice, thus promoting the interaction between logic, set theory and other
branches of mathematics.
