
* 0088948
* Core Model Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/15/2000,05/29/2002
* Ernest Schimmerling,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2003
* USD 86,860.00

Abstract:

Core models are generalizations of Godel's Constructible Universe. Jensen's
pioneering work on the fine structure of core models and on techniques for
constructing core models with large cardinals has led to many applications in
diverse parts of set theory. More recently, Martin, Mitchell, Steel, and others
have extended earlier work on core models to the level of Woodin cardinals. The
investigator's questions concern 1) the combinatorial structure of core models,
2) the application of core model techniques in determining the large cardinal
consistency strength of various set theoretic statements, 3) the application of
core model techniques in descriptive set theory, 4) problems in infinitary
combinatorics, forcing, and model theory that were in part inspired by his
earlier work on core models.

The most widely accepted theory (system of axioms) of sets is known as ZFC. Kurt
Godel is famous for having shown that if ZFC is consistent, then ZFC is
incomplete in the sense that there are statements which are neither provable nor
refutable in ZFC. This is particularly striking since all of mathematics can be
expressed in the language of sets and most mathematicians work exclusively
within ZFC. There are important open questions that are not decided by ZFC. The
most famous example is Georg Cantor's Continuum Problem, which Godel showed
cannot be answered negatively in ZFC and Paul Cohen showed cannot be answered
positively in ZFC. (Cohen received a Fields Medal for this work.) There are many
interesting extensions of ZFC and the relationships between them are quite
complicated. The investigator's project has to do with a natural hierarchy of
axioms known as the ``large cardinals''. Many beautiful results, including some
longstanding conjectures, were proved by a number of researchers using ZFC and
large cardinals in the 1980's and 90's; further success is anticipated. And,
also, details of how the various theories of sets are related have been
discovered by comparing these theories with the large cardinal hierarchy.
