
* 0094174
* CAREER: Large Cardinals
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 03/01/2001,02/13/2001
* Itay Neeman,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2007
* USD 250,000.00

The PI is investigating several aspects of large cardinal theory in the region
of Woodin cardinals, including (1) Long Games; (2) Iterability; and (3)
connections with Descriptive Set Theory. 1 - Results obtained by the PI through
previous NSF support demonstrate the tight connection between Woodin cardinals
and games of variable countable length. The existence of iterable models for
specific large cardinals can be used to yield the determinacy of games of
specific lengths, with increasing length corresponding to increasing large
cardinal strength. These games in turn can be used to decide statements over
minimal inner models for large cardinals. The PI is attempting to extend this
correspondence, the first main test case being open games of length omega one. 2
- The study of Woodin cardinals leads naturally to a transfinite game known as
the iteration game. Winning strategies ("iteration strategies") for the good
player in this game are essential to the comparison process that lies at the
heart of inner model theory. Proving that iteration strategies exist is the
single most important problem in the field. The PI has been working on this
problem, contributing to the existing pool of partial results. Several problems,
related to the general problem of iterability but specialized and more concrete,
are investigated as part of this project. This investigation should provide
increased understanding of the main problem, and hopefully lead to additional
partial results. 3 - The PI is working to solidify the connections between large
cardinals and definable sets of real numbers. Extensive work, much of it done
during the '70s and '80s, provides a detailed analysis of definable sets of
reals assuming determinacy. Later work obtained determinacy from large
cardinals. The PI is working to emulate the existing analysis of definable sets
of reals, working directly from large cardinals. The point here is to try to
convert methods used in the study of definable sets of reals, into methods which
can be used in inner model theory and the study of large cardinals.



Set Theory is a branch of Mathematics which attempts to understand the universe
of Mathematics, that is the collection of all objects studied by Mathematicians,
or more precisely the collection of all _sets_. (Numbers, groups, functions,
etc., can all be represented as sets.) Set Theorists view this universe as a
structure in its own right, a structure which can itself be analyzed using
mathematical reasoning. For example, a Set Theorist may ask "is there an
embedding of the universe into a similar, yet not identical, structure?" Set
Theorists work with such embeddings ("elementary embeddings") in much the same
way that one would work with functions on numbers, asking "how similar is the
target structure to the original structure?" and "what's the smallest size of a
set actually moved by the embedding?" Such questions about embeddings of the
universe form a subfield of Set Theory known as the study of large cardinals.
The terminology here hints at the answer to the last question mentioned. Indeed,
the sets actually moved by elementary embeddings are substantially larger than
any object studied in other branches of Mathematics (substantially larger than
the set of real numbers for example). Yet it turns out that the existence of
elementary embeddings has concrete effects on lower level objects, including
concrete effects on real numbers. This project is part of the on-going effort to
better understand large cardinals, and better understand their effects on the
line of real numbers. The PI, like other researchers in the field, is motivated
by the connection between the abstract and the concrete.
