
* 0097881
* Applied Mathematical Logic
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 05/15/2001,04/12/2004
* Kenneth Kunen,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2006
* USD 152,538.00

The investigator's research integrates a number of diverse areas in mathematics:
logic, set theory, algebra, topology, and analysis, as well as some automated
reasoning techniques from computer science. In topology, the investigator
focuses on properties of Stone spaces, compact homogeneous spaces, and Bohr
topologies. Topology and analysis are integrated in this research; measure
theory is used to construct topological spaces with interesting properties,
while the topological properties of a space are used to prove theorems about the
possible measures which can exist on the space. The investigator studies Bohr
topologies, which involve giving a topology to arbitrary abstract groups or
other structures; this subject has its roots in the harmonic analysis of the
1930s; modern questions in this area relate to general topology, Fourier series,
and functional analysis. Logic and set theory are relevant because results in
topology and measure theory are frequently independent of the usual axioms of
set theory; when a result is proved independent, the methods used are those of
formal logic. In algebra, the investigator works on algebraic systems such as
quasigroups and loops. Automated reasoning tools are very useful here, primarily
in the study of non-associative systems. These systems are described by fairly
simple axioms, and a computer search can often reveal interesting new
consequences of these axioms. However, the investigator combines the computer
use with classical arguments involving combinatorics and group theory.

There are two distinct, but related, threads to this research. The first thread
involves the expansion of our knowledge of traditional pure mathematics. There
is no specific practical application in mind here, although topology arises
naturally in an attempt to generalize properties of the geometry of physical
space, and measure theory is a natural extension of the notion of probability.
The second thread involves automated reasoning (AR) tools. AR allows the
computer to derive logical conclusions from given knowledge. This subject has
been in existence since the 1960s, but it is only in recent years that the
hardware and software have become powerful enough to discover conclusions which
could not have been discovered without computer assistance. This second thread
is a continuation of the investigator's work in improving the AR tools and using
these tools to create new results in mathematics. This is of interest not only
for the mathematics itself, but because it demonstrates the power of the tools,
which can then be applied to reasoning tasks in other areas of science and
engineering, as well as to autonomous decision making by robotic agents.
