
* 0097181
* Topics in Descriptive Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2002,03/22/2002
* Stephen Jackson,TX,University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2005
* USD 91,979.00

This project concerns research in set theory and descriptive set theory,
particularly involving the influences of the axiom of determinacy. The axiom of
determinacy is the statement that every two-player integer game is determined,
that is, one of the players has a winning strategy. Although this axiom
contradicts the axiom of choice, an accepted part of mathematics, it was
proposed in the 1960s to be a reasonable assumption for the smallest inner model
of set theory containing the real numbers. This model contains the sets of reals
occurring in ordinary mathematical practice (e.g., the projective sets and
beyond). The study of this model, in turn, gives direct information about the
mathematical universe. The notion of a scale is a central structural concept in
descriptive set theory, and the axiom of determinacy was used to develop the
scale theory of the projective sets, which was later extended throughout the
entire model. The scale theory by itself, however, is not sufficient to answer
many questions. A more detailed inductive analysis was begun in the mid 1980s
which was successful at the lower levels of the model, including the projective
sets. This theory does not currently extend through the entire model, and
finding such an extension remains a central goal. Recently, several new lines of
investigation have opened up, relating in some way to the theory of this model.
One such direction concerns investigating the connections between the existing
theory of this model and the theory of ultrafilters (Shelah's p.c.f. theory).
Preliminary results, which use centrally Woodin's theory of the nonstationary
ideal, suggest strong collapsing principles apply as one moves from the inner
model to the real universe. Exactly what is forced to collapse, and what
principles govern this phenomenon, is a topic of investigation. Finding and
establishing principles independent of the complete inductive analysis might
also provide a framework for propagating a basic "skeleton" of the analysis
through the entire model.

This project attempts to advance the understanding of the mathematical universe
of sets. All of mathematics takes place within this universe, and progress here
is important not only foundationally, but because of the direct influence on the
various branches of mathematics. It has been known for some time that strong
assumptions are needed to answer many basic mathematical questions. Identifying
these assumptions and exploring their consequences is a major theme in set
theory. The axiom of determinacy is an important example of such an axiom. This
was formulated in the 1960s but the full extent of its consequences is not
known. Recent evidence suggests that it may shed light on some basic
mathematical questions, such as the continuum hypothesis (the question of how
many real numbers there are).
