
* 0099556
* Computability Theory and Logic
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/15/2001,06/27/2002
* Robert Soare,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2003
* USD 60,002.00

IN this project the investigator will study computability theory and its
relationship and applications to other areas of mathematics such as differential
geometry and algebraic structures, as well as internal computability properties
such as automorphisms of computably enumerable (c.e.) sets and the effective
content of mathematics. The space Riem(M) of Riemannian metrics (modulo
diffeomorphisms) on certain manifolds is of considerable interest to a wide
variety of mathematicians and physicists. Topologists have proved for certain
natural scale invariant functionals related to diameter on the space Riem(M),
and for certain manifolds M of dimension > 4 that for every c.e. set A there is
a sequence of points x_n, n in N, the integers, such that if n in A then x_n
determines a local minimum on Riem(M) whose depth is roughly equal to the
halting time of the Turing machine computation that n in A. The investigator
constructed an infinite sequence of sets A_i, i in N, of c.e. sets so that for
all n the settling function (for stopping times of the associated Turing
machine) of A_i dominates that of A_{i+1}, even when the latter is composed with
an arbitrary computable function. The two results together give a "fractal" like
behavior with extremely big basins, and very much smaller basins coming off
them, and those containing still smaller basins, and so on, where the relative
size of one set of basins to the next exceeds any computable function, what the
topologists describe in their paper on fractals as "the astonishing richness of
the space of Riemannian metrics on a smooth manifold, up to reparametrization.''
The investigator's work will also stress connections of computability to model
theory and algebraic structures. With a junior colleague and a graduate student
he will classify the degree spectrum of models which are prime or saturated but
which have no computable isomorphic copy. Finally, he will continue his work on
the automorphisms and structure of c.e. sets. He will put together these results
to help obtain a classification of structure of c.e. sets and effective content
of certain parts of mathematics.
