
* 0100589
* Proof Theory and Computational Complexity
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, THEORY OF COMPUTING
* 07/01/2001,06/18/2001
* Samuel Buss,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 238,520.00

This project focuses on some of the unexpectedly fruitful connections between
proof theory and important open questions in computational complexity. In
mathematical logic, Buss investigates proof theory and proof complexity,
especially weak proof systems with close connections to open problems in
computational complexity. He investigates aspects of theoretical computer
science related to open questions such as the "P versus NP" problem and related
problems in complexity including open problems in the mathematical foundations
of cryptography. Buss studies the proof complexity of propositional systems such
as Frege systems, cutting planes systems, Nullstellensatz proof systems,
counting axioms, the polynomial calculus, and intuitionistic proof systems. He
plans to extend previous work on bounded arithmetic and its relationships with
proof complexity, computational complexity and cryptographic conjectures. The
goals of this research are firstly to give bounds on proof size and on proof
search algorithms, and to determine what kinds of computational content can be
extracted from formal proofs; and secondly to investigate open problems in
computational complexity from the viewpoint of mathematical logic.

The work of this project is motivated by the desire to obtain a better
understanding of open problems in computational complexity. These open problems
include the "P versus NP" problem regarding the difficulty of solving a large
range of combinatorial problems including scheduling and optimization; they also
include establishing the possibility of mathematically secure cryptographic
systems. It is commonly believed that many of the computational problems in NP
and in cryptography are intractible, and it important for many applications that
they be intractible. However, mathematical proofs of intractibility have not
been obtained yet, in spite of extensive efforts. Buss works on aspect of these
problems in the setting of mathematical logic and proof theory. His work
addresses the logical and computational complexity of formal, symbolic proofs;
this includes the analysis of proofs in a variety of proof systems corresponding
to feasible computation, and the possibility of extracting computational
information from proofs.

This project will be supported by the Foundations program of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Theory of Computing program of the Division of
Computer and Communications Research.
