
* 0100035
* Logic and Computability
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2001,03/03/2005
* Richard Shore,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2007
* USD 328,440.00

The proposed project includes research into a broad range of topics in
computability theory (recursion theory) and logic both theoretical and applied
to other areas of mathematics and computer science. Included in the first area
are investigations of the structures of sets and functions ordered by relative
complexity of computation. Particular emphasis will be placed on the issue of
definability in the complexity structures of all sets and those which are
effectively enumerable. Included in this area is the analysis of the relations
between difficulty of computing functions and other issues such as rates of
growth, complexity of their definitions in arithmetic and the strength of axiom
systems needed to prove their existence. Applications of the methods of pure
computability theory will be made in the areas of computable algebra and model
theory. General methods will be developed for transferring results from
arbitrary structures to ones in specific classes of interest such as lattices,
groups and rings. Another area where issues of computability and complexity are
to be studied is that of modal and intuitionistic logics and their model theory.
These logics are now used to model issues in program verification and computer
security. The second area includes the study of structures representable by
finite automata, decision procedures, the analysis and development of
nonmonotonic logic, concurrent programming models, and applications of linear
programming ideas and algorithms to data structures and logic programming. A
primary focus here will be the logical and mathematical foundations of hybrid
(continuous and discrete) control theory as well as the practical implementation
of algorithms for these subjects based on the theoretical work being done. An
important tool to be developed in this area is that of infinitary automata.

The research proposed is of two types. The first is directed at a better
understanding of the fundamental notions of computability and relative
difficulty of computation for different tasks. The theoretical work deals both
with the abstract notion of computability as well as with applications to
specific branches of, and questions in, other areas of mathematics. One
important application (within mathematics) concerns the general question of what
starting information is needed to be able to compute various aspects of many
important classes of mathematical structures. In practical terms, the results at
times indicate that there are no algorithms for certain important tasks or that
more information than might have been expected is needed to write programs
calculating the desired results. Another aspect of this work stresses the impact
that the specific concrete choice of representation of an abstract mathematical
structure has on one's ability to compute specific functions and relations. The
second type deals more directly with developing the mathematical (and especially
logical) tools needed for the crucial areas of program verification, data
management and automated control of real-world complex systems. Commercial
applications are expected for some of this work and there has already been a
spin off to a start-up company developing several applications including data
compression and network management algorithms. Other applications of these
techniques to be investigated include multimedia applications and distributed
continuous systems.
