
* 0136607
* Foundations of Computational Mathematics Conference, August 5 - 14, 2002
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, THEORY OF COMPUTING
* 07/01/2002,07/02/2002
* Willard Miller,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2003
* USD 30,000.00

The investigator and his colleagues organize the third Conference on
Foundations of Computational Mathematics at the Institute for Mathematics and
its Applications (IMA), University of Minnesota on 5-14 August 2002. Deepening
the understanding of the mathematical processes that underlie fast computation
and computer simulation is the principal goal of the meeting. The mathematical
content covers fields of research at the interface of engineering, computer
science, and pure mathematics, but focused on computation. The program includes
18 3-day workshops and 18 plenary speakers. The plenary talks and workshops span
subjects of vital interest to the nation's infrastructure, economy, and defense.
The project supports participation by postdocs, graduate students, junior
participants, women and minorities as well as plenary and semi-plenary speakers
and workshop organizers. Large-scale computation and the implementation of
mathematical models for complex physical and societal phenomena are of
fundamental importance to the nation's economy. Computation is also the backbone
of the sciences supporting the nation's defense. Large-scale computation is the
engine of numerical models for complex physical phenomena occurring at many
scales. Fast computation and processing of the ever-increasing data sets
obtained from various sensors is critical to the new military. The purpose of
this major meeting, held only every three years, is to further the understanding
of the deep relationships between mathematical theory: analysis, topology,
geometry and algebra, and computational processes as they are evolving in tandem
with the modern computer. The topics to be addressed include large scale
computation and high performance computing as occurs in atmospheric and
groundwater modeling, computer aided design and animation, data, image and
signal processing, modeling network traffic, quantum computing, learning theory,
optimization and control. Sustaining the nation's advantage in these vital areas
relies on understanding the foundations of computational science. The meeting
involves 350-500 researchers in 18 workshops over a 10-day period, with special
plenary sessions attended by everyone. A large contingent of graduate students
and other young scientists are participating, and the program is designed to
promote intensive interaction among the participants. Several panels are devoted
to identifying the most promising directions for future research. Published
proceedings, web-based materials, and the conference sessions themselves serve
as launching pads for focus and special interest groups for future interactions
in a range of subjects at the interface of mathematics and computation.


