
* 0140062
* Extending the Scope of Geometrical Model Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2002,04/12/2004
* Steven Buechler,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 114,804.00

Buechler's proposed research is to extend the scope of geometrical stability
theory outside of the context of a first-order theory. His test project is an
analysis of the geometries induced by bounded linear operators on a Hilbert
space and more complex structures like von Neumann algebras. With his student
Berenstein Buechler has shown that many self-adjoint operators induce dependence
relations satisfying all of the conditions of the dividing dependence relation.
Buechler hopes that the dividing dependence relation will give insight into the
structure of von Neumann algebras. In another project Buechler will investigate
"dividing relative to a closure operator". While this study is analogous to the
study of p-simple types in a superstable theory it presents dramatically
different results when the original theory is not simple and the closure
operator is chosen creatively. Applications to metric spaces and Vaught's
conjecture are expected. Buechler will also study a class of scale-free networks
with model-theoretic methods. Scale-free networks are ubiquitous in nature and
technology. Random graph theorists have discovered some of their properties,
such as the degree functions. However, techniques for building models are
limited. Model theorists have developed techniques for building graphs that are
random relative to some constraints. These methods may lend themselves to
building scale-free graphs with specified parameters.

Frequently a significant advancement in science occurs when a problem arising in
one area is viewed from the perspective of another discipline. For example,
problems in genetics have yielded to techniques from graph theory. In
mathematics algebra has lead to great insight into geometry and knot theory.
Buechler's specialty is model theory, a subfield of mathematical logic.
Recently, Hrushovski applied model theory to solve problems in number theory.
Buechler is adapting these same model-theoretic methods with an eye to problems
in analysis and network theory. In analysis Buechler is looking at the model-
theoretic content of operator theory, which has connections to mathematical
physics. The networks Buechler will study are at the heart of such disparate
systems as the metabolic pathways in a cell and the World Wide Web. Buechler
will attempt to adapt model-theoretic techniques for constructing graphs of
interest in pure mathematics to building models of these networks arising in
nature and technology. Graduate students will be involved in all of these
projects. The cross-disciplinary nature of the work will require the students to
learn science that their normal curriculum would not expose them to, and to
learn the value of viewing research in a broader context.
