
* 0200465
* Computable Mathematics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2002,04/24/2002
* Denis Hirschfeldt,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2005
* USD 68,607.00

In this project the principal investigator will apply methods from computability
theory to study the effective content and proof-theoretic strength of various
areas of mathematics. In particular, he will concentrate on computable model
theory and algebra, reverse mathematics and effectiveness of combinatorial
principles, and effective notions of randomness and relative randomness. In
computable model theory, this project will continue the development of methods
to address issues raised by effectivizing model-theoretic notions. These issues
include the relationships between the different ways that a given structure may
be effectivized, the relationships between the degree of effectivity of
different models of theories with few models, and the differences between the
computability-theoretic phenomena that can occur in general and those that can
occur within well-known classes of structures. Hirschfeldt will also study
computability-theoretic and proof-theoretic aspects of combinatorial principles,
exploiting the connections between effective mathematics and the reverse
mathematics program. Finally, the principal investigator will study the
structure of (effectively approximable) reals under notions of relative
effective randomness defined through the use of prefix-free Kolmogorov
complexity of initial segments.

The study of the effective content of mathematics has received increasing
attention in the last few decades. It is a natural outgrowth of the efforts to
understand and formalize the notions of algorithm and computable function
undertaken in the early part of the twentieth century. It is of both pure
mathematical and foundational interest, and has important connections with
computer science. This project aims to further our understanding of how
structure affects computability, and how computability interacts with other
fundamental notions of modern mathematics and foundations of mathematics, such
as randomness and proof-theoretic strength. Computability theorists have
developed a highly successful theory of relative computational complexity of
sets of numbers, which, in addition to its intrinsic mathematical interest, has
been influential in theoretical computer science. One of the goals of this
project is to continue the development of an emerging parallel theory of
relative algorithmic randomness, which can act as a theoretical framework in
which to consider questions such as: When should we say that an infinite set is
more random than another, and what consequences does the relative randomness of
sets have for their relative computational complexity?
