
* 0203747
* Research in Model Theory: Generic Structures
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/15/2002,08/03/2006
* Kitty Holland,IL,Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2007
* USD 82,017.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0203747 Principal Investigator: Kitty L. Holland

Holland's proposed work centers on applying the Hrushovski-style amalgamation
technique to produce novel examples of omega-stable structures. Together with
Baldwin, Holland is engaged in an attempt to use this technique to produce a bad
field. Holland's work toward this end has produced algebro-geometric results of
independent interest on the relationship between transcendence degree and
multiplicative group rank in characteristic zero fields. Holland proposes to
exploit this work to complete the bad field project with Baldwin and to extend
the algebro-geometric results. She further proposes to settle stability
questions for certain structures produced by the technique; to analyze the
geometries of structures produced by the technique and to extend her joint work
with Baldwin toward an abstract model theoretic analysis of the technique and
its products.

Since its introduction in the early 90s, Hrushovski's amalgamation technique has
been applied with great success to settle a variety of old existence conjectures
central to algebraic model theory. Holland's ambition, embodied in this
proposal, is threefold: To continue breaking new ground in application of the
technique, to explore the limitations of the technique by characterizing common
properties of its products, and to make the technique more widely and
efficiently applicable by extracting common difficulties arising in its
implementation and dealing with them uniformly on an abstract level.

Holland's proposed work centers on applying the Hrushovski-style amalgamation
technique to produce novel examples of omega-stable structures. Together with
Baldwin, Holland is engaged in an attempt to use this technique to produce a bad
field. Holland's work toward this end has produced algebro-geometric results of
independent interest on the relationship between transcendence degree and
multiplicative group rank in characteristic zero fields. Holland proposes to
exploit this work to complete the bad field project with Baldwin and to extend
the algebro-geometric results. She further proposes to settle stability
questions for certain structures produced by the technique; to analyze the
geometries of structures produced by the technique and to extend her joint work
with Baldwin toward an abstract model theoretic analysis of the technique and
its products.

Since its introduction in the early 90s, Hrushovski's amalgamation technique has
been applied with great success to settle a variety of old existence conjectures
central to algebraic model theory. Holland's ambition, embodied in this
proposal, is threefold: To continue breaking new ground in application of the
technique, to explore the limitations of the technique by characterizing common
properties of its products, and to make the technique more widely and
efficiently applicable by extracting common difficulties arising in its
implementation and dealing with them uniformly on an abstract level.
