
* 0204728
* Inner Models, Fine Structure and Large Cardinals
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2002,04/12/2004
* Martin Zeman,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 85,698.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0204728 Principal Investigator: Martin Zeman

The proposed research focuses on various aspects of the inner model theory and
can be divided into two areas. The first area puts emphasis on the determining
the internal structure of extender models, fine structure theory and infinitary
combinatorics. The PI has done extensive research here, making substantial
contributions to the existing results. Extender models are generalizations of
Goedel's constructible universe which admit a very complex structure of large
cardinal axioms. The key element behind the inner model theory is iterability --
a method which enables us to iterate countable structures that are elementarily
embeddable into initial segments of these models. Granting iterability, the
author and his collaborators were able to develop a fine structure theory of
these models, which is a means enabling to investigate the internal structure
and combinatorics (Jensen's principles) of these models abstractly, without any
direct reference to iterability. The aim of this project is to extend the
existing methods in a manner that would yield the complete description of
combinatorial properties of extender models. The open problems are related
mainly to cardinal transfer theorems and stationary reflection. This part of the
project includes also direct applications of the inner model theory in
determining the consistency strength of various principles from infinitary
combinatorics. The focus here is on improving the PI's results on Jensen's
guessing principle. The second part of the project consists of two areas that
are less tightly related to the PI's past research, namely the construction of
inner models, iterability and applications in the descriptive set theory.

The subject of set theory is the analysis of methods which arise in mathematics.
The methods that are widely accepted by the mathematical world have been
formalized into so-called Zermelo-Fraenkel system of axioms (briefly ZFC).
However, it turns out that we more and more often encouter questions whose
solutions require more than mere ZFC. Set theory provides us with tools for
recognizing such problems and approaches which enable us to determine which
methods to use. More precisely, set theory provides us with a general method for
determining the complexity of various problems quantitatively. The scale used
here is the hierarchy of the large cardinal axioms. Extender models play a
crucial role here -- there are the actual technical means which enables us to
establish the connection between various concrete problems from mathematics and
large cardinal axioms.

The proposed research focuses on various aspects of the inner model theory and
can be divided into two areas. The first area puts emphasis on the determining
the internal structure of extender models, fine structure theory and infinitary
combinatorics. The PI has done extensive research here, making substantial
contributions to the existing results. Extender models are generalizations of
Goedel's constructible universe which admit a very complex structure of large
cardinal axioms. The key element behind the inner model theory is iterability --
a method which enables us to iterate countable structures that are elementarily
embeddable into initial segments of these models. Granting iterability, the
author and his collaborators were able to develop a fine structure theory of
these models, which is a means enabling to investigate the internal structure
and combinatorics (Jensen's principles) of these models abstractly, without any
direct reference to iterability. The aim of this project is to extend the
existing methods in a manner that would yield the complete description of
combinatorial properties of extender models. The open problems are related
mainly to cardinal transfer theorems and stationary reflection. This part of the
project includes also direct applications of the inner model theory in
determining the consistency strength of various principles from infinitary
combinatorics. The focus here is on improving the PI's results on Jensen's
guessing principle. The second part of the project consists of two areas that
are less tightly related to the PI's past research, namely the construction of
inner models, iterability and applications in the descriptive set theory.

The subject of set theory is the analysis of methods which arise in mathematics.
The methods that are widely accepted by the mathematical world have been
formalized into so-called Zermelo-Fraenkel system of axioms (briefly ZFC).
However, it turns out that we more and more often encouter questions whose
solutions require more than mere ZFC. Set theory provides us with tools for
recognizing such problems and approaches which enable us to determine which
methods to use. More precisely, set theory provides us with a general method for
determining the complexity of various problems quantitatively. The scale used
here is the hierarchy of the large cardinal axioms. Extender models play a
crucial role here -- there are the actual technical means which enables us to
establish the connection between various concrete problems from mathematics and
large cardinal axioms.
