
* 0207218
* Applications of Set Theory to Analysis
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/2002,04/11/2002
* Alexander Kechris,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2003
* USD 50,000.00

The Fields Institute in Toronto, Ontario is running an intensive program in
Applications of Set Theory to Analysis from September to December 2002. This is
an award for the support of junior U.S. participants in that international
program. Long-term activities in the semester include graduate courses and
seminars, and shorter activities include a workshop on Descriptive Set Theory
and a workshop on Banach Spaces, Algebras, and Subspaces of Baire Class 1
Functions.

Even people whose only contact with higher mathematics comes from watching
reruns of "Star Trek" or "The Simpsons" will have encountered the phenomenon
that the decimal expansion of Pi requires infinitely many digits. The ratio of
the circumference of a circle to its diameter, therefore, is a manifestation of
the actual, as opposed to just the potential, infinite. While the existence of
the actual infinite has had a profound influence on mathematics, its acceptance
was not immediate and the history of the subject is fraught with controversy.
Two major branches of mathematics which devote much of their resources to the
study of the infinite are analysis and set theory. Much of analysis is concerned
with understanding limiting behaviour in various contexts. A simple prototype of
this is found in considering the number Pi as the limit of increasingly longer
finite decimal approximations to Pi. Many of the spaces which analysts study
consist of limits of simpler objects. Set theory, on the other hand, studies the
infinite in a more abstract setting, concentrating on the combinatorial and
structural implications of the infinite. While the connections between set
theory and analysis have always been acknowledged, too much of the work in these
two areas has gone on largely unheeded by researchers in the other area. The
chief purpose of the current proposal is to create an environment where leading
set theorists and analysts can collaborate on problems which straddle the
boundaries of their subjects.
