
* 0300201
* Cardinal Invariants and Descriptive Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2003,12/20/2007
* Jindrich Zapletal,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 103,827.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0300201 Principal Investigator: Jindrich Zapletal

The principal investigator plans to work on the connections between the theory
of cardinal invariants and descriptive set theory, two subfields of set theory.
The central idea in the field of cardinal invariants is to assign cardinal
numbers to various Borel (that is, suitably definable) structures on the real
line or similar spaces. The comparison of these cardinal numbers provides a way
to measure differences between distinct Borel structures, and the principal
investigator has developed a method for comparing many of these cardinal
numbers. It turns out that the comparison of cardinal numbers frequently
translates back to natural Borel questions about the Borel structures, without
loss of information. Questions to be studied under this grant include the
extension of the syntactically defined class of problems for which the technique
sketched above works; the relevance of large cardinal axioms to the translation
method; particular cases of Borel structures arising in dynamical systems or in
the study of Borel equivalence relations, and a duality that relates these
results to a method recently found by W. Hugh Woodin.

Ordinary cardinal numbers are used for counting, i.e., for comparing the sizes
of collections of objects. For more than one hundred years mathematicians have
had a version of cardinal numbers for infinite sets, beginning with the notion
of comparison: if two sets A and B can be put into a one-to-one correspondence
then we say that A and B have the same cardinality. From this point of view the
set of natural numbers {1, 2, 3, ...} and its subset of even natural numbers {2,
4, 6, ...} have the same cardinality (size) since multiplication by 2 gives a
one-to-one correspondence from the first set to the second one. Both of these
sets are infinite, i.e. larger than any finite set, and one of the key steps in
the development of logic and set theory was the realization by Georg Cantor that
the set of real numbers is definitely of a larger cardinality than the set of
natural numbers. Modern set theory has developed notions and tools for working
with sets of larger cardinality than the real line, and these tools are becoming
useful in exploring constructions and properties that arise in dynamical systems
and measure theory.
