
* 0300055
* Student Travel Awards to Attend the Annual and European Summer Meetings of the ASL
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 10/15/2003,07/12/2007
* Charles Steinhorn,CT,Association For Symbolic Logic
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2008
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0300055 Principal Investigator: Charles I. Steinhorn

This project funds travel awards to graduate students in logic to support their
participation in the Annual Meetings and the European Summer Meetings (Logic
Colloquia) of the Association for Symbolic Logic. These two events are arguably
the most important meetings in the field of logic; since their inception, they
have been international scientific meetings of the highest standard of
excellence. The Association works to ensure that these meetings cover logic
comprehensively and that they represent the highest quality work being done in
this field. They accordingly have provided important opportunities for
intellectual exchange, thus acting as a stimulus to advancement of research. For
graduate students in logic, the opportunity to attend one or both of these ASL
meetings is an indispensible component of serious participation in the
profession.

The Association for Symbolic Logic is the leading international professional
society for logicians, whose membership includes researchers in computer
science, cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, and philosophy. It
organizes and sponsors a number of important meetings. Most prominent among
these are its Annual Meeting, held each year in North America, and its European
Summer Meeting. The Association also has met for many years at the Joint
Mathematics Meetings and with the American Philosophical Association. Recent
sponsored meetings have taken place in Asia, Australia, Europe, and North and
South America. During the last few years, the Association has actively sought to
increase the range and number of meetings of which it is a sponsor. A particular
aim of this effort is to embrace new and emerging fields in which logic has come
to play an important role, including computer science, linguistics, and
cognitive science. This project will permit the continuation of a successful
program of graduate student travel awards that the Association has administered
since 1993 and that has been partly funded by NSF since 1997. The program has
proved to be a highly effective means of bringing students in logic to important
professional meetings at which they can meet and exchange ideas with leading
logicians, an experience which is a vital component in training future Ph.D.'s
in the field. Almost fifty percent of the awards funded by N.S.F. during the
period 1998-2001 (the first N.S.F.-supported awards were made in 1998) went to
students who subsequently have earned their Ph.D.'s in logic. Further
information on the Association may be found on its web site:
http://www.aslonline.org.
