
* 0300639
* Topics in Model Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 05/15/2003,05/22/2007
* Anand Pillay,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2009
* USD 499,113.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0300639 Principal Investigator: Anand Pillay

The proposal covers problems in several areas of model theory (a branch of
mathematical logic) and its applications. On the pure side are problems
involving definability and fine structure in models of simple theories, which
will be approached using the theory of elementary pairs of models. Also
questions on the structure of the Lascar group, a certain Galois group attached
to any first order theory, raise new conjectural relationships between first
order logic and descriptive set theory. The applied side of the proposal deals
mainly with jet-space methods in differential fields, the Galois theory of
differential equations in positive characteristic, and the model theory of
Kahler manifolds. Among the common themes on the applied side is the manner in
which model theory predicts that the further a definable set is from algebraic
geometry, the more rigid is its structure, and the mathematical implications of
this behaviour in the concrete situations under investigation.

The proposal is in a certain branch of mathematical logic called model theory.
Modern mathematical logic developed in the twentieth century. Although the
present proposal does not touch directly on computability questions, it is worth
remarking that mathematical logicians such as Turing provided the first rigorous
notions of computability and played a role in the development of actual
computers. Model theory, on the other hand, is concerned with a detailed study
of the language in which mathematicians express themselves and define
mathematical objects. Model-theorists such as Robinson and Tarski showed how
such preoccupations can have wide-ranging implications for mathematics itself,
and so indirectly for science as a whole. The development of nonstandard
analysis provides an example. The past fifteen years have seen striking advances
in applications of model theory to areas of mathematics such as number theory
and geometry. The proposer plans, among other things, to extend these advances,
using new methods he has recently developed.
