
* 0301771
* Geometric Model Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2003,06/10/2003
* Thomas Scanlon,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0301771 Principal Investigator: Thomas W. Scanlon

These projects study the connections between model theory and geometry. In this
context, model theory includes the search for axiomatizations and quantifier
elimination results for concrete structures and the development of general
stability and dimension theories. The geometric problems to be studied arise in
algebraic, complex analytic, rigid analytic, and differential algebraic
geometry. Specific projects include the extension of the model theory of compact
complex manifolds to nonstandard analytic spaces and rigid analytic spaces. Some
of this work investigates the extent to which Kaehler manifolds are free from
model theoretic pathologies. In diophantine geometry new uniformity and
finiteness principles are being sought as reflections of similar results for
enriched fields. In particular, a program based on the model theory of separably
closed fields aims to resolve a function field variant of Denis' analogue of the
Mordell-Lang conjecture for Drinfeld modules. The fine structure of definable
sets over D-fields will be investigated, aiming to extend relative completeness
and quantifier elimination theorems to valued D-fields with richer analytic
structure and to produce effective versions of quantifier elimination theorems
in this setting. Differential jet spaces and related constructions will be used
to uncover the combinatorial geometry of regular types in partial differential
fields. Abstract Euler characteristics and Grothendieck rings of first-order
structure will be investigated.

The idea of the branch of logic called model theory is, roughly, that if we know
all of the simply-stated truths about an object then either we should know how
to recognize that object uniquely, or anything else sharing the same collection
of first-order properties should be revealing like the original and might
sometimes be easier to study. To be more precise, model theory studies
mathematical structures by considering the first-order sentences true in those
structures, and the family of alternate structures that also satisfy all of
those first-order sentences. (Sentences in logic are built out of a small
repertoire of elements and constructions. "First-order" refers to the number of
quantifiers in a sentence, a measure of complexity.) A model for the algorithms
and bounds sought in some of these projects is long division: if you are given
two whole numbers to divide by hand then you can estimate the number of steps
required by long division by comparing the number of digits in the decimal
expansions of the dividend and divisor.
