
* 0301162
* Constructive Set Theory: Forcing, Large Sets, and Mathematics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2003,04/18/2003
* Michael Rathjen,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2007
* USD 141,261.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0301162 Principal Investigator: Michael Rathjen

The general topic of Constructive Set Theory originated in John Myhill's
endeavour to discover a simple formalism that relates to Bishop's constructive
mathematics as classical Zermelo-Fraenkel Set Theory (with the axiom of choice)
relates to classical Cantorian mathematics. Constructive Zermelo-Fraenkel Set
Theory (CZF) provides a standard set theoretical framework for the development
of constructive mathematics in the style of Errett Bishop. One of the hallmarks
of constructive set theory is that it possesses a canonical interpretation in
Martin-Lof's intuitionistic type theory which is considered to be the most
acceptable foundational framework of ideas that make precise the constructive
approach to mathematics. The interpretation employs the Curry-Howard
`propositions as types' idea in that the axioms of constructive set theory get
interpreted as provable propositions. There are central questions that have
guided researchers in classical Cantorian set theory over the last 50 years. The
objective of the research to be undertaken is to pursue similarly central
questions for constructive set theory. Roughly speaking, these are questions
addressing the independence of set-theoretic principles (via realizability
notions and forcing over Kripke models), the role of large set axioms, and the
formalization of mathematics within such a framework. The method of forcing
featured prominently in Cohen's famous independence results regarding the axiom
of choice and the continuum hypothesis. In a similar vein, forcing methods
germane to the intuitionistic context, as well as realizability structures, will
be employed to tackle problems of independence on the basis of CZF. The theory
of large cardinals has dominated research in classical set theory for the last
40 years. In the context of intuitionistic set theories large cardinal axioms
have to be replaced by large set axioms. A central part of the proposed research
will be concerned with studying notions of largeness couched in terms of
elementary embeddings. It is hoped that this project will also shed light on the
role of large cardinals in devising strong ordinal representation systems in the
area of proof theory called ordinal analysis.

Constructive mathematics distinguishes itself from its traditional counterpart,
classical mathematics, by insisting that proofs of existential theorems in
mathematics respect constructive existence: that an existential claim must
afford means for constructing an instance of it. The foundations of a systematic
approach to constructive mathematics, known as intuitionism, were laid in
Brouwer's response to the foundational crisis in mathematics at the beginning of
the 20th century. Nowadays, in computer science, constructive formal systems
based on type theory, or on the Curry-Howard isomorphism have become
increasingly widespread for program development and language design. The
concepts of program and constructive proof are connected in a deep way. Via this
connection proofs are used to support the development of reliable software
systems. The axioms of so-called Zermelo-Fraenkel Set Theory provide an accepted
framework for formalizing classical mathematics whereas Constructive Set Theory
(briefly CST) is a universal framework for developing mathematics from a
constructive viewpoint. This project is motivated by the desire to answer
central questions regarding CST, questions that have shaped the research
activity in classical Cantorian set theory for more than half a century. The
work is expected to substantially enhance our understanding of models of
constructive set theory and thereby enlarge the realm of constructivism.
