
* 0304986
* International Conference on Computability and Complexity in Analysis
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2003,06/12/2003
* Ning Zhong,OH,University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 12,000.00

The conference is concerned with the theory of computability and complexity in
analysis, physical sciences, and engineering over the real numbers, which is
built on the Turing machine model. This research is an interdisciplinary area
between applied analysis and computability and complexity theory, and sometimes
also involves works in numerical analysis. The goal of the research is to
understand the laws of real number computation, the computability content of
existence results in analysis, and the computational complexity of computable
operators.

Computability brings to mind computers, which are playing an ever larger role in
our society. Computers operate on finite strings of digits. However most
mathematical models describe continuous problems ranging from physical phenomena
such as electromagnetism and sound waves, to engineering applications such as
bridge designs and air flows around airplanes, to financial predictions such as
expected investment returns. Continuous models are based fundamentally on the
concept of real numbers. Although a large portion of computer resources is
devoted to compute the solutions of such continuous problems, real number
computation is not as well understood as it should be. There still exists a big
gap between the continuous nature of problem from the physical world and the
computability and complexity theory of discrete structures. The explosion of
Ariane 5 rocket on June 4, 1996, is a drastic example. The problem at the center
is that computers operate on finite strings of digits while the real numbers are
infinite mathematical objects. The increasing demand for reliable as well as
fast software requires a better understanding of real number computation.
Computable analysis is a theory which studies the laws of real number
computation. Its goal is to bridge the gap between analysis, the mathematical
theory of real numbers, on the one end, and computability on the other. It
studies which computations in analysis, physical sciences, and engineering are
possible and which are not. The research lets us understand why a problem cannot
be solved on computers, or provides us with a better understanding of the
computability content of a continuous problem and thus better tools for
constructing more efficient algorithms. The research outputs of the conference
series are substantial. The series has produced five volumes of proceedings
containing more than 100 (refereed) papers ranging from theoretical
investigations of computability and complexity in analysis to new
implementations of exact real arithmetics as well as further developments of
existing software packages.
