
* 0355334
* Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2004,04/24/2008
* W. Hugh Woodin,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 380,294.00

Omega-logic is the natural logic given by forcing: a sentence is Omega-valid if
it holds in all rank initial segments of all forcing extensions of V. If there
exists a proper class of Woodin cardinals then whether or not a given sentence
is Omega-valid is itself generically invariant. There is a natural candidate of
the notion of proof for Omega-logic and the Omega-Conjecture is simply the
conjecture that if there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals then for any
sentence, the sentence is Omega-provable if and only if it is Omega-valid. The
significance of the Omega-Conjecture is that if it is true then one has a
complete analysis of what can be achieved by forcing and moreover the set of
Omega-valid sentences is definable in third order number theory. This places a
limit on the possibilities for generic absoluteness.

The Omega-Conjecture is also generically invariant and so it is unlikely to be
independent is the same fashion that CH is. Therefore any refutation of the
Omega-Conjecture must come from large cardinal axioms. The Omega-Conjecture
holds in the current generation of inner models (extender models). The focus of
the proposal is to investigate the possibility that some large cardinal
hypothesis refutes the Omega-Conjecture by examining extender models for large
cardinals beyond superstrong. These extender models differ from the current
family in that long extenders are allowed on the sequence. Preliminary results
have established several key points. First, for the standard generalization of
extender models to the case of long extenders, comparison fails as soon as one
reaches sequences of extenders for which the moving spaces problem arises (this
problem was first identified by Steel). Nevertheless there is family of extender
models which effectively exhaust all known large cardinal axioms and for these
extender sequences the moving spaces problem does not arise (the sequences are
suitably short). If comparison can be established for these models then Omega-
Conjecture holds in these inner models. As a corollary one would obtain that no
known large cardinal hypothesis can refute the Omega-Conjecture. Finally if a
suitable iteration hypothesis holds in these inner models then assuming
appropriate large cardinals in V (extendible cardinals) the Omega-Conjecture
must hold in V. Finally if, as one might naturally expect, there are definable
versions of these extender models then there are a number of truly profound
corollaries. These include the following: if there is an extendible cardinal
then HOD correctly computes the successor for a proper class of singular
cardinals.

Cantor's Continuum Hypothesis is arguably the most famous unsolvable problem in
Mathematics, it was the first problem on Hilbert's list of 23 problems from
1900. The Continuum Hypothesis simply asserts that any infinite collection of
real numbers is either equinumerous with the integers or equinumerous with the
collection of all real numbers.

Around 40 years ago this problem was shown to be formally unsolvable from the
axioms of Set Theory. This seminal work of Cohen introduced a new technique to
Set Theory, the method of forcing. However the fact that the Continuum
Hypothesis is formally unsolvable does not necessarily imply that it cannot be
solved. Indeed the experience in Set Theory over the last 40 years has
demonstrated that some questions which are formally unsolvable can be answered.
But the precise methodology used in these cases cannot work for the problem of
the Continuum Hypothesis.

The Omega-Conjecture (proposed around 10 years ago) arises naturally from an
abstract analysis of the method of forcing but in the context of so called large
cardinal axioms. If the Omega-Conjecture is true then there is an argument, or
at least strong evidence, that the Continuum Hypothesis is false. But
independent of this, whether or not the Omega-Conjecture is true has profound
consequences for the foundations of Set Theory.

Cohen's method of forcing cannot be used to establish that the Omega-Conjecture
is unsolvable so it is reasonable to expect that whether or not the Omega-
Conjecture is true can be resolved. Any refutation of the Omega-Conjecture must
come from large cardinal axioms. This research project concerns trying to prove
the Omega-Conjecture by a detailed analysis of the hierarchy of large cardinal
axioms. Preliminary results have been obtained which offer strong evidence for
plausibility of this approach.


