
* 0400931
* Topics in Applications of Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/15/2004,04/24/2007
* Slawomir Solecki,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2008
* USD 175,001.00

Solecki's research interests lie in applications of mathematical logic (model
theory, set theory and, primarily, descriptive set theory) to analysis and
topology. The project consists of several parts. For example, Solecki proposes
to investigate a problem of automatic continuity of universally measurable
homomorphisms on Polish groups. A possible solution to this problem will
certainly involve descriptive set theory of Polish groups. However, it is also
likely to rely heavily, on the one hand, on set theoretic assumptions (like the
Continuum Hypothesis) and, on the other hand, on algebraic properties of the
underlying group (amenability, freeness). Indications of the connections between
this problem and set theory and algebra can be found in earlier work of
Christensen, Mokobodzki and Solecki. In another part of the project, Solecki
will apply methods developed first in set theory (in the study of Borel
equivalence relations) to problems in topology and model theory. First, he will
use descriptive set theoretic techniques augmented by tools coming from model
theory to investigate the structure of an important topological space---the
pseudo-arc. Second, he will apply methods from descriptive set theory to study
groups associated canonically with countable complete theories---Lascar's Galois
groups.

In the project, Solecki will apply techniques and notions developed in
mathematical logic to problems in other areas of mathematics. For example, he
will investigate a certain topological space---a hereditarily indecomposable
continuum called the pseudo-arc. These types of topological spaces were first
introduced in mathematics in the first quarter of the twentieth century as
curious examples of extremely complicated curves. Today, we know that they
appear naturally in many mathematical contexts, e.g., in fluid dynamics, in
smooth dynamical systems living in Euclidean spaces, among topological groups,
in the study of continuous functions, etc. Solecki intends to gain a better
understanding of the pseudo-arc by using methods from descriptive set theory, a
branch of mathematical logic, which were originally developed to study in an
effective way the size of abstract sets. It is hoped that crossing boundaries of
subfields of mathematics by applying set theoretic methods in analysis and
topology should lead to new and substantial insights.


