
* 0401042
* collaborative research: theoretical support for mechanized proof assistants
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 09/01/2004,04/24/2006
* Jeremy Avigad,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2007
* USD 98,999.00

In this project, Avigad and Friedman propose to develop a theoretical base in
mathematical logic to support the development of mechanized proof assistants for
mathematics. They propose to study the definitional structure of mathematics,
and characterize the ways that definitions are used in practice; to study the
methods of inference commonly used in elementary reasoning in number theory,
real analysis, and set theory, and to develop of algorithms that can mirror
these forms of inference; and to develop an enriched theory of mathematical
proof to characterize and classify the various ``indirect'' methods that are
used in mathematical reasoning. A novel aspect of the proposal is the attention
Avigad and Friedman will give to actual data, i.e. specific formal developments.
In particular, Avigad will complete a mechanically verified proof of the prime
number theorem, and is developing a broad number theory library, using a proof
system called Isabelle; and Friedman has begun a fully formal development of set
theory using in a notational framework of his own devising, with an emphasis on
readability, for a broad audience.

This research is intended to contribute to the general goal of devising better
computer support for the development, manipulation, storage, and communication
of mathematical knowledge. In particular, formal mathematical libraries and
means of handling them are important to verify the behavior of hardware and
software systems, for example, and to support scientific computing and
cryptography. It is well understood that the development of useable proof
assistants will have to combine pure logical considerations with pragmatic
engineering concerns. However, in today's specialized academic environments, the
relevant communities have become largely disjoint. Avigad and Friedman are
committed to bridging the gap, by developing powerful theory that is guided by,
and designed to support, sound practice.
