
* 0401603
* Maximal Methods for Small Sets
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/2004,09/11/2007
* Paul Larson,OH,Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2008
* USD 77,581.00

We intend to study maximal models for the powersets of the first two uncountable
cardinals as realized by the forcing method in the context of large cardinals
and determinacy, and the applications of these models to other areas, especially
topology. Many of these issues complement a new theory of the infinite developed
by W. Hugh Woodin called Omega-logic. By now it is a well established theme in
set theory that large cardinals impose certain forms of canonicity and
absoluteness on the universe of sets. In particular, the existence of certain
large cardinals implies that the theories of certain definable inner models of
the universe are invariant under forcing. Furthermore, these large cardinals
also tend to give rise to a detailed structure theory for these inner models.
The prototypical results of this type are results of Woodin, building on work of
Foreman, Magidor, Shelah, Martin and Steel, showing that a proper class of
Woodin cardinals implies that the theory of the least inner model of set theory
containing the reals and the ordinals (L(R)) cannot be changed by set forcing,
and that this fixed theory includes the Axiom of Determinacy. One natural
program in the wake of these results is to identify and study larger models for
which similar results hold. Another direction, noting that the Axiom of
Determinacy contradicts the Axiom of Choice, is to find similar forms of
absoluteness compatible with AC. One way of doing this is to consider statements
to the effect that the universe of sets is closed under certain forcing
operations. Such statements are typically called forcing axioms. Another
approach is to consider forcing extensions of these inner models of determinacy.
One major advance in this direction is Woodin's forcing Pmax. Heuristically,
every natural question about the subsets of the first uncountable cardinal
should have an answer in the Pmax extension of L(R). Nonetheless, there are
several important questions about the Pmax extension which remain open. Some of
these questions concern the properties of the nonstationary ideal on the first
uncountable cardinal. One goal in pursuing these questions is to develop a finer
analysis of the Pmax extension. In the other direction there is the issue of
whether results obtained by Pmax can be obtained by other methods. Furthermore,
the Pmax method has a number of variations, some of which have found application
in topology.

Cohen's method of forcing is a way of taking models of the mathematical universe
and producing larger, often very different models. We intend to study properties
of the first two uncountable cardinals as realized by the forcing method in the
context of the regularity imposed by assuming the existence of large infinite
objects (large cardinals) and certain regularity properties for set of real
numbers (determinacy), and the applications of these models to other areas,
especially topology. Many of these issues complement a new theory of the
infinite developed by W. Hugh Woodin. By now it is a well established theme in
set theory that large cardinals impose certain forms of canonicity and
absoluteness on the universe of sets. In particular, the existence of certain
large cardinals implies that the theories of certain definable inner models of
the universe are invariant under forcing. Furthermore, these large cardinals
also tend to give rise to a detailed structure theory for these inner models.
One natural program in the wake of these results is to identify and study larger
models for which similar results hold. One way of doing this is to consider
statements to the effect that the universe of sets is closed under certain
forcing operations. Another approach is to consider forcing extensions of
canonical inner models of determinacy. One major advance in this direction is
Woodin's forcing Pmax. Heuristically, every natural question about the subsets
of the first uncountable cardinal should have an answer in the Pmax extension.
Nonetheless, there are several important questions about the Pmax extension
which remain open. One goal in pursuing these questions is to develop a finer
analysis of the Pmax extension. In the other direction there is the issue of
whether results obtained by Pmax can be obtained by other methods. Furthermore,
the Pmax method has a number of variations, some of which have found application
in other areas of mathematics.




