
* 0401312
* Inner Model Theory and Descriptive Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2004,04/29/2008
* John Steel,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 412,254.00

Steel will work on the problem of constructing canonical inner models for large
cardinal hypotheses, and on related problems in pure descriptive set theory. One
very well known and central problem in this area is whether the Proper Forcing
Axiom is equiconsistent with the existence of a supercompact cardinal. A
solution to this problem is probably still far off, but Steel has recently made
some progress using the powerful and flexible ``core model induction" method. He
intends to pursue and develop this method further, as it applies to the Proper
Forcing Axiom, and in several other contexts as well. This program leads
naturally to a number of questions concerning the relationship between canonical
inner models with Woodin cardinals and the derived models of the Axiom of
Determinacy which are associated to them. Steel has some results on this
connection, and plans to investigate the area further.

Much of set theory is motivated by the simple question ``What are the proper
axioms for mathematics?". Mathematicians prove things for a living; what should
they take as their common assumptions in these proofs? In the period 1905-1927,
Russell, Zermelo, Fraenkel, and Skolem isolated an elegant list of basic
statements about sets, expressed in the language of set theory, and showed that
from these axioms one could derive all of the mathematics of the time. This
system of axioms is now known as Zermelo-Fraenkel Set Theory with Choice, or
ZFC. While there is still no hint of a mathematical statement which cannot be
expressed in the language of set theory, we have discovered that ZFC is
incomplete in important ways. A surprising number of quite basic questions about
sets in general are not decided by the axioms of ZFC; moreover, many of the more
abstract questions of analysis, algebra, and topology are similarly left
undecided. This leads to Godel's Program, first formulated by Kurt Godel in the
late 1940's: Decide mathematically interesting questions which are independent
of ZFC in well-justified extensions of ZFC. There have been great successes in
this direction obtained by adding ``large cardinal hypotheses" to ZFC. Such
hypotheses assert the existence of sets whose cardinality, or size, is
inaccessible from below in ever stronger senses. Possibly our deepest
understanding of large cardinal hypotheses comes from the inner model program.
This program attempts to associate to each large cardinal hypothesis H a
canonical minimal universe of sets (or ``inner model") in which H is true. The
stronger H is, the largere this universe must be. The inner models we have so
far constructed have internal structures which admit a systematic, detailed
analysis, a ``fine structure theory" which gives us a very good idea as to what
these universes look like. Inner models are crucial in several basic uses of
large cardinal hypotheses to settle questions left undecided by ZFC. Steel will
focus his efforts on furthering the inner model program.


