
* 0455285
* Descriptive Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 05/01/2005,02/10/2009
* Alexander Kechris,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2010
* USD 336,520.00

The general aim of this project is the development of the theory of definable
actions of Polish groups, the structure and classification of their orbit
spaces, and the closely related study of definable equivalence relations. This
work is motivated by basic foundational questions, like understanding the nature
of complete classification of mathematical objects, up to some notion of
equivalence, by invariants, and creating a mathematical framework for measuring
the complexity of such classification problems. This theory is developed within
the context of descriptive set theory, which provides the basic underlying
concepts and methods. On the other hand, in view of its broad scope, it has
natural interactions with many other areas of mathematics, such as model theory,
recursion theory, the theory of topological groups and their representations,
topological dynamics, ergodic theory, operator algebras, and combinatorics.
Within this general program it is proposed to study: (i) problems arising in the
theory of countable Borel equivalence relations, particularly concerning
hyperfiniteness and treeability, including descriptive aspects of free actions
of free groups; (ii) newly developed connections between the topological
dynamics of automorphism groups of countable structures and finite Ramsey theory
as well as a related semigroup framework for such connections with infinite
Ramsey theory; (iii) the concepts of genericity and ample genericity in Polish
groups and their relation to other structural properties of groups such as the
small index property, uncountable cofinality, the Bergman finite generation
property, fixed point properties for actions on trees and automatic continuity;
(iv) complexity of classification problems concerning the isometric or
topological classification of various kinds of metric, topological or Banach
spaces.



A fundamental question that arises in many fields of mathematics is that of
classifying a given collection of objects under study. This amounts to providing
a "catalog" or "listing" of these objects, in principle not unlike that of
cataloging species in biology or stars and galaxies in astronomy. If such a
classification is possible, one has a "complete" understanding of the
mathematical structures involved. Otherwise a more or less "chaotic" behavior is
expected. It is thus very important to understand under what circumstances a
classification is possible. This difficult foundational question is further
complicated by the fact that what constitutes an acceptable classification is
very much dependent on the particular field of mathematics studied, so the
criteria for a "good" classification in one area might not be appropriate in
another. At its basic level, this project aims to develop a general quantitative
theory, which in many situations can precisely measure the complexity of a
classification problem and thus provide objective means by which one can decide,
in any given field, whether a satisfactory classification of the objects in
question is possible. This is achieved by associating with each collection of
objects to be classified an appropriate concept of "magnitude" or "size", which
in a precise sense measures the difficulty of its classification problem. This
new theory of "magnitude" as well as problems in different directions that arise
in the course of the development of this theory are investigated in this
project.




