
* 0500799
* Inner Models, Fine Structure and Large Cardinals
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2005,05/15/2007
* Martin Zeman,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 154,569.00

My project focuses on studying connections between inner models of set theory
and large cardinals on the one side, and infinitary combinatorics and
descriptive set theory on the other side. It consists of four parts that are
connected through methods of research. The first part is devoted to the analysis
of the internal structure and combinatorial properties of extender models, an
area of research launched by Jensen in the late 60's; the emphasis here is on
extending the methods recently developed by Schimmerling and Zeman, and creating
a "catalogue" of such methods with broad applicability. The second area focuses
on optimal forcing constructions in infinite combinatorics. A typical question
in this category is obtaining the exact consistency strength for the failure of
Jensen's principle "square" at a singular cardinal. Although the emphasis here
is on developing new forcing methods, inner model theory (even at its current
state of development) provides large cardinal axioms that are likely candidates
for the consistency strengths in question. The third area comprises applications
of inner models in establishing lower bounds for consistency strengths at large
cardinal levels below one Woodin cardinal, as well as applications in
descriptive set theory related to correctness of canonical inner models and
inner model theoretic characterizations of descriptive set theoretic objects.
The last area focuses on the theory of inner models; the main objective here is
to make a progress on extender models matching higher levels of the large
cardinal hierarchy, as well as exploring possibilities for constructions of the
core model below one Woodin cardinal with no background large cardinal
assumption on the set-theoretic universe.

Set theory can be viewed as a mathematical theory that formalizes the methods
currently accepted as valid working methods in mathematics. It is based on the
so-called Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms that describe basic mathematical
constructions. The developments in mathematics in the twentieth century brought
the entire subject to a new stage: It turns out that there are more and more
natural questions answers of which are sensitive to the background axioms, that
is to the axioms of set theory. Such questions arise even in classical
disciplines like algebra or analysis. They cannot be decided from Zermelo-
Fraenkel axioms alone. In order to decide such questions, it is necessary to
augment the axiomatic system by additional axioms; such axioms are usually
formulated in the language of infinitary combinatorics. This has to be done in a
manner that will not introduce an inconsistency of the augmented axiomatic
system. In some cases, the consistency of the augmented system (relative to the
Zermelo-Fraenkel system) can be proved using methods formalizable in the
Zermelo-Fraenkel system itself. However, there is an entire hierarchy of axioms,
the so-called large cardinal axioms, which do not allow this. It is believed
that every mathematical statement that is not decidable from the Zermelo-
Fraenkel axioms alone -- or at least the consistency of such a statement -- can
be decided using the right large cardinal axiom. The mathematical praxis
provides a lot of support for this belief. Thus, the large cardinal hierarchy
constitutes a kind of a "scale" that "measures" the complexity of mathematical
statements, and each such statement has an exact match on this scale. The large
cardinal axiom, that together with Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms provides the very
piece of information necessary and sufficient to decide the (consistency of) the
statement, is called the consistency strength of the statement. Expressed
informally: By determining the consistency strengths, set theory is able to
isolate the precise amount of information that that has to be used along with
the standard mathematical methods in order to decide certain mathematical
questions. Inner model theory, forcing, descriptive set theory, and infinitary
combinatorics constitute crucial tools for this task.


