
* 0500841
* Research in Model Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2005,07/01/2010
* John Baldwin,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 226,987.00

Baldwin proposes work on three topics in model theory: abstract elementary
classes, generic expansions of fields, and the preservation of stability under
expansion by naming predicates. The last two are in some sense dual. The twenty
year old search for a bad-field tries to construct a sufficiently generic
subgroup of the complex numbers that omega stability is preserved. Both refined
model theoretic and algebraic tools are essential. In the other direction
Baldwin is exploring with Baizhanov, the most general conditions under which can
hope to preserve stability when a subset is named. Baldwin has been writing a
monograph summarizing the current state of `Morley's theorem' for Abstract
Elementary Classes. This monograph, tries to clarify and organize the general
work in this topic, underline the connections with both Zilber's work on complex
geometry and the `Hrushovski construction, and lay the foundation for a more
general stability theory in this context.

The general perspective of logic in understanding the foundations of various
mathematical topics has provided in Baldwin's work links among fields as diverse
as database theory (computer science), random graphs, abstract algebra and
complex analysis. In many cases the role of logic is place limits on what can be
proved and direct research into more productive endeavors. Baldwin has served as
a link between the logic and mathematics education communities for the last
fifteen years. He is currently director of the Office of Mathematics Education
at UIC. He aims to provide future teachers with a profound understanding of
fundamental secondary school mathematics. A teacher with profound understanding
of school mathematics is not only aware of the conceptual structure of secondary
mathematics, but also understands the common strategies that students use to
solve problems along with common student misconceptions. A background in logic
is invaluable in helping future teachers develop the ability to communicate
mathematics clearly.
