
* 0501035
* Graduate Student Support for Summer School in Topos Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 05/15/2005,02/01/2005
* Steven Awodey,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2006
* USD 5,414.00

Awodey is requesting funding to send two Ph.D. students in Pure and Applied
Logic at Carnegie Mellon University to a week-long summer school in topos
theory. The school will be held in Belgium, and is partially sponsored by the
Department of Mathematics of the University of Louvain-la-Neuve. In addition to
the PI, several distinguished researchers are participating as instructors. The
primary aim of the meeting is to provide students with an opportunity to acquire
advanced training in topos theory. Topics to be covered include: general sheaf
theory, classifying toposes, descent theory and groupoid representations,
homotopy and cohomology of toposes, algebraic set theory, and realizability. The
students have successfully completed M.S. studies in Carnegie Mellon's Logic and
Computation program and are now doctoral students in Carnegie Mellon's PhD
program in Pure and Applied Logic. They are judged to be promising logicians of
outstanding ability, in a field that is under-represented in U.S. logic.

Topos theory occupies a unique position in mathematics, connecting logic,
topology, and algebraic geometry. The notion of a topos originated in the
Grothendieck school of algebraic geometry as a generalized notion of "space",
but in logic it also subsumes Boolean-valued models, Cohen forcing, and Kripke
semantics, as well as topological and sheaf models. It is also related to the
logical notion of a deductive system of higher-order logic or type theory. The
broader impacts of the proposed project include not only promoting graduate
education, but also enhancing infrastructure for research and education through
international partnerships; and the broad dissemination of results, enhancing
scientific and technological understanding.


