
* 0501114
* RUI: Incompleteness of the Third Kind in Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2005,03/05/2009
* Maurice Stanley,CA,San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2009
* USD 108,180.00

The PI proposes to continue work on several problems in set theory, using the
methods of set and class forcing, infinite combinatorics, infinitary logic, and
fine structure. Previous work has shown that certain combinatorial
characterization problems do not have first-order solutions. For example, in
general there is no first-order definition of the set of subsets of omega-2
that, in some omega-1 and omega-2 preserving outer model, have a closed
unbounded subset. Other examples regarding subsets of other cardinals, branches
through trees of certain sorts, and large homogeneous subsets for certain
partitions are known. One line of work concerns settling some further cases.
Another line of work concerns a more fundamental question. Can this phenomenon
can be mitigated by working relative to some reasonable extension of ZFC, for
example, one that is consistent with all large cardinal axioms. The logically
most simple case of incompleteness of the third kind lies (necessarily) just
beyond the scope of Woodin's celebrated generic absoluteness theorem: Assume CH.
Consider Sigma-2-1 sentences of analysis with sets of reals as parameters. In
general the set of such sentences that are satisfiable in some outer model
having the same reals is not first-order definable. Does there exist an
extension of ZFC that is consistent with all large cardinal axioms and relative
to which this set is (lightface) Delta-2-2 definable? Finally, the PI is
interested in several questions regarding class forcing.

The proposed work centers on incompleteness of a "third kind" in set theory.
Incompleteness in set theory is important because all mathematics can be
formalized in set theory. Propositions that are neither provable nor refutable
from the axioms of set theory cannot be settled mathematically, at least in our
current understanding. Goedel's famous Incompleteness Theorems show that such
propositions exist. Sentences demonstrating this first kind of incompleteness
formalize metamathematical statements. For example, the formalization of "ZFC is
consistent" is neither provable nor refutable from the axioms of set theory
(ZFC), provided those axioms are, in fact, consistent. Even though "ZFC is
consistent" is not provable from ZFC, there is an obvious reason to favor it
over its negation---studying mathematics within ZFC presupposes that ZFC is
consistent. Incompleteness results proved using Cohen's method of (set) forcing
represent a second kind of incompleteness. Typically, given a "standard" model
of ZFC, one constructs an outer model in which a given statement is true and one
in which it is false. In the case of this second kind of incompleteness, there
is often no reason to favor a statement or its negation. Deep work by Woodin,
Steel, Martin, Foreman, and a number of others has suggested reasons to favor
certain statements up through a certain level of logical complexity. Just beyond
this level of logical complexity lies incompleteness of a third kind. Here it is
not possible even to say which statements are satisfiable in some outer model.
"Characterization problems" are the combinatorial form of this phenomenon. Past
work of the PI has highlighted that, in general, it is not possible to
characterize in set theory the "satiable objects" of certain sorts. Precise
statements are technical, but an analogy gives the general idea. In this
analogy, the "objects" correspond to equations. An object is "sated" if the
corresponding equation is solvable. An object is "satiable" if the corresponding
equation is potentially solvable, that is, either solvable or solvable in some
larger number system. In elementary mathematics, there is no reason to
distinguish solvable and potentially solvable equations because typically there
exist maximal number systems in which every potentially solvable equation of a
particular sort is actually solvable. Such "maximal standard models" do not
exist in set theory. The analog of an anticharacterization result in set theory
would be a type of equation for which there cannot be a good criterion for
potential solvability. Anticharacterization is troubling for two reasons. First,
in mathematics one expects that anything that is true is true for a good reason
---so there ought to be a criterion for insatiability. Secondly, in their
strongest form, these anticharacterization results hold only if the universe
fails to be "sufficiently non-minimal". To some extent this threatens the well
established thesis that all of mathematics is formalizable in first-order set
theory, because non-minimality cannot be expressed in this language. The PI
seeks to explore three aspects of anticharacterization. First, he seeks to
determine whether some specific cases of characterization problems are solvable.
Secondly, he seeks to discover whether adding auxiliary axioms to the usual
axioms of set theory might allow satiable objects to be characterized. This
could be construed as evidence in favor of these axioms. Finally, he seeks to
continue work on abstract class forcing with an eye towards understanding
general outer models, at least in the presence of conditions that render models
highly non-minimal.
