
* 0502499
* Computability Theory and Algebraic Structures
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2005,04/21/2005
* Valentina Harizanov,DC,George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 19,435.00

The principal investigator and her students and collaborators use computability
theoretic methods to investigate various algorithmic phenomena on countable
mathematical structures. The project aims to better understand how algebraic
properties of structures interact with the algorithmic ones. Topics of
investigation include: complexity of structures and their isomorphic copies,
complexity of additional relations on their domains, complexity and structure of
partial and total isomorphisms, and the correspondence between computability and
definability. The complexity is often expressed by computable infinitary
formulae, and measured by Turing degrees or by other computability theoretic
degrees. Since these degrees are not invariant under isomorphisms, we
investigate their spectrum, which consists of all degrees in the isomorphism
type of a structure. An important goal is to relate the degree spectra of
relations to the degree spectra of structures by studying the so-called
spectrally universal structures. The project involves investigations in general
model theoretic setting, such as algorithmic versions of categoricity, but also
more concrete well-known classes of algebraic structures, such as commutative
groups, non-commutative groups, rings, fields, vector spaces. Another goal of
the project is to integrate computable algebra with algorithmic learning theory
in Putnam-Gold's framework of inductive inference machines, which has so far
been developed mainly for computably enumerable sets. This study is also
important in the philosophy of inductive reasoning.

In the 1930's, Turing, Goedel, Kleene and others developed the mathematical
theory of computability. Their results paved the way for the invention of modern
computers. Model theory, which emerged as a distinct field in the 1940's through
the works of Skolem, Goedel, Tarski, Malcev and others, provides a rigorous
framework for the notions of language, meaning and truth. A model, a concept
used in all of sciences, describes a portion of reality by using a formal
language to express properties under study. Interaction of computability theory
with model theory, as well as other areas of mathematics, has resulted in
computable model theory and, more generally, in computable mathematics. Goedel's
incompleteness theorem is a striking early result in computable model theory.
While some mathematical constructions are algorithmic, or can be replaced by
algorithmic ones yielding the same results, others are intrinsically non-
algorithmic. Problems that can be solved algorithmically are called decidable.
Examples of negative results in computable mathematics include the
undecidability of the Hilbert's tenth problem, and the undecidability of the
word problem in combinatorial group theory. Undecidable problems can be more
precisely classified by considering generalized algorithms, which require
external knowledge. Turing degrees, which play a significant role in this
project, provide an important measure of the level of such knowledge needed. An
important goal of the project is to use Turing degrees to investigate structures
of importance in other areas of mathematics.
