
* 0513494
* Model Theory, Algebra and Geometry
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/20/2004,05/21/2007
* Matthias Aschenbrenner,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2008
* USD 77,457.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0303618 Principal Investigator: Thomas W. Scanlon

The research supported by this award is to be performed by Matthias
Aschenbrenner, under the sponsorship of Thomas W. Scanlon. These projects in
model theory and its applications to algebra and geometry are concerned with
asymptotic differential algebra, o-minimal geometry, and bounds and algorithms
in algebra. The project on asymptotic differential algebra will pursue model-
theoretic and algebraic properties of Hardy fields and transseries, and the
relationship between them. A Hardy field is an ordered differential field of
germs of real-valued, once-differentiable functions defined on neighborhoods of
positive infinity in the real line; they are important in the asymptotic theory
of differential equations and appear naturally in connection with o-minimal
expansions of the real field. An example of a field of transseries is the field
of logarithmic-exponential series over the real numbers, which has been explored
by analysts as well as model-theorists. Among the algorithmic issues in algebra
that will be investigated are algorithms with performance bounds for polynomial
rings over the integers and for rings of power series; problems for which good
algorithms are sought include tests for ideal membership.

The idea of the branch of logic called model theory is, roughly, that if we know
all of the simply-stated truths about an object then either we should know how
to recognize that object uniquely, or anything else sharing the same collection
of first-order properties should be revealing like the original and might
sometimes be easier to study. To be more precise, model theory studies
mathematical structures by considering the first-order sentences true in those
structures, and the family of alternate structures that also satisfy all of
those first-order sentences. (Sentences in logic are built out of a small
repertoire of elements and constructions. "First-order" refers to the number of
quantifiers in a sentence, a measure of complexity.) A model for the algorithms
and bounds sought in some of these projects is long division: if you are given
two whole numbers to divide by hand then you can estimate the number of steps
required by long division by comparing the number of digits in the decimal
expansions of the dividend and divisor.
