
* 0516576
* Two Conferences in Logic at Notre Dame
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 04/01/2005,03/22/2005
* Steven Buechler,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2006
* USD 22,200.00

The Notre Dame logic group will invigorate broad discussions among faculty and
students across logic through a conference and a short summer school course.
During a week-long Conference on Vaught's Conjecture and Classification of
Countable Structures in May of 2005, model theorists, computability theorists
and descriptive set theorists will share their different perspectives on this
long-intractable problem and the research it has spawned. A June, 2005, two-week
Short Course in Proof Theory, aimed at graduate students in mathematical logic,
computer science and philosophy, will fill a gap in the educational experience
of students in the U.S.\ and promote interdisciplinary interaction.

The course in proof theory is deliberately designed to foster interaction
between graduate students in mathematics, computer science and philosophy. The
venue will broaden the student's perspective on their scholarly pursuits and
career options.

Vaught's conjecture has been studied from the perspectives of different
disciplines for decades. The purpose of the conference is to share these
different perspectives with a focus on the problem rather than the tools. The
interdisciplinary nature of Conference on Vaught's Conjecture and Classification
of Countable Structures will have the added benefit of making the talks more
accessible to graduate students at all levels.
