
* 0554855
* Logic and Computability
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2006,03/18/2008
* Richard Shore,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2010
* USD 210,000.00

The research proposed centers on investigations of the structures of sets and
functions ordered by relative complexity of computation. Particular emphasis
will be placed on issues of definability and automorphisms. Also included in
this area is the analysis of the relations between the difficulty of computing
functions and other issues such as rates of growth, complexity of their
definitions in arithmetic and the strength of axiom systems needed to prove
their existence (reverse mathematics). The emphasis in reverse mathematics will
be on analyzing basic combinatorial principles that seem to lie outside the
scope of the standard theories studied. Applications of the methods of pure
computability theory will be made in the areas of model theory and notions used
in differential geometry. The emphasis in computable model theory will be on the
ways in which choosing different representations of a given structure affect the
computational complexity of various relations or procedures on the elements of
the structure. Issues in automata theory and especially automatic structures
that deal with computable complexity will also be addressed.



The proposed project includes research into a broad range of topics in
computability theory (recursion theory) and logic both theoretical and applied
to other areas of mathematics and computer science. At the foundational level,
this work illuminates the nature of relative complexity of computation, the
strength of axioms needed to prove standard mathematical theorems and the
relations between these areas. In practical terms, results in this area
(computable mathematics and model theory as well as reverse mathematics) at
times indicate that there are no algorithms for certain important tasks or that
more information than might have been expected is needed to write programs
calculating the desired results. The work related to automata theory and
automatic structures is based on a very limited model of computation that is
often relevant to practical computing problems. The theoretical and foundational
analysis of structures whose basic relations and functions are computable by
such automata should also eventually be of practical significance.


