
* 0556223
* Large Cardinals
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 04/15/2006,04/06/2010
* Itay Neeman,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 377,236.00

The PI is investigating the theory of large cardinals, and their applications to
determinacy, with emphasis on the following topics: (1) long games and
iterability; (2) forcing with ultrafilters over models of determinacy; and (3)
monadic theories of ordinals. 1 -- Previous work by the PI identified a specific
class of games of uncountable length, so that the associated game quantifier is
precisely strong enough to define the minimal iterable inner model with an
external measure concentrating on Woodin cardinals. This is the least level in
the large cardinal hierarchy which cannot be captured by games of countable
length. The present project aims to extend and study this connection between
levels of the large cardinal hierarchy and games of uncountable length. 2 --
Using inner models for large cardinals it is possible to identify ultrafilters
on specific sets of countable sequences in the smallest model of set theory
containing all the reals. These ultrafilters give rise to interesting forcing
extensions of the model. The PI is investigating the constructions of
ultrafilters from large cardinals with the aim of generalizing them to the case
of uncountable sequences, and studying the resulting forcing extensions. 3 ---
The PI is studying the expressive power of the monadic second order language in
the structure of the ordinals, both under the axiom of choice (for ordinals
above the second uncountable cardinal) and under the axiom of determinacy.

Large cardinal axioms state the existence of functions which act on the entire
universe of sets, and preserve the structure of set membership. It is one of the
most amazing discoveries of modern set theory that these functions, which at
face value should only affect extremely large sets (large enough to not be
definable from smaller sets using the structure of set membership), concretely
affect the properties of real numbers. The intermediary connecting large
cardinals to real numbers is the axiom of determinacy, stating the existence of
winning strategies in infinite games of perfect information. The present project
is part of the study of the ties between large cardinals and determinacy. It
addresses games of uncountable infinite length, two-valued measures on sequences
of uncountable length under the axiom of determinacy, and the expressive power
of statements involving sets, but not functions, over wellordered structures.
