
* 0556013
* Banach Spaces: Theory and Application
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2006,01/11/2008
* Thomas Schlumprecht,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2010
* USD 109,615.00

The author will work on problems in Frame Theory and on several fundamental
questions in Geometrical Functional Analysis. Frames represent a theoretical
underpinning of Signal processing. In the context of A/D conversion it is
crucial to quantize signals, or, abstractly speaking, the coefficients in a
frame-expansion. Using infinite dimensional Banach space theory the author
intends to formulate and prove results which provide the theoretical background
for such quantizations. He will build on results already proven for basis-
expansions. The author intends also to continue his research on the following
fundamental questions of Geometrical Functional Analysis: Does there exist a
bounded linear operator on any infinite dimensional Banach space which is not a
compact perturbation of a multiple of the identity? The principal investigator
proposes to explore several interesting variations on this theme, each with a
distinctly structure-theoretical flavor. Secondly, the author proposes to work
on several structure theoretical questions in Banach spaces, which concern their
co-ordinate systems. These problems can be summarized under the following
general question: Given a separable Banach space, how close can we find an other
space containing the first one which has a finite dimensional decomposition (or
even a basis)?


