
* 0600940
* Logic, Group theory, Combinatorics and Ergodic theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2006,04/13/2010
* Gregory Cherlin,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2012
* USD 710,690.00

Groups of finite Morley rank arise in model theory as a substantial
generalization of the class of algebraic groups. It has been conjectured that
the simple groups in this category are all algebraic, and Cherlin is working on
this conjecture with a team of international collaborators. This involves
techniques used in the classification of the finite simple groups as well as
some ideas from black box group theory. In graph theory, using a mix of model
theoretic and combinatorial techniques, Cherlin and Shelah are developing
techniques to determine, for a given finite set of forbidden graphs, whether
there is a universal graph meeting the constraints. The ultimate question here
is whether the entire problem is algorithmically decidable. Thomas works on the
theory of countable Borel equivalence relations, combining the methods of
descriptive set theory with techniques related to superrigidity. The methods of
descriptive set theory cast considerable light on classical classification
problems, and conversely powerful methods coming from group theory illuminate
and advance the general theory. Cherlin and Thomas also host a dynamic visitor
program at Rutgers, coordinated with annual visits by Shelah.

Infinite group theory provides a tool for studying and exploiting the symmetries
of a mathematical model or a physical system. Cherlin and his collaborators are
aiming at the classification of the groups associated with well-behaved
algebraic systems, while Simon Thomas approaches the study of infinite groups
from the point of view of their actions and the analysis of one action in terms
of another. A particularly strong role is played here by ideas coming from the
theory of dynamical systems. Graphs are the mathematical abstraction of networks
in general, and the problems under consideration relate to the analysis,
preferably by a general (computable) algorithm, of classes of graphs
characterized by forbidding a fixed set of patterns.
