
* 0601021
* Randomness and Computability
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/15/2006,07/14/2006
* Joseph Miller,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2009
* USD 104,080.00

The two most fundamental notions in effective randomness are Kolmogorov
complexity and Martin-Lof randomness. The first measures the information content
of finite binary strings, while the second captures the intuition that a random
infinite binary sequence has no "distinguishing features". Both notions are
rooted in computability theory, so it is not surprising that the study of
randomness draws methods and ideas from computability theory, as well as core
mathematical subjects like measure theory and information theory. However, the
theory of effective randomness has proved to be a rich field of study in its own
right. Miller proposes to study the strength of non-monotonic betting
strategies, the computable power of sequences with positive effective Hausdorff
dimension, degrees of randomness, and K-triviality.

A sequence of zeros and ones is considered random if the shortest (binary)
computer program that generates the sequence has essentially the same length as
the sequence itself. Intuitively, a random sequence has no patterns that can be
exploited to give a compressed description. For example, the sequence consisting
of a million zeros can be generated easily by a short program, so it is not
random. On the other hand, there is a high probability that a sequence generated
by flipping a coin a million times (tails is zero, heads is one) will be random.
The length of the shortest program for a sequence is called the Kolmogorov
complexity of the sequence; this notion was introduced in the 1960s. An infinite
sequence is considered random if all of its finite initial segments are
sufficiently random. This is equivalent to saying that no (semi-)computable
betting strategy can win money trying to predict the digits of the sequence. The
proposed research will address fundamental questions about randomness,
including: (1) How powerful are computable betting strategies that are allowed
to bet on the digits of a sequence in any order; (2) Is it possible to distill
information out of a semi-random source to produce a random sequence or, at
least, a sequence that has higher information density; (3) What does it mean to
say that one infinite sequence is more random that another (4) How
computationally weak are the infinite?


