
* 0612720
* Model theory of modules
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 12/19/2005,05/29/2008
* Philipp Rothmaler,NY,CUNY Bronx Community College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 70,768.00

The investigators intend to apply model-theoretic methods to three areas of
module theory. The first is the decomposition theory of projective modules and
pure-projective modules, where realizing and omitting finitely generated
positive primitive types one can obtain and classify interesting new examples of
projective and pure-projective modules. In the second area, of cotorsion
theories, the investigators intend to establish and apply the interplay with the
Ziegler spectrum in order to describe the flat cover and the realm of cotorsion
modules that are not pure-injective. The third part is about calculation of
Ziegler spectra of string algebras as a contribution to representation-theoretic
classification and to decidability theory and about the related issue of super-
decomposable pure-injectives. As a fourth, more general model-theoretic topic of
study, the investigators propose to apply classical model-theoretic
constructions to pairs of structures endowed with an epimorphism in order to
obtain existence results in `dual' or `projective' model theory (dual in the
sense that monomorphisms are replaced by epimorphisms).



The model-theoretic study of mathematical structures is unique in that one
restricts to a certain formal language, similar to a computer language. The loss
of richness of expression allows for a gain on the side of the structures under
investigation: more structures come into play, because the language cannot
distinguish between them. (To persue the analogy with computers: a computer may
not be able to distinguish between an infinite object and a large finite chunk
of it.) The advantage of this approach is that one discovers new structures
(models of the formal statements describing the initial structure) that may be
very similar to the original structure at hand when the statements mentioned are
chosen as to force them to be. It has found striking applications in various
parts of mathematics over the last decades.
