
* 0650927
* Definability and Decidability over Algebraic Extensions of Product Formula Fields
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2007,05/07/2007
* Alexandra Shlapentokh,NC,East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2011
* USD 116,108.00

The main goal of this project is to increase our understanding of what is
definable and decidable in the language of rings. The interest in the questions
of polynomial definability and decidability dates back to the time of the
solution of Hilbert's Tenth Problem (HTP). At the beginning of the XX century a
famous German mathematician David Hilbert asked the following question (among
others): is there an algorithm that can determine whether an arbitrary
polynomial equation in several variables and with integer coefficients has
integer solutions? In the early 1970's, Yurii Matiyasevich, building on the work
by Martin Davis, Hilary Putnam and Julia Robinson showed that the sets of
integers which can be defined using polynomial equations and the sets of
integers that can be listed by a computer program were the same, and thus showed
that an algorithm sought by Hilbert did not exist. Matiyasevich's result
immediately raised another question which proved to be even more vexing: is
there an algorithm as described above but for the solutions in rational numbers?
This problem is unsolved to this day. As is often the case with difficult
problems in Mathematics, HTP for rational numbers as well as its sister problem,
HTP for the rings of integers of number fields, generated many new questions
such as Mazur's conjectures and various conjectures for elliptic curves. Many of
these questions turned out to be questions of Number Theory or Algebraic
Geometry, but they in turn generated quite interesting consequences in Logic.
The author of this proposal believes that this line of research will continue to
reveal new areas of interaction between Number Theory, Algebraic Geometry and
Logic, enriching all the fields involved.

The language of rings or the language of polynomial equations is widely used in
almost all branches of Mathematics, sciences and social sciences, and therefore
understanding what can be expressed by this language and whether we can
determine algorithmically which sentences in this language are true is of
importance to many areas of Mathematics and beyond.


