
* 0653696
* Logic, Sets, Categories, and Applications
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2007,06/19/2009
* Andreas Blass,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 365,145.00

The proposer continues his research on applications of set-theoretic methods to
abelian group theory, with particular emphasis on products of infinite cyclic
groups and related groups. In addition to applying set-theoretic ideas to this
branch of algebra, he is looking for new set-theoretic concepts and results
motivated by algebraic problems. He is exploring the connection between
universal algebra (in Lawvere's category-theoretic formulation), the theory of
classifying topoi, and the theory of unification (which plays a prominent role
in some areas of computer science). The connection is already understood in the
case of absolutely free algebras, but further exploration is needed in the more
general case of algebras subject to nontrivial identities. Unification in the
presence of identities is in general a troublesome topic, and it is hoped that
the connection with other, better understood areas can clarify it. The proposer
is also studying a topos-theoretic approach to extending the notion of Borel
functions to higher types. Such an extension is useful for the theory of
cardinal characteristics of the continuum. Borel functions at the base type
(real numbers) already play a major role in this theory, but so does an
operation of sequential composition that necessarily leads to higher types. The
proposer is also studying several questions at the border between constructive
logic, category theory, and game semantics. This research includes an attempt to
amplify the connection between games and free (or co-free) bicomplete
categories, axiomatization of game-semantical validity, and a game-theoretic
principle that may be fruitfully added to intuitionistic logic. Finally, the
proposer is studying several questions in set theory, most of which are
connected with ultrafilters and in particular with the equivalence relation of
near coherence on ultrafilters. There are also some questions in infinite
combinatorics growing out of considerations in abelian group theory. The project
builds on the proposer's past experience in several areas of mathematics --- set
theory, category theory (especially topos theory), abelian group theory, game
semantics, constructive mathematics, and computer science --- in order to
address problems bridging these areas. Almost all of the topics in the proposal
connect two or more of these areas. In each case, it is reasonable to expect
that ideas and styles of reasoning from one area can benefit other areas. Among
the potential outcomes of this research are: (1) a better understanding of
unification, which is an essential ingredient of logic programming, (2) a
clearer view of constructive mathematical reasoning as based on strategies in
certain sorts of debates, and (3) applications of a context that resembles
traditional set theory in many ways yet avoids the phenomena sometimes regarded
as pathological.
