
* 0700533
* Proof complexity, computation, and algorithms
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2007,06/17/2009
* Samuel Buss,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 250,000.00

This project supports research by Buss and his graduate students on
computational complexity, proof complexity, algorithms, and numerical methods.
Buss investigates proof theory and proof complexity, especially aspects that are
closely connected to open problems in computational complexity including the P
versus NP problem. The relevant proof systems include bounded arithmetics, which
are first-order theories tailored to have logical strength related to feasible
computability, and propositional proof systems, which have rich connections to
bounded arithmetic and circuit complexity. Buss will work to establish lower
bounds on proof complexity based on complexity assumptions such as the existence
of provably secure cryptographic systems. He will work to prove new independence
results and separation results for weak proof systems. He will investigate what
kinds of computational content can be extracted from proofs. Buss will
investigate the proof complexity of propositional systems such as Frege systems,
cutting planes systems, Nullstellensatz proof systems, counting axioms, the
polynomial calculus, and intuitionistic proof systems. Buss also works on
numerical and geometric algorithms arising from computer graphics. He will work
on simulation methods for rigid multibodies using higher-order approximation
methods over manifolds, on symplectic algorithms and other energy-conserving
algorithms for physical simulations, and on collision response algorithms.

The project supports research by Buss and his students on problems that le at
the interface between mathematics and computer science, as motivated by open
questions concerning the fundamental limits of computation. These open questions
include the P versus NP problem, the mathematical feasibility of secure
cryptographic coding, and the optimality of particular algorithms and circuits
for solving combinatorial problems. Busss addresses these questions by
investigating computational complexity and proof complexity. The project studies
questions about the tradeoffs between the strength of a formal proof system and
the size of optimal proofs. Good bounds on proof complexity are closely related
to upper and lower bounds on the hardness of computation, as well as to the
mathematical underpinnings of cryptography. The project also supports Buss's
work on algorithms for simulation of dynamical systems
