
* 0704256
* Computability Theory and Algebraic Structures
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2007,04/27/2007
* Valentina Harizanov,DC,George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2010
* USD 51,413.00

Harizanov integrates the ideas and methods from computability theory, model
theory, algebra, and topology to investigate algorithmic phenomena on algebraic
structures. She aims to better understand how algorithmic properties interact
with algebraic and topological ones. Harizanov focuses on the complexity of
countable models, their submodels and relations, and transformations of
structures. She studies model-theoretic complexity of computable structures
measured by their Scott rank. Harizanov investigates intrinsic complexity of
relations on structures, captured both syntactically and by their Turing or
strong degree spectra. She relates degree spectra of structures to the degree
spectra of relations via spectrally universal structures, which are often
obtained as Fraisse limits. Harizanov investigates the spaces of left orders and
bi-orders on magmas, semigroups, and groups of importance in low-dimensional
topology and algebra. She connects their topological properties with
computability-theoretic ones. Harizanov also studies algorithmic complexity of
isomorphisms. This includes effective categoricity of specific and general
computable structures. It also includes the study of partial and total
automorphisms. One direction is to develop the theory of automorphism degree
spectra of computable structures. The other direction is to investigate various
semigroups of partial automorphisms and how the structures can be recovered from
these semigroups.



Invented in the 1930's, computability theory paved the way for the creation of
the modern programmable computer. The main thrust of the field is to understand
the limitations on algorithmic computation, without regard for the physical
implementation. Interaction of computability theory with model theory and
universal algebra, as well as other areas of mathematics, has resulted in
computable model theory and, more generally, in computable mathematics, a very
active research area in the last few decades. Harizanov's proposed research
includes a broad range of topics in computable mathematics. She investigates
when some mathematical constructions are algorithmic, or can be replaced by
algorithmic ones yielding the same results, and when they are fundamentally
nonalgorithmic. Undecidable sets, as well as problems these sets encode, can be
more precisely classified by considering algorithms with oracles, which require
external knowledge. Turing and other computability-theoretic degrees, which play
a significant role in Harizanov's project, provide an important measure of the
level of such knowledge needed. Harizanov combines degree-theoretic and other
unique methods from computability theory with algebraic, combinatorial and
topological methods to study and explain phenomena of importance in other areas
of mathematics.


