
* 0800198
* Topics in Computability Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2008,04/16/2010
* Peter Cholak,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 123,885.00

Cholak will study a range of topics in computability theory. All of the Cholak's
projects are motivated by the goal of understanding the relationship between
computability and definability. For example, Cholak studies automorphisms of the
computably enumerable sets. Take two computably enumerable sets A and B; if they
are in the same orbit then A and B satisfy the same infinitary formulas.
Conversely, if A and B satisfy the same infinitary formulas then A and B are in
the same orbit. One of the structures that Cholak will continue to explore is
the collection of all computably enumerable sets with the inclusion relation. In
addition, Cholak will study what is definable in the collection of all effective
closed classes of reals under inclusion and also under Medvedev reducibility
which is defined via Turing reducibility. Cholak is also in engaged in other
projects involving reverse mathematics and various models of second-order
arithmetic, computable structure theory, and effective measure theory and
randomness.

Cholak works in the area of mathematical logic called computability theory. The
central theme in computability theory is the relationship between Turing
machines and definability. Informally, a Turing machine is a computer with
unlimited time and memory. We say a natural number x is accepted by a Turing
machine if the Turing machine halts with input x. We say a subset A of the
natural numbers is computably enumerable iff there is a Turing machine that
accepts x iff x is in A. A set R is computable iff A and its complement are
computably enumerable. For Cholak, definability or expressibility means
formulas, mainly in first-order logic, although many times we will have to move
to stronger logics. The classical result of Post in arithmetic relating
computability and definability is that the computably enumerable sets are the
sets that can be defined by a formula of the form "there exists a number x such
that some computable relation hold of x.
