
* 0801256
* Finite and Infinite Model Theory and Applications
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Charles Steinhorn,NY,Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2012
* USD 123,108.00

The project focuses on questions dealing with classes of finite structures, and
variants and extensions of o-minimality. Most of the effort directed toward the
study of finite structures involves asymptotic classes of finite structures,
their infinite analogues (measurable structures), and robust classes of finite
structures. Broadly speaking, this research has as its aim the development of a
model theory for classes of finite structures that is in analogy with mainstream
model theory for infinite structures. Other ongoing work involving finite models
will solve a conjecture on the relative expressive power of two logics, which in
particular will demonstrate that one of these logics cannot capture the
polynomial time computational complexity class. The projected research devoted
to problems about extensions of o-minimality concentrates on the continued
development of a model theory for ordered structures of rank greater than one.
Important foundational results already have been obtained and the proposed
investigations build on these. Some of this work appears to have intriguing
applications to preference and utility theory in mathematical economics, and
possibly to other aspects of economic theory. Another aspect of the research to
be undertaken dealing with extensions of o-minimality concerns questions arising
from previous work on expansions of o-minimal structures whose definable open
sets form an o-minimal reduct of the original structure.

The research outlined above has as its foundation model theory, one of the
principal subfields of mathematical logic. Model theorists study properties of
familiar mathematical structures that can be expressed in a formal mathematical
language such as predicate logic. This distinctive point of view can provide
understanding and insights into such structures that otherwise could not be
easily obtained. One of the two principal aspects of the project deals with
classes of finite structures, that is, classes of mathematical structures whose
domain consists of a finite set. Finite structures in general are central to
computer science: any database can be interpreted as a finite structure in the
sense in which they are studied in here, and a particular class of finite
structures called finite fields are especially important in cryptology. The
second major aspect of this project focuses on structures that include and
behave in significant respects like the ordered field of real numbers, that is,
the real numbers together with the polynomial and algebraic functions that are
studied in calculus and describe a wide range of phenomena in the physical and
life sciences, as well as in the more quantitative social sciences. Research
arising from the model-theoretic point of view has deepened our understanding of
familiar mathematical systems in such diverse areas of the mathematical sciences
as the analysis and geometry of real functions, neural nets, relational database
theory, and estimation theory in statistics. Some of the most intriguing
applications of the proposed research relate to and unify within a single
framework both the neoclassical theory of utility in economics and contingent
valuation theory that has become prominent in environmental economics, for
example. During the period of the award the principal investigator also intends
to continue to direct the Vassar Science Scholars Program, an academic year
science and mathematics outreach program for students from a local high school
with inner city demographics which he initiated and has directed since its
inception.
