
* 0801123
* Extensions of Hilbert's Tenth Problem and Computational Aspects of Arithmetic Geometry
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/15/2008,06/09/2008
* Kirsten Eisentraeger,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2013
* USD 119,412.00

The investigator will work on two projects connected with number theory and
arithmetic geometry. The first project is to study generalizations of Hilbert's
Tenth Problem. The problem in its original form asked for an algorithm to decide
whether an arbitrary multivariable polynomial equation with integer coefficients
has an integer solution. In 1970 Matiyasevich proved that no such algorithm
exists, i.e. Hilbert's Tenth Problem is undecidable. This motivated studying
analogues of this problem by considering equations and solutions in other
commutative rings. The biggest open problem in the area is Hilbert's Tenth
Problem over the rational numbers. The PI has proved the undecidability of
Hilbert's Tenth Problem for various function fields. These generalizations have
used tools from arithmetic geometry, such as the study of rational points on
elliptic curves. One research goal is to extend these results and prove
undecidability of Hilbert's Tenth Problem for the function fields for which the
problem is still unresolved. The biggest open problems are function fields of
one variable over an algebraically closed field. Another goal is to explore
Hilbert's Tenth Problem for various subrings of number fields. The second
project is to study several problems that deal with computational aspects of
curves and their Jacobians. Elliptic curves and, more generally, Jacobians of
curves of small genus have many applications to cryptography, and the second
project focuses on these applications. One goal of the second project is to
explore curves of small genus and work on constructing curves that are suitable
for cryptographic purposes. The PI will also work on applications of pairings to
cryptography.

Both projects involve studying the solutions to multivariable polynomial
equations. Looking for solutions to such equations over the integers or rational
numbers has a long history that goes back to ancient Greece. For the first
project the investigator will study the fundamental question of whether it is
possible to find a procedure that determines whether an arbitrary multivariable
polynomial equation has a solution in a given number system. The second project
focuses on computational aspects of certain special classes of equations that
have applications to cryptography. For these applications one usually looks for
solutions to these equations over finite fields.


