
* 0801313
* RUI: Model Theory of Abstract Elementary Classes
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 05/01/2008,04/08/2008
* Monica VanDieren,PA,Robert Morris University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2013
* USD 111,211.00

This proposal is part of Saharon Shelah's 30 year old program of developing a
classification theory for Abstract Elementary Classes (AECs). The definition of
AECs and the basic theorems were introduced by Shelah in the seventies. An AEC
can be thought of as a semantic generalization of the class of models of a first
order theory and has roots in work of Jonsson in universal algebra. Toward the
end of 2001 activity in and attention to classification theory of Abstract
Elementary Classes grew substantially. The most influential event leading to the
fast-growing interest in non-elementary model theory was Zilber's attempt to
understand Schanuel's conjecture over the complex numbers. Zilber introduced a
natural class of models containing the complex numbers with an exponentiation-
like function that satisfies Schanuel's conjecture. While this class was not
manageable by first order logic, the class is an AEC which is categorical in all
uncountable cardinals and shares properties with Shelah's excellent classes. In
a parallel development, Rami Grossberg and the PI introduced the notion of
tameness and studied Galois-stable AECs under this assumption. A weaker notion
than tameness appeared implicitly in Shelah's work as an internal property of
categorical AECs. Grossberg and VanDieren went on to prove a special case for
tame classes of the main test question in the classification theory for AECs,
namely Shelah's Categoricity Conjecture. The purpose of this investigation is to
expand this program of non-elementary model theory with the effects of improving
the body of knowledge of first order stability theory and developing a natural
framework within which problems outside of logic, for instance in algebraic
geometry, can be interpreted and better understood.

The research proposed is in model theory, a branch of mathematical logic. A
model theorist typically starts with a set of axioms (a theory) and studies the
different interpretations or models of these axioms. The ultimate goal is to
classify the theories to predict the underlying structure of the models. This
involves introducing new machinery such as abstract independence relations which
can then be used to answer problems in other branches of mathematics. Most work
in model theory has been confined to examining sets of axioms which can be
expressed using first-order logic. Since there are many natural theories in
mathematics that do not admit an appropriate treatment in first-order logic, the
application field of the classification theory for first-order logic has limits.
Recent interest in non-first-order (non-elementary) examples from algebraic
geometry and number theory has triggered increased involvement in Shelah's
program of classification theory for non-elementary classes. The proposed
research involves (1) proving an important case of the main test-question in the
classification theory for non-elementary classes (Shelah's Categoricity
Conjecture) and (2) developing a stability theory for the general non-elementary
context of tame AECs, while (3) facilitating under-represented group
participation in mathematics.


