
* 0819590
* Latin American Symposium on Mathematical Logic, Paraty, Brazil, May 11-17, 2008
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, Catalyzing New Intl Collab
* 05/01/2008,07/01/2009
* Jose Iovino,TX,University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2010
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT

The 14th Latin American Mathematical Logic Symposium (SLAM) is to be held in
Paraty, Brazil, May 11-17, 2008. The SLALM was established in 1970 to strengthen
working relations between researchers in the United States and Latin America.
Thanks in no small part to the success of these relations, today, mathematical
logic thrives in Latin America. The region has become a significant source of
graduate students and postdocs to logic programs in the United States and
elsewhere. While the amount of research activity and the number of specialized
conferences that are held in the region continues to grow, the SLALM remains the
largest Pan-American logic conference.

The first SLALM was held in Santiago, Chile, under the leadership of Abraham
Robinson, who at the time was President of the Association for Symbolic Logic.
The meeting included two-week minicourses followed by a week-long conference.
The minicourses were taught by A. Levi (The Hebrew University), R. Sikorski
(Warsaw), and J. R. Schoenfield (Duke). Subsequent SLALM's were held in
Brasilia, Brazil (1972), Campinas, Brazil (1974), Santiago, Chile (1978),
Bogota, Colombia (1981), Caracas, Venezuela (1983), Campinas, Brazil (1985),
Paraiba, Brazil (1989), Bahia Blanca, Argentina (1992), Bogota, Colombia (1995),
Caracas, Venezuela (1998), San Jose, Costa Rica (2004), and Oaxaca, Mexico
(2006).

The meeting is sponsored by the Association for Symbolic Logic. It is expected
that the proceedings of the 14th SLALM will be published by a major scientific
publisher. Proceedings of past symposia have been published by North-Holland (in
the series Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics) and Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
