
* 0943870
* EMSW21-RTG: Research Training Group in Logic and Dynamics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 05/15/2010,01/07/2016
* Su Gao,TX,University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,543,481.00

The Research Training Group in logic and dynamics at the University of North
Texas seeks to integrate faculty research with the training of postdoctoral
associates, graduate students, and undergraduate students in mathematical
sciences. The faculty associates (Gao, Jackson, Mauldin, Urbanski) in this
project represent a unique blend of research interests in the areas of logic and
dynamics, and in particular the exciting interactions between the two fields.
The trainees in this project will be exposed to a wide range of research topics
from descriptive set theory to ergodic theory, and from definable equivalence
relations to infinite iterated function systems. It is expected that they will
be attracted by the underlying connections among these topics, and they will
make further contributions to the fields through their research.

The activities in this project include undergraduate research colloquia,
supervised undergraduate research projects, research seminars, annual mini-
conferences, biannual research workshops, and teaching workshops. By a thorough
mentoring process and other community-building interactions, the participants of
the project will experience a full range of training and will be fully supported
financially, intellectually, and professionally. It is expected that the
activities will produce high-quality research results on all levels. It is also
expected that faculty research productivity will be enhanced because of
interactions and collaborations in the project. The Research Training Group
strives to increase the number of students (both graduate and undergraduate)
pursuing a mathematics degree and career, and in particular to increase the
number and percentage of members of underrepresented groups pursuing advanced
mathematics degrees. The activities and objectives of the project are carefully
designed to address the current challenges and opportunities in the North Texas
region.
