
* 1001847
* Randomness, Dimension and Computability
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 09/01/2010,08/13/2012
* Joseph Miller,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2014
* USD 240,000.00

The two most fundamental notions in effective randomness are Kolmogorov
complexity and Martin-Löf randomness. The first measures the information content
of finite binary strings, while the second captures the intuition that a random
infinite binary sequence has no "distinguishing features". Both notions are
rooted in computability theory, so it is natural that the study of randomness
draws methods and ideas from computability theory, as well as classical
mathematical subjects like measure theory and information theory. On the other
hand, ideas from effective randomness have fed back into computability theory
and even reverse mathematics, so there is cross-fertilization between effective
randomness and other fields. Moreover, the theory of effective randomness has
proved to be a rich field of study in its own right. Miller proposes to study
the interaction between effective dimension and computational power, the
interaction between degrees of randomness and computational power, triviality
and lowness notions, and the strength of non-monotonic betting strategies.

A sequence of zeros and ones is considered random if the shortest (binary)
computer program that generates the sequence has essentially the same length as
the sequence itself. Intuitively, a random sequence has no patterns that can be
exploited to give a compressed description. For example, the sequence consisting
of a million zeros can be generated easily by a short program, so it is not
random. On the other hand, there is a high probability that a sequence generated
by flipping a coin a million times (tails is zero, heads is one) will be random.
The length of the shortest program for a sequence is called the Kolmogorov
complexity of the sequence; this notion was introduced in the 1960s. An infinite
sequence is considered random if all of its finite initial segments are
sufficiently random. This is equivalent to saying that no (semi-)computable
betting strategy can win money trying to predict the digits of the sequence. The
proposed research will address fundamental questions about randomness. Some are
speculative, such as: "What does it mean to say that one sequence is more random
that another?" This question has lead to difficult technical problems. It has
motivated much of Miller's work on the initial segment complexity of Martin-Löf
randoms and has recently led to the formulation of a notion that seems to come
closer to providing a satisfactory answer. On the other hand, technical work
often reveals higher level patterns. For example, there is a growing body of
evidence supporting the assertion: "More random sequences are less useful as
oracles and computationally useless random sequences are automatically more
random." This ties back into the question about what it means to be "more
random". Other basic questions, such as "To what extent can we distill
information out of a semi-random source?" have lead to interesting work but have
not been exhausted on a technical level. Still others, like "How powerful are
betting strategies that are allowed to bet on the digits of a sequence in any
order?" remain largely open, despite concentrated effort. These are all
fundamental questions that have proved to have interesting technical aspects.
