
* 1001306
* Computability Theory, Facing Outwards
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2010,04/15/2010
* Russell Miller,NY,CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2014
* USD 107,198.00

In this project, the PI Russell Miller will continue his work using
computability theory to analyze the difficulty of problems in other areas of
mathematics. These areas include field theory and commutative and differential
algebra; manifolds, both topologically and analytically; uncountable structures
and the possibility of presenting and studying them effectively; and Blum-Shub-
Smale computability and degree theory for the real numbers. In field theory,
Miller has already made substantial progress, both by asking and answering
natural computable-model-theoretic questions about fields, and also by noticing
general questions about fields which can be answered using computability theory.
He has taken the lead in introducing computability techniques to researchers
outside mathematical logic, and has often been able to interest such people in
his questions and his methods. Fields also intersect with his interest in
uncountable structures: indeed, uncountable fields fit very naturally into the
framework of local computability, the approach developed by Miller for
considering uncountable structures within the Turing model of computation. In
another approach to uncountable objects, Calvert and Miller have developed a
definition of real-computable manifold, using the Blum-Shub-Smale model of
computation on the real numbers. They have found that for the study of the
fundamental group, the BSS model actually melts away and the Turing model of
computation is appropriate. However, for consideration of distances on
manifolds, using geodesics or other ways of defining a metric, they expect that
BSS computation or other notions of computation, such as those from computable
analysis, will be essential.

Traditional computability theory examines the capabilities of digital computers
and the limits on the problems which can be solved using such computers. Since
the pioneering work of Alan Turing, it has been known that many problems cannot
be solved by any digital computer running any program whatsoever. Even these
"noncomputable" problems can be ranked by difficulty, however: problem A is
easier (or at least, no more difficult) than problem B if we can show how a
hypothetical program solving B would allow us to solve A as well. Recently, the
PI Russell Miller has made contributions to computable model theory, the branch
of this field in which one studies noncomputable problems about specific
mathematical structures involving the natural numbers and the rational numbers.
Structures involving all real numbers are much larger and therefore trickier to
consider, but Miller and many others have introduced various methods for
addressing these structures as well. Some of these methods use digital
computers, while others assume exact-precision arithmetic on the real numbers or
other structures. By examining the limits of these different models of
computation, we can understand better how much extra power is provided by exact
precision, and which mathematical problems require such precision if they are to
be solved.
