
* 1001550
* Algebraic Model Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2010,08/08/2013
* Thomas Scanlon,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2015
* USD 368,090.00

Scanlon will study the theory of difference and differential equations through
the vantage of mathematical logic and to apply the results of these
investigations to fundamental problems in arithmetic and geometry. More
specifically, he will develop a unified approach to the logical theory of
difference and differential fields and to resolve deep structural questions
about difference-differential equations through a general theory of
linearization via jet and arc spaces giving a precise sense to which all
geometric complexity of nonlinear equations actually reflects the complexity of
associated linear equations. Scanlon will study Galois theory, or the theory of
symmetries, of general systems of equations involving operators by employing
this process of linearization, the logical theory of liaison groups, and a
Tannakian formalism. In addition, he will address specific questions about
algebraic relations on special points by using the fine structure theory for
definable sets in difference fields as well as the model theory of valued fields
and of real geometry via the theory of o-minimality. Finally, Scanlon will
develop the model theory of the theory of the Witt vectors with analytic
structure and the relative Frobenius. Scanlon will use this theory both as a
proving ground for the general theory of metastability and as a logically tame
theory in which arithmetic problems may be encoded believing that this theory
may ground a new theory of motivic integration in which finite dimensional
difference varieties play the role of algebraic varieties. Scanlon will develop
a model theory of p-jets independent of the prime p from which uniformities in
number theoretic problems may be deduced.

Model theory, in the sense of mathematical logic, gives a unifying perspective
for studying questions in disparate branches of mathematics as instances of a
general theory. For example, it may ground fanciful, but suggestive, theories in
which techniques appropriate to the study of geometry and differential equations
are transposed to investigate numbers. In the opposite direction, its very
general methods for understanding symmetries of structures and more importantly
symmetries of one part of a structure relative to another part when specialized
to concrete mathematical questions about differential and difference equations
reveal otherwise unknown theories of symmetries. With this project, Scanlon will
explore the underlying unity of mathematics as seen from mathematical logic from
the theories of differential equations, to dynamical systems, to number theory.
