
* 1056703
* CAREER: Undecidability in Number Theory and Applications of Arithmetic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/2011,05/12/2016
* Kirsten Eisentraeger,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2018
* USD 411,423.00

The investigator will study several questions related to diophantine equations.
One focus is on generalizations of Hilbert's Tenth Problem. Hilbert's Tenth
Problem over the rational numbers and over number fields in general is still
open while undecidability is known for several subrings of the rational numbers.
One goal is to investigate for which subrings of number fields the problem is
undecidable. Another is to extend the currently known undecidability results for
function fields. Research on Hilbert's Tenth Problem has led to new areas of
interaction between number theory, arithmetic geometry and logic. These will be
further explored in this project. Another focus is the study of computational
problems in arithmetic geometry that have applications to cryptography. One goal
is to construct curves of small genus that are suitable for cryptographic
applications. Another goal is to generalize the quantum algorithms for number
fields to function fields.

The investigator proposes several research projects that involve studying the
solutions to multivariable polynomial equations. Looking for solutions to such
equations over the integers or rational numbers is one of the fundamental
problems in number theory. It has a long history that goes back to ancient
Greece. For the first project the investigator will study the fundamental
question of whether it is possible to find a procedure that determines whether
an arbitrary multivariable polynomial equation has a solution in a given number
system. The second project focuses on computational aspects of certain special
classes of equations that have applications to cryptography. This area of
mathematics is very well-suited for motivating young students to study
mathematics. The investigator will teach middle school and high school girls
about cryptography and its mathematical background. There will be two yearly
workshops which will involve hands-on experiments in the computer lab. There
will also be professional development workshops for local mathematics teachers.
