
* 1101228
* Complexity of proofs, proof search, and algorithmic complexity
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 09/01/2011,08/25/2011
* Samuel Buss,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 210,000.00

This project supports research by Professor Buss and his graduate students in
logic and computational complexity, particularly in computational complexity,
propositional proof complexity, bounded arithmetic, randomness and
approximation, and algorithm design. The central research topics concern
propositional proof complexity and its interplay with computational complexity
and first-order arithmetic. Propositional proof complexity forms a basis for
nearly all formal systems that support logical reasoning and inference. Many
aspects of proof complexity and weak theories of first-order arithmetic connect
to open problems in computational complexity, including the P versus NP problem,
questions about counting and derandomization, and open cryptographic questions
about pseudorandom number generators. The PI will work to extend lower bounds on
deterministic algorithms for satisfiability and other hard problems. His
research will explore the mathematical foundations of proof search. He will
develop and test new algorithms for propositional proof search. He will work on
new witnessing algorithms for fragments of bounded arithmetic, such as logics
that correspond to polynomial space reasoning. He will work to prove new
independence results and separation results for weak proof systems. He will work
on complexity lower bounds, especially for space-restricted computation.

Mathematical research on proof theory, logic, and algorithms has the goal of
improving our understanding of fundamental limitations of feasible
computability, feasible provability, and the mathematical security of
cryptographic algorithms. The project supports the research of the PI and his
students on these mathematical aspects of complexity of proofs and algorithms,
with particular emphasis on establishing the complexity required for proofs and
computations. The PI will also develop and evaluate new algorithms for
satisfiability. These algorithms are the logical core of most presently deployed
systems for software and hardware verification, and are an important part of
several major research efforts to produce verifiably correct software and
hardware. The project supports education and student research training in
mathematics and computer science, especially in the methods and theory of
computational complexity and mathematical logic.
