
* 1101248
* Integration and Preparation Theorems
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 09/01/2011,08/10/2011
* Daniel Miller,KS,Emporia State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2013
* USD 20,854.00

This project consists of two lines of investigation. The first part of the
project studies the integration theory of real constructible functions, which by
definition are sums of products of real globally subanalytic functions and their
logarithms. The significance of the constructible functions is that they form
the smallest class of functions that extends the globally subanalytic functions
and is stable under integration. Properties of Lebesgue spaces and also
multivariate harmonic analysis will be studied in the context of constructible
functions, including asymptotic estimates of oscillatory integrals and possibly
questions concerning the integrability of Fourier transforms of constructible
functions. The main tool employed to study integration of constructible
functions is the subanalytic preparation theorem. The second part of the project
aims to show through a purely analytic proof that the subanalytic preparation
theorem holds in a more general quasianalytic setting. An important motivation
for doing so is to obtain a more informative proof of the preparation theorem
that could be used to study the decidability of expansions of the real field by
functions from quasianalytic classes and power functions in order to combine the
principal investigator's previous work on decidability, which dealt only with
functions from quasianalytic classes, and the work of Jones and Servi on
decidability, which dealt only with power functions.

The origins of this project stem from two very classical questions which are
pervasive throughout much of mathematics and its applications to science and
engineering: 1) how to solve equations and inequalities, and related to this,
how to determine the truth or falsity of statements built up through the use of
equations and inequalities and also logical operations; 2) how to compute and
study properties of functions defined by integral formulas. The subanalytic
preparation theorem shows that, at least in theory, a wide class of equations
(which includes all polynomial equations) can be solved by radicals in a more
liberal sense that allows the use of locally defined analytic functions in
addition to arithmetic operations and radicals. One aim of this project is to
obtain a new algorithmic proof of the preparation theorem which, incidentally,
would also generalize the theorem to wider classes of functions. In addition to
studying equations, the preparation theorem is an important tool for studying
the asymptotic behavior and integrals of constructible functions, which is a
class of functions that contains, in particular, all algebraic functions. The
Fourier transform is an important operation used in many areas of mathematics
and its applications, and it is defined by an integral formula. Another aim of
the project is to the lay groundwork for a theory of integration that could be
used to show that Fourier transforms of constructible functions have simple
properties.
