
* 1101123
* Collaboration in Computability
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, International Research Collab
* 05/01/2011,03/08/2012
* Julia Knight,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2016
* USD 95,833.00

The area of computability has blossomed in recent years. Some of the most
interesting problems call for combining computability with sophisticated
algebra, model theory, descriptive set theory, and/or probability. There is a
large group in Novosibirsk working on these problems. There are smaller groups
doing related work elsewhere in Russia, in Kazakhstan, and at several
universities in the U.S. The grant will be used to help build and maintain
working relationships among these researchers. The first goal is to to solve
problems. The grant will help us to produce better results, to work more
quickly, and to be aware of more important connections.

Two earlier NSF grants have, for the past ten years, served to facilitate joint
work by researchers from the U.S., Russia, and Kazakhstan. At the time the first
proposal was submitted, collaboration among researchers in logic in the U.S. and
the former Soviet Union was just beginning, with occasional visits by senior
researchers. The first grant had an enormous impact and greatly magnified the
ties among researchers in the three countries. The second grant led to much
greater involvement of young researchers. The current grant will be used to
continue building a network of collaborators who are committed to sharing ideas
and working together on fundamental problems. We will continue the emphasis on
involving young researchers. We want our graduate students and postdocs to see
themselves as part of an international research community.
