
* 1101204
* Large cardinals and the continuum
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 09/15/2011,07/30/2013
* Itay Neeman,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2015
* USD 315,455.00

This project is concerned with the study of large cardinal axioms, forcing with
large cardinals, connections between large cardinal axioms and the continuum
through forcing axioms and through inner model theory, and applications of set
theory to reverse mathematics and monadic decidability. Specific research topics
to be addressed include: forcing axioms consistent with large values of the
continuum; questions in infinitary combinatorics that are related to large
cardinals, particularly on the relationship between the tree property and the
singular cardinals hypothesis at small cardinals; iterability for inner models,
and indicators of strength for the proper forcing axiom in connection with long
extender models; uses of strong induction hypotheses in reverse mathematics; and
monadic theories that are affected by set theoretic axioms, including monadic
theories of ordinals and the monadic theory of the reals restricted to definable
sets.

Many of the foundational questions of mathematics can be addressed using strong
axioms of set theory. Perhaps the most celebrated instances involve questions
about definable subsets of the continuum of real numbers. Even fairly simple
properties of these sets, for example whether they admit a robust notion of
length, are now known to be dependent on strong axioms of set theory. But much
still remains unknown about the connection between strong axioms of set theory
and the continuum. The motivating goal for the project is to deepen our
understanding of this connection. This requires a deeper understanding of the
axioms themselves, and of intermediary principles between these axioms and
properties of the continuum: principles that can be obtained (provably or
consistently) granted the axioms, and directly affect the continuum. The project
seeks to extend work on both fronts, with research into models for the axioms,
combinatorial principles on infinite sets, and saturation principles of the
universe of sets that affect properties of the continuum.
