
* 1201454
* Operator algebras and model theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2012,04/24/2012
* David Sherman,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2015
* USD 118,314.00

The purpose of this research, largely undertaken in collaboration with
logicians, is to study operator algebras using a recent variant of classical
model theory that interacts well with the structures of functional analysis. A
basic goal is to determine how well this "continuous" model theory distinguishes
analytic structures, and which properties it captures. Among the applications is
new information about isomorphisms and embeddings between structures and their
ultrapowers, as these can be readily reinterpreted using continuous model
theory. The project also develops the continuous version of many model theoretic
concepts, such as stability, primeness, quantifier elimination, model
companions, and existential closedness, both for general logical theorems and
new paradigms in functional analysis. Up to this point the emphasis has been on
tracial von Neumann algebras, but the approach is expected to be fruitful for
C*-algebras, subfactors, algebras equipped with an automorphism, etc. The past
few years have seen several surprising applications of logical techniques in
functional analysis, mostly coming from combinatorial and descriptive set
theory. This project aims to import concepts from model theory, the study of the
relation between mathematical objects and their logical properties. Given an
object, suppose one knows the answer to all the questions that can be formulated
in a specific way (first-order syntax) -- how well does one understand the
object? In general one cannot recover the object itself, but this "logical
information" is relevant to many lines of research, and only recently has an
appropriate version of model theory been applied to operator algebras. This
project will continue to develop the ties between logic and functional analysis,
in particular supporting travel for researchers and training for graduate
students. The results should offer insights into active topics with applications
to other branches of mathematics, for instance the Connes Embedding Problem and
logical stability.
