
* 1229043
* Workshop in Inner Model Theory and Descriptive Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 03/01/2012,02/14/2012
* Stephen Jackson,TX,University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2013
* USD 12,709.00

This proposal is to support a three day workshop in inner-model theory and
descriptive set theory to be held June 1-3, 2012 at the University of North
Texas. The workshop will be held immediately prior to a conference in logic and
dynamics to be held at UNT June 4-8, 2012. The workshop will bring together the
leading experts in an active and central area of mathematical logic, inner model
theory, as well as experts in associated areas of descriptive set theory. The
workshop atmosphere should be conducive to an exchange of ideas among the
attendees as well as the dissemination of research results and ideas the experts
have been working on. By holding the conference in proximity to the
logic/dynamics conference, we feel it also has the possibility of attracting an
expanded set of participants. Support for the workshop will allow us to support
graduate student travel to the workshop and thereby enhance the impact. We will
make publicly available the slides and lecture notes from the workshop to
further the information exchange. Having the workshop at UNT will enhance the
RTG program at UNT and allow the RTG post-docs and graduate students to interact
with leaders in related, but different fields of logic. As with the
logic/dynamics conference, we will, where possible, seek to increase the
presence of women and underrepresented groups.
