
* 1300634
* Classification of Unstable Theories
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/15/2013,07/30/2013
* Maryanthe Malliaris,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 129,998.00

The proposed research focuses on unstable theories, primarily theories with the
independence property. One direction of this work involves studying unstable
theories from an asymptotic (ultrapower) point of view. Specifically, Malliaris
plans to work on the structure of Keisler's order, a long standing program of
comparing the complexity of theories, whose structure on the unstable theories
has remained open since 1967. Keisler's order directly compares theories
independent of language, and it was recognized early on that this order would
likely give significant model-theoretic information. A complementary direction
of this work involves developing further connections between model theory and
graph theory. For instance, Malliaris plans to further develop the theory of
characteristic sequences of hypergraphs (associated to formulas), a framework
which brings ideas and techniques from graph theory and finite combinatorics
such as Szemeredi regularity to bear on the analysis of types in unstable
theories, and on various tradeoffs between independence and order in unstable
theories. Informally, both the connections to graph theory and to ultrapowers
give a perspective in which local noise is smoothed out and the nature of the
significant jumps in the complexity of pseudofinite structure can be more
clearly seen. This is an ideal context for studying the independence property,
in which it is crucial to see finer distinctions between 'noise' or
inconsistency arising from certain random structure, and more global
compatibility. Broadly speaking, the proposed research program builds toward a
more unified structure theory for the unstable theories, and aims to discover
and further develop productive notions of complexity inherent to unstable
theories.

The proposed work is in model theory, specifically the classification of
unstable theories. A model is a structure given by the data of an underlying set
along with an interpretation for all function, relation, and constant symbols in
a fixed background language L; a theory is a complete consistent set of
L-sentences of first-order logic; and an elementary class is precisely the class
of models of some theory, e.g. algebraically closed fields of characteristic 0.
A major interest of model theory is studying theories via elementary classes of
models, that is, studying a theory at hand by classifying the possible
variations within its associated elementary class. One of the most fertile
contexts for model theoretic analysis has been stability theory, the study of
so-called stable or 'tame' theories, developed by Shelah in the 1970s. While the
much larger class of non-stable or 'unstable' theories are quite complex from
the point of view of stability, they are of significant interest. Many
mathematical structures are unstable, so provide both theoretical motivation and
examples; and there are many conjectures and problems about unstable theories
which naturally attract research. The proposed work aims to build tools and a
perspective from which to identify and analyze jumps in model-theoretic
complexity among the unstable theories from a more uniform point of view, as
well as to develop certain productive analogies and interactions with finite and
asymptotic combinatorics. At the same time, these tools will be tested, in part,
via the large scale structural conjecture of Keisler's order.
