
* 1301658
* Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2013,04/14/2014
* W. Hugh Woodin,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2014
* USD 231,856.00

The Inner Model Program is one of the central areas of Set Theory. The
traditional view of this program has been that of an increment program with
progress measured by a progression up the hierarchy of large cardinals. It is
now known that this view is not correct. A critical transition occurs at the
level of exactly one supercompact cardinal, and in solving the Inner Model
Problem for this specific large cardinal axiom, one solves the Inner Model
Problem for essentially all known large cardinal axioms. The solution must
necessarily yield an ultimate enlargement of Godel's inner model L. This
Ultimate-L must closely approximate the parent universe V within which it is
constructed. Though the detailed construction of Ultimate-L is open, the axiom,
``V = Ultimate-L'', can be precisely formulated and its consequences explored
even now. One can also precisely specify a conjecture which would be the final
outcome of the construction of Ultimate-L. This is the Ultimate-L Conjecture.
This conjecture is closely related to several other conjectures and these
collectively are the focus of this research proposal.

The mathematical study of Infinity is the focus of Set Theory. This subject
began on the basis of principles isolated by Cantor and then elaborated on by
others. By the early part of the 20th century the basic Zermelo-Frankel Axioms
had been isolated and these axioms together with the Axiom of Choice are the ZFC
axioms. The ZFC axioms define the current conception of (mathematical) Infinity.
The seminal discoveries of the latter half of the 20th century showed that most
of the fundamental questions asked about infinite sets are unsolvable on the
basis of the ZFC axioms. Famous among these unsolvable questions is that of
Cantor's Continuum Hypothesis which by the middle of the 20th century was widely
regarded as one of the most important questions of mathematics. This proposal
focuses on the Ultimate-L Project. This project if successful will isolate (for
the first time) an extension of the ZFC axioms that will resolve essentially all
of these otherwise unsolvable questions (including that of the Continuum
Hypothesis) and provide a framework for reducing all questions of Set Theory to
questions of the existence of large infinite sets--these are the so called
Axioms of Strong Infinity. The new approach arises from a series of recent
results which show that such an extension of the ZFC axioms might actually
exist.
