
* 1440263
* Boise Extravaganza in Set Theory, June 17-20, 2014
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 04/01/2014,05/02/2016
* Liljana Babinkostova,ID,Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2017
* USD 38,366.00

The Boise Extravaganza in Set Theory is a longstanding annual regional
conference that focuses on Set Theory and its Applications. Its twenty-first
meeting will be held on the campus of the University of California, Riverside,
during June 17 - 20, 2014 as a symposium of the 95th annual meeting of the
Pacific Division of the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS-PD). Likewise, BEST's twenty-second meeting will be held on the campus of
San Francisco State University during June 16-19, 2015, as a symposium of the
96th annual meeting of the AAAS-PD. BEST provides the western region of the
United States with a conference in Set Theory that emphasizes diversity. The
conference actively seeks to recruit and integrate student and early career
dissemination of research in Set Theory and its affiliated mathematical
disciplines into the conference agenda. The conference promotes interaction
between different career stages in the field by also recruiting four plenary
speakers. BEST also promotes broader understanding between mathematics and the
sciences through opportunities arising from integration with the annual meeting
of the AAAS-PD. BEST seeks to increase participation by underrepresented groups
in Set Theory and Mathematics.

Set Theory is the foundation of Mathematics, and as such, of modeling and
deductive reasoning in the natural sciences. Offering BEST at the Annual Meeting
of the Pacific division of the AAAS thus provides potential for significant
broader impact. Mathematics has always benefited from an influx of ideas and
problems in other sciences, and conversely. It benefits the natural sciences,
and also Set Theory, when opportunities for such cross fertilization are
nurtured and facilitated. For each of the 2014 and 2015 meeting of BEST, the
conference provides travel support for up to 10 student speakers, 4 postdoc
speakers, 2 pre-tenure faculty speakers and 4 invited speakers.

Conference web site: http://diamond.boisestate.edu/~best/
