
* 1500615
* Model Theory and Ergodic Theorems
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 05/01/2015,05/01/2015
* Jose Iovino,TX,University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2019
* USD 170,356.00

Ergodic theory is a branch of mathematics concerned with the behavior of
dynamical systems when they are allowed to run over long time intervals. One of
the fundamental results of ergodic theory is the Mean Ergodic Theorem of von
Neumann (1932), which amounts to an abstract statement about the limiting
average state of a conservative system. In this project we seek to apply
concepts and techniques of model theory, a branch of mathematical logic, to
establish results on ergodic averages and ergodic recurrence by reinterpreting
and extending research results discovered in the decades following von Neumann.
The model-theoretic viewpoint should help illuminate and potentially unveil
connections between ergodic theory and other branches of mathematics.

One of the project's goals is casting recent results on convergence of multiple
ergodic averages into a suitable model-theoretic framework that allows combining
analytic arguments with the theory of types, forking calculus, and ordinal
ranks. An important concept in the proposed research is a ranking of the
complexity of "polynomial actions" of a group G on some measure space X, or
rather of the induced (polynomial) actions of G on various topological spaces
(say, of functions on X). This requires developing an abstract algebraic
framework that extends Leibman's theory of polynomial mappings between groups.
Ancillary anticipated products of the model-theoretic approach include results
on metastable convergence (akin to a weak form of uniformity in situations in
which uniform convergence is absent), on convergence of averages on
ultraproducts of polynomial-ergodic systems, and on polynomial-ergodic actions
of ordinal (transfinite) rank (generalized Leibman degree).Connections and
applications to combinatorics, Ramsey theory, and number theory will also be
studied.
