
* 1500906
* Descriptive set-theoretic graph theory and applications
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2015,06/23/2015
* Clinton Conley,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 153,809.00

The central objects of study in this research proposal are combinatorial graphs,
which are structures consisting of a underlying collection of vertices, some
pairs of which are connected by edges and some pairs remaining unconnected.
Despite the simplicity of this concept, familiar to any child who has played a
game of connect-the-dots, graphs are sufficiently general to model many
phenomena both within mathematics and also in nearby scientific disciplines. For
example, graphs have found applications in computer network design, including
modeling the evolution of the internet, as well as in statistical physics,
including modeling atomic-scale thermodynamic interactions. In these
applications, the number of vertices is so large that for analytical purposes it
is indistinguishable from being infinite. In this project, the principal
investigator will study infinite graphs from the descriptive set-theoretic
viewpoint, in essence regarding such graphs abstractly as sets and relating the
complexity of their descriptions with their concrete combinatorial properties.
In areas of mathematics such as dynamics and probability, such definable graphs
arise as limits of finite graphs, and the descriptive set-theoretic methods shed
light on this asymptotic behavior. Additionally, the analysis finds applications
within descriptive set theory as well, finding new ways of stratifying the
relative difficulty of various classification problems.

In general, the objective of the project is to understand combinatorial
parameters of Borel graphs on standard Borel spaces subject to various
measurability constraints. For example, the chromatic number of a graph (the
smallest cardinality of the image of a function assigning different values to
adjacent vertices) typically has different values when the coloring function is
required to be Borel, measurable with respect to some Borel probability measure,
or Baire measurable with respect to some compatible Polish topology. While
interesting in their own right, such parameters have (often surprising)
connections with other areas of mathematics -- including combinatorial and
geometric group theory, ergodic theory, probability theory, and operator
algebras -- and a secondary aim of the proposal is to strengthen these
connections in addition to forging new ones. More precise proposed areas of
study within this general setting include: (a) existence of measurable vertex
colorings, edge colorings, and matchings, (b) applications to structurability of
measured equivalence relations, in particular those arising as orbit equivalence
relations of probability-measure-preserving actions of locally compact Polish
groups, (c) applications to the global hierarchy of Borel/measure reducibility
of definable equivalence relations, especially those just above hyperfinite, (d)
connections with the probabilistic aspects of graph limits.
