
* 1501506
* Set-theoretic methods and the study of compact spaces
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2015,09/18/2020
* Alan Dow,NC,University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2021
* USD 179,971.00

This project investigates fundamental and foundational questions in connection
with convergence or limiting properties of infinite sets in an ambient space.
The issues of the long-term behavior of an infinite sequence of processes or
systems (however abstract) is at the core of many mathematical or physical
questions. The universal setting for this investigation is known as the study of
compact topological spaces. The "points" in the ambient space can represent any
mathematical object in applications ranging from turbulent dynamical systems to
a quantum mechanics setting. It has emerged that many natural questions are
sensitive to the very foundational principles of mathematics itself. This
research project pursues the resolution of such topological questions armed with
the modern methods of uncovering possible dependence on the foundational axioms
of mathematics.

The investigator will study the influence of well-known countability properties
on the structure of compact (Hausdorff) spaces. Some spaces are determined by
the behavior of their converging sequences, while one of the most fundamental
spaces, henceforth BetaN, the Stone-Cech compactification of the integers N, are
at the opposite extreme in that it has no converging sequences whatsoever. The
behavior of BetaN is heavily influenced by extra axioms of set-theory and many
natural questions about spaces of functions and measures and the like, are as
well. Additionally, the Banach spaces of continuous real-valued functions with
domain some compact subset of BetaN will be investigated. Again set-theoretic
hypotheses, mixed with additional topological properties, lead to varying
behavior in the important class of compact spaces. Our study is the analysis of
the interplay between the various countable convergence conditions and the
axioms of set-theory that influence them. We are expecting to have to develop
new techniques of constructing topological spaces as well as the refinement of
forcing techniques to uncover basic combinatorial structures involved. These
specific problems of longstanding will be of central focus. (1) If an infinite
compact space has no converging sequence, does it contain a copy of BetaN? (2)
Are the metrizable compact spaces the only ones whose diagonal is uncountably-
inaccessible? (3) Is the Banach space of continuous functions on the remainder
BetaN - N, like BetaN - N itself, essentially unique in certain models of set
theory? (4) If the topology of a compact space is determined by converging
countable sequences, is there a finite or countable bound on how many times one
must iterate taking limits to capture all such limits?
