
* 1501036
* Treeable Equivalence Relations and the Use of Probability Groups in Arithmetic Combinatorics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 05/15/2015,06/10/2017
* Anush Tserunyan,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2018
* USD 137,698.00

This is a research project at the interface of the mathematical topics of set
theory, combinatorics, and analysis. The research contains three projects
involving two main areas of mathematics: descriptive set theory and ergodic
Ramsey theory. The first two of the research projects lie in the theory of
definable equivalence relations, which provides a general framework for
understanding the nature of classification of mathematical objects up to some
notion of equivalence; due to its broad scope, it has natural interactions with
many areas of mathematics. These two projects are devoted to studying an
important subclass of definable equivalence relations and whether slight
extensions of the members of this subclass still belong to it. The third project
features a new method for obtaining statements in arithmetic combinatorics
similar in nature to a celebrated theorem of Szemeredi, which roughly states
that any non-negligible subset of integers retains much of the additive
structure of the entire set of integers.

In the theory of definable equivalence relations on Polish spaces, a central
place is occupied by countable Borel equivalence relations, an important
subclass of which is that of treeable equivalence relations. The first two
projects investigate the question of closure of this subclass under finite index
extensions in two different contexts: Borel and measure-theoretic. The former
involves Borel combinatorics and possibly Borel games, whereas the latter is
tightly connected with ergodic theory and the theory of cost of equivalence
relations, and may require nontrivial machinery from geometric group theory. The
third project lies in ergodic Ramsey theory and its goal is to obtain multiple
recurrence results for amenable groups via a correspondence principle provided
by nonstandard analysis. This is done by transferring recurrence statements from
a given amenable group to a more convenient setting of probability groups by
taking the ultrapower of the original group and equipping it with Loeb measure.
The latter, being countably additive, presents the main advantage of the
probability group over the original amenable group equipped with only a finitely
additive density function, enabling integration over the group and the use of
Fubini's theorem.
