
* 1600263
* Proof Theory: Finite Data from Infinite Mathematics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, Combinatorics
* 09/01/2016,08/17/2018
* Henry Towsner,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2020
* USD 154,131.00

Many mathematical questions can be solved in multiple ways, each with its own
advantages. Short, conceptual proofs can avoid complicated calculations, but
sometimes cannot provide the detailed quantitative information those
calculations would reveal. A recent insight is that, sometimes, mathematics can
have it both ways. By studying the structure of mathematical proof itself,
techniques from the field known as proof theory make it possible to take
abstract proofs and to extract detailed calculations from them. Used in the
opposite direction, these techniques can take certain kinds of lengthy
calculations and replace them with short, abstract arguments which can then be
generalized to prove new results. The focus of this project is to both further
extend these techniques to new areas, particularly recently discovered
applications in statistics, as well as continue the application of known
techniques to new problems, especially in areas where probability and randomness
play a central role.

In this project, Towsner will build on previous applications of ultraproducts to
studying the way mathematical objects can be separated into structured and
random parts. An explicit quantitative approach to such dichotomies has long
been central to extremal graph theory, but recent work has shown that these can
also be viewed in measure-theoretic terms by using ultraproducts to mediate
between the finitary and infinitary perspectives, leading to new results in the
area. Towsner will study this connection systematically, both developing new
tools in the infinitary setting and using the proof-theoretic functional
interpretation to translate these tools back to the classical setting,
extracting explicit calculations from these infinitary arguments.
