
* 1600796
* Model-Theoretic Classification, Graph Combinatorics, and Topological Dynamics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, Combinatorics
* 07/01/2016,05/21/2018
* Artem Chernikov,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 179,998.00

Model theory studies the ways in which classes of mathematical objects can be
defined in some restricted formal language, and what structural properties are
implied by these definability assumptions. This method of study originated in
questions around the philosophy and foundations of mathematics, but in recent
years it has found striking applications in the study of some central objects of
classical mathematics and computer science. This project investigates further
these connections, in particular in the context of graphs (mathematical ways of
describing networks and related systems) and group actions (mathematical ways of
describing collections of symmetries of a space). This study has the potential
to open up a route for applications of the powerful infinitary model-theoretic
machinery to open questions in finite graph combinatorics, and conversely for
applications of deep results in combinatorics to open questions in model theory.

Motivated by Morley's conjecture on the possible number of uncountable models of
first-order theories, Shelah isolated several important classes of "tame"
theories and developed a rich machinery for analyzing models and definable sets
for some of those classes, particularly for stable theories. Later work by many
researchers demonstrated that notions and methods of generalized stability
reflect important phenomena in other areas of mathematics. This project will
investigate two such connections. 1) Improved Ramsey-type bounds and strong
regularity lemmas were obtained for semi-algebraic graphs by Fox et al. and for
algebraic graphs in large finite fields by Tao, with numerous applications in
the corresponding areas. These results can naturally be viewed as results about
graphs definable in certain structures fitting into the classification picture.
2) Study of definable group actions turns out to be closely related to certain
questions in topological dynamics, especially around weakly almost periodic
dynamical systems and tame systems studied by Glasner and others. The
investigator will work on developing further methods of generalized stability
and applying them to questions in combinatorics of graphs definable in various
"tame" structures (stable, o-minimal, distal, dependent) and to study dynamical
properties of definable group actions in those structures.
