
* 1700336
* Model Theory and Differential and Difference Equations
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2017,06/07/2017
* Joel Nagloo,NY,CUNY Bronx Community College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2021
* USD 60,726.00

In this project, the investigator will use model theory, a branch of
mathematical logic, to classify and study some classical differential and
difference equations. Model theory is a branch of mathematical logic that
studies mathematical structures and their definable sets (i.e., the basic sets
that "live" in those structures). On the other hand, differential and difference
equations are equations that describe how things change with time and are the
fundamental tools that modern science and engineering use to model physical
reality. The basic idea of the project will be to view the set of solutions of a
differential or difference equation as a definable set in an appropriate
structure, and use the tools of model theory to understand its properties. The
equations that the project focuses on -- the Painlevé differential and
difference equations and the Schwarzian differential equations -- appear in many
important physical applications such as statistical mechanics and general
relativity, as well as in important problems in number theory.

The project builds on recent successes by model theorists to use techniques from
geometric stability theory to classify special cases of these differential
equations according to the trichotomy theorem in differentially closed fields of
characteristic zero. The investigator will extend his work on the generic
Painlevé (differential) equations to non-generic ones as well as to the
Schwarzian equations. The objective is to both fully describe the structure of
the sets of solutions and to use such descriptions to better our understanding
of geometrically trivial sets in the theory. This work is expected to have
applications to problems in number theory and functional transcendence theory.
The project will also transport some of the ideas and techniques used to study
classical differential equations to the difference setting. The main challenge
will be to develop a notion of irreducibility (in the sense of classical
functions) for difference equation and show that the difference Painlevé
equations are irreducible. In addition to model theory, the work will also
employ techniques from algebra and geometry and from the analytic study of
differential/difference equations.
