
* 1764320
* Large Cardinals, Small Sets and Absoluteness
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 05/01/2018,06/11/2020
* Paul Larson,OH,Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 04/30/2022
* USD 152,100.00

Techniques from mathematical logic can be used to measure the complexity of
mathematical concepts. Areas of mathematics with physical applications tend to
appear in the low levels of the corresponding complexity hierarchy. Passing to
higher levels of complexity enables mathematicians to make connections between
different areas of mathematics, and to develop productive general theories.
There is a corresponding division of the universe of mathematics into an
absolute part, where natural questions tend to be resolved by the standard
axioms, and a more abstract part where extensions of the standard axiom system
are needed to resolve many fundamental questions. The main focus of Larson's
research is the relationship between these parts. The technical machinery
involved in this project includes Cohen's forcing technique, axioms asserting
the existence of winning strategies in infinite games, and axioms asserting the
existence of infinite objects whose existence cannot be proved from the standard
axioms for mathematics. These techniques originate in set theory, which serves
as the most commonly accepted foundations for mathematics. Larson's work applies
them to other areas, including model theory, topology and analysis. Larson hopes
to make progress with this approach on several longstanding well-known open
problems.

One aspect of Larson's work concerns forcing over models of determinacy to
produce canonical models. Woodin's Pmax forcing, when applied to a model of
determinacy, produces a model which is maximal for subsets of the set of
countable ordinals. One project, initiated by Woodin, and continued by Larson in
collaboration with other researchers, is the extent to which this maximality can
be made to hold for larger cardinals. Another product, largely in collaboration
with Jindrich Zapletal, converts a number of classical ZFC constructions into
partial orders, which when applied to determinacy models produce models of
fragments of the Axiom of Choice. This approach has resolved a number of
classical questions about the relationship between forms of the Axiom of Choice,
but may also be able to shine light on newer problems in the theory of Borel
equivalence relations. Other aspects of the project include a new approach to
Vaught's Conjecture, one of the oldest problems in model theory, and the study
of the notion of universally measurability, a fundamental concept from analysis
which is still not well understood. Finally, Larson is working on a book on
unpublished work of W.H. Woodin, on extensions of the Axiom of Determinacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
