
* 1764029
* Forcing and Large Cardinals
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2018,07/02/2022
* Itay Neeman,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,001.00

The goal of this project is to develop a better understanding of the possible
behaviors of the mathematical universe. Our knowledge of the mathematical
universe comes through deduction from axioms. This knowledge is inherently
incomplete, and there is a wide range of questions that cannot be decided from
the standard axioms. Set theorists have developed and studied additional axioms
that allow settling some of these questions. These axioms are broadly divided
into two types: Large cardinal axioms, and forcing axioms. The large cardinal
axioms form a natural hierarchy ordered by axiomatic strength. Forcing axioms
have applications outside set theory. This project involves the development of
new forcing axioms primarily meant to deal with questions related to the second
uncountable cardinal, methods for applications of these axioms, the theory of
large cardinal axioms primarily at the level of strength expected to be
connected to the new forcing axioms (the level of supercompact cardinals), and
other applications of large cardinal axioms at this strength, primarily to
questions of infinitary combinatorics. While there has been a large body of work
on forcing axioms related to the first uncountable cardinal, analogous forcing
axioms related to the second uncountable cardinal were only discovered recently.
Similarly the theory of large cardinal axioms at the level of supercompact
cardinals is only now beginning to come into focus. This project will obtain
results in these emerging subjects, develop methods that open these subjects to
broader research, and aim to apply them to some long standing open problems.



This project deals with several central areas in set theory: (i) forcing axioms
and their applications; (ii) inner models theory; and (iii) infinitary
combinatorics. Forcing axioms are strengthenings of the Baire category theorem
that allow meeting a prescribed number of dense sets with filters in prescribed
classes of partial orders. In connection with (i) this project is particularly
concerned with higher analogues of the proper forcing axiom (PFA). PFA,
developed in the early 1980s, allows meeting aleph_1 dense sets in proper
partial orders. It has proved incredibly useful both as a starting point for
consistency proofs and as an axiom leading to set theoretic structure theorems.
Recent work of the PI shows that there are analogues of PFA which involve
meeting more than aleph_1 dense sets. Separately, the PI developed new
reflection principles at aleph_2. It is one of the goals of this project to
combine the higher analogues of PFA with these reflection principles, and use
the new resulting axioms to extend applications of PFA to new contexts. The
inner models program has as its main goal the construction of models for large
cardinal axioms from assumptions that do not directly involve large cardinals
(for example from forcing axioms). In connection with (ii), this project is
primarily concerned with the theory of inner models at the level of supercompact
cardinals. In connections with (iii) this project is primarily concerned with
the tree property, a remnant of large cardinal strength that can consistently
hold at small cardinals. One of the goals of the project is to obtain it
simultaneously at all successors in increasingly large intervals of cardinals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
