
* 1837069
* International Conference on Computability, Complexity, and Randomness
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/15/2018,08/08/2018
* Antonio Montalban,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This award supports participation of graduate students, postdocs and junior
faculty from the US in the International Conference on Computability, Complexity
and Randomness (CCR 2018) 17-21 December, 2018, Universidad Andres Bello,
Santiago de Chile. This conference is the 13th in a series of conferences run as
Computability, Complexity and Randomness (CCR), which deal with problems at the
interface of mathematics and computer science where the notion of randomness
plays a central role. Although randomness is a primitive notion in probability
theory, this alone does not help to determine when an individual mathematical
object can be considered as random for a given application. It does not help
either to understand how applications will behave on individual random inputs.
Also one may require the notion of randomness relative to different models of
computation, and possibly consider randomness in a grey scale down to notions of
anti-randomness. Another main question is how to define, and perhaps construct,
explicit instances of random objects. These problems meet at classical
computability theory, computational complexity theory, probability theory,
information theory and the theory of dynamical systems.

This CCR conference will continue to disseminate the expertise that has been
rapidly developing in the area and foster new collaborations. CCR 2018 will be
held at the Mathematics Department of Universidad Andres Bello, which is
associated to the internationally recognized Center for Mathematical Modeling
(CMM) of the University of Chile. CCR 2018 is sponsored by the Association for
Symbolic Logic. For further information, visit http://www.mat-unab.cl/~ccr2018/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
