
* 1954127
* RUI: Geometry and Complexity in the Model Theory of Groups
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 09/01/2020,06/17/2020
* Joshua Wiscons,CA,University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 154,937.00

This project is organized around the long-standing "Algebraicity Conjecture" for
groups of finite Morley rank, which arise naturally in model theory and are
crucial to understanding a fundamental class of structures. The project
investigates key remaining obstructions to the Algebraicity Conjecture by
developing a newly found connection with approximately classical geometries. The
project will also apply the existing partial solution to the Algebraicity
Conjecture to establish natural limits to how much symmetry a group of finite
Morley rank may encode, with the added goal of classifying those at the extreme.
Additionally, the project explores the notion of "relational complexity" for
finite symmetry groups, a key component of a classification theory for certain
highly symmetric structures. This research addresses core problems about the
complexity of certain natural families of groups and develops computational
tools for further exploration. Finally, the project provides new opportunities
and support for undergraduate and Masters students at California State
University, Sacramento, to engage with and build skill in the model theory of
groups.

The first thread of this project addresses remaining obstructions to the
Algebraicity Conjecture with the goal of exploiting a connection between certain
groups of small 2-rank and generically defined projective geometries. Specific
aims include the elimination of a long-standing pathological configuration, a
clarification of a second, and a significant expansion of the existing
techniques for analyzing groups of small, but nonzero, 2-rank. The second thread
of research studies permutation groups of finite Morley rank. The focus is on
Borovik and Cherlin's guiding problem of classifying those groups with a
sufficiently high degree of generic transitivity as being of a single form that
arises naturally in projective geometry. The final thread investigates the
relational complexity of finite permutation groups. The study of relational
complexity is currently anchored by Cherlin's Binary Conjecture, which proposes
a classification of the primitive groups of complexity 2. This project aims to
broaden the scope of research on relational complexity by analyzing various
natural families of permutation groups, focusing on the complexity of the
symmetric and alternating groups acting on partitions. Moreover, this thread
further develops algorithms and refines exiting code for computing relational
complexity, with the additional goals of creating a public repository for the
code and manual to support its use.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
