
* 1954069
* Definable Equivalence Relations and Dynamics, Topological and Measurable, of Polish Groups
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2020,08/26/2021
* Slawomir Solecki,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 325,000.00

Groups are abstract mathematical entities that capture the structure of
symmetries of an object. Groups are studied through the way they act as
symmetries of various other mathematical objects. These actions are ubiquitous
in mathematics and in sciences and they come at various levels of resolution.
The project considers group actions in the very broad context of preserving
definable sets, and more narrow contexts of preserving a notion of being close
and of preserving the size of sets. The ideas in the project use and connect
several disparate areas of mathematics. In addition, the project provides
research training opportunities for graduate students.

The project will tackle three types of issues all related to dynamics of
topological groups. The first part aims to make progress on an important
dichotomy in Descriptive Set Theory of Borel equivalence relations; the second
part will investigate submeasures, concentration of measure in associated
sequences of mm-spaces, and dynamics of associated topological groups; the third
part, using measurable dynamics and unitary representations, will deal with the
nature of the closed subgroups generated by generic measure preserving
transformations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
