
* 2051825
* NSF-BSF: Independent Theories in Model Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2021,07/07/2022
* Maryanthe Malliaris,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 171,730.00

Model theory, a branch of mathematical logic, asks what we can say about
arbitrary mathematical theories. Surprisingly, for such a general context, we
can say meaningful things, discovering new general laws on the one hand and
giving new methods for concrete mathematical theories on the other. Model-
theoretic classification theory gives an approach to discovering the general
laws: informally, it aims to isolate so-called dividing lines where a
significant structural change in the class of theories may be detected, and in
parallel to develop the internal theory to understand what is producing the
phenomena observed. One such dividing line has to do with whether theories have
nontrivial randomness. Current methods have been successful in many ways on the
non-random side. This project concerns independent theories, those on the random
side. The randomness complicates to varying degrees the ability of current
methods to gauge the full structure. This research works towards a more
fundamental understanding of such theories, using a range of classical and newly
developed tools able to detect average behavior and changes in the complexity of
model-theoretic randomness. Along with the research developments, the project
will support the training of students at various levels.

More precisely, the project aims to study independent theories, those with the
independence property. The following interrelated test problems guide the work
in this project. The first concerns characterizing saturated models of simple
theories in a way analogous to the known characterization for stable theories,
as a test problem for understanding of the building blocks of simple unstable
theories. An approach to this question, of independent interest, involves
developing a recently introduced generalization of forking. A second problem
involves characterizing and developing a structure theory for a certain
interesting class of simple theories 'near' the random graph. A third is to
investigate the structure of quotients of Keisler's order. A fourth is to find
true dividing lines within the class of independent theories and in parallel to
develop the internal theory justifying these as dividing lines. These questions
themselves connect to the classical problem of understanding the so called
Keisler order, whose structure on dependent theories is known but whose
structure on the independent theories remains in some senses mysterious.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
