
* 2054558
* RUI: Randomness, Computability, and Complexity in Groups
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2021,06/08/2021
* Meng-Che Ho,CA,The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 210,000.00

Groups are a class of fundamental objects in algebra, and more generally,
mathematics. They originated as a way to describe symmetries in both mathematics
and nature. It turns out that almost all algebraic mathematical structures can
be considered as a group with some extra structure. More recently, group theory
has also found uses in cryptography. Many tools from other fields, like
combinatorics and geometry, have proven useful in the study of groups.
Furthermore, group theory has a long history of interaction with logic. In the
early developments of logic, group theory was an important testing ground for
ideas in logic. On the other hand, it became gradually clear that many ideas
from logic were also useful in the study of groups. This project aims to explore
this connection and applies tools from logic to advance our understanding of
various important classes of groups. This project also provides opportunities
and support for students at California State University, Northridge to engage in
research in logic and group theory.

This project aims to understand the model-theoretic, computability, and
complexity properties of groups, and use this understanding to make progress in
classifying the finitely-generated groups. The project contains three main
parts. The first part aims to analyze the model-theoretic properties of random
groups, especially the 0-1 conjecture of first-order sentences in Gromov's
random group model. The main tool is the theory developed by Sela, and
independently by Kharlampovich and Myasnikov, which they used to solve the
70-year-old Tarski's problem. The second part aims to understand the complexity
of describing the elements and multiplication of groups. This includes analyzing
the word problem and representative systems of groups using the framework of
formal language theory. The third part builds on previous work of the
investigator and aims to understand the descriptive complexity of groups, and
how they connect to various important classes of finitely-generated groups. More
broadly, this part aims to understand the complexity of classes of groups and
the relations on them, especially isomorphism, within the context of
computability theory. Overall, the project is conducive for student research as
it contains many concrete and experimental examples, and will provide training
and research experience for the diverse students at California State University,
Northridge.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
