
* 2054379
* Explicit Proofs from Compactness and Saturation
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 09/01/2021,05/21/2021
* Henry Towsner,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 184,618.00

One of the surprising aspects of modern mathematics is that it is often possible
to prove that it is possible to calculate something without providing an
explicit way to perform the calculation. This research project is focused on
cases where this happens because the argument is indirect, proving a fact about
finite numbers using a detour through various notions of infinity. In these
cases, it is often possible to provide a translation in which we reinterpret
statements about infinite numbers as more complicated statements about explicit
computations. The goal of this project is to develop "meta-theorems" for cases
where this happens - results allowing us to systematically translate infinitary
proofs into finite, explicit proofs - and to test these methods by applying them
to examples in model theory. The project will support the training of graduate
and undergraduate students through their involvement with the research topics.

This project considers an assortment of situations where abstract logical ideas,
particularly saturation, compactness, forcing, and uncountable cardinals, are
used to prove concrete theorems. One of the lessons of proof theory is that we
often expect such proofs to point the way towards proofs that are more concrete;
the goal of this project is to find such concrete proofs. The project focuses on
results in model theory, including the combinatorial part of stability theory
and its links to graph and hypergraph quasirandomness, and saturated embedding
tests for quantifier elimination. The proof-theoretic functional interpretation
is a central tool; domain-specific adaptations will be developed to make the
approach practical.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
