
* 2054302
* Topological Dynamics and Countable Combinatorics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2021,06/24/2022
* Andrew Zucker,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 120,000.00

Dynamics is the study of objects in motion. Here, an "object" is represented by
a point in some mathematical structure, and "motion" is understood to mean a
group of symmetries of this structure. By considering different mathematical
structures, ideas from dynamics interact with several other areas of
mathematics, in particular logic, group theory, and combinatorics. In turn,
ideas from these fields give rise to new phenomena in dynamics. This project
will focus on ideas coming from "countable combinatorics," broadly construed.
Combinatorics is the study of discrete structures, as opposed to continuous
ones, while the emphasis on "countable" combinatorics means that these discrete
structures will be infinite, but still small enough that we can write down a
list, or enumeration, of their elements. Much research in the past two decades
has elucidated how pigeon-hole principles on countable structures can yield
examples of groups with simple dynamics; here, the group of symmetries will be
large, i.e. uncountable. On the other hand, attention has shifted recently to
considering combinatorial arguments on countable groups themselves; these can be
used to show that countable groups always have wild dynamics.

The PI has two primary goals for this project. The first is to continue to
develop the dictionary back and forth between combinatorial principles and
dynamical properties of countable groups and more general Polish groups. In the
case of countable groups, the existence of certain patterns on the group can
lead to the construction of subshifts with interesting behavior, such as doubly
minimal shifts or shifts disjoint from another given dynamical system. For more
general Polish groups, Ramsey-like principles can be used to produce interesting
spaces of ultrafilter-like objects on which the group can act. These dynamical
systems will then have important universal properties, such as being universal
for minimal flows, or being a universal "completion flow," a dynamical object
previously defined and investigated by the PI. The second is to develop
techniques to prove new theorems in countable combinatorics. Of particular
interest are theorems asserting that various countable first-order structures
have finite big Ramsey degrees. While the properties of interest are about
countable objects, the techniques used can deal with extremely large objects,
such as spaces of ultrafilters or forcing posets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
