
* 2115518
* Model Theoretic Classification Theory and Finite Combinatorics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 01/15/2021,01/15/2021
* Caroline Terry,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2023
* USD 90,596.00

Model theory is a branch of mathematical logic which seeks to understand common
structural phenomena driving the behavior of different types of mathematical
objects. A crucial idea in this area, first developed in the 1970s by Shelah, is
the notion of a dividing line. A dividing line can be thought of as a structural
dichotomy within a certain class of mathematical objects. Many of the most
important dividing lines correspond to local combinatorial properties which have
significant implications for global structure. In the infinite setting, model
theorists have had great success using dividing lines to classify examples and
generalize their behavior. However, extensions into the finite setting have been
limited, largely due to the failure there of crucial infinitary tools. On the
other hand, extremal and arithmetic combinatorics are fields which focus on the
finite setting, but which study many of the same themes as model theory, such as
local versus global structure and the interplay of structure and randomness.
These fields have developed finitary questions and tools which are new to model
theory, but which have have deep connections to model theoretic ideas. The goal
of this project is to extend the study of model theoretic dividing lines in the
finite setting by solving finitary problems from extremal and additive
combinatorics which address these shared themes.

More specifically, this project will focus on finding local model theoretic
conditions which have robust implications for bounds and growth rates in
theorems from additive and extremal combinatorics. This will be accomplished in
two main directions. The first will focus on questions from additive
combinatorics. Here a main goal will be to identify structural dichotomies for
subsets of high-dimensional vector spaces over prime fields. For instance, what
kinds of sets are most "tame'', as measured through improved bounds in
structural decomposition theorems? Can the "tame'' sets be characterized by
local combinatorial configurations? The second direction will address questions
in extremal combinatorics. Specifically, the PI will continue work on
enumeration and extremal problems for hereditary properties in finite relational
languages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
