
* 2154086
* Model Theory of Valued Differential Fields
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/2022,03/29/2022
* Nigel Pynn-Coates,OH,Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 51,370.00

Differential equations, which express a relationship between a function and its
rates of change, are used to understand many phenomena in science and
engineering. Often, the eventual behavior of these functions is of interest: Do
they stabilize or tend to infinity? How fast do they grow? Valued differential
fields are mathematical structures that abstractly formalize these questions and
possible answers. This project will investigate valued differential fields from
the perspective of model theory, a branch of mathematical logic which involves
studying properties of mathematical structures that can be expressed in formal
languages, in turn revealing new insights into these structures and their
complexity. In recent years the ideas and tools of model theory have had
fruitful applications in other areas of mathematics, a trend this project will
continue in the setting of valued differential fields. The project includes the
training and mentoring of undergraduate students.

Valued differential fields are algebraic structures that formalize the
asymptotic comparison of solutions to differential equations. This project aims
to deepen our understanding of such structures and their model theory in two
primary ways. First, it will investigate unordered valued differential fields,
most ambitiously complex transseries, which have been much less studied than
ordered valued differential fields. These latter structures describe only non-
oscillating behavior, while oscillating functions play an important role in
mathematics and in describing the real world, from water waves to wave functions
in quantum physics. This project will search for universal domains for the kinds
of asymptotic differential algebra in which oscillation is permitted and study
their complexity. Second, the project will investigate certain ordered valued
differential fields that can arise from transexponential extensions of
transseries. The work will then address natural next steps, most significantly
the study of certain quotient structures, called imaginaries, associated to such
ordered valued differential fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
