
* 2154258
* Dynamics Beyond Turbulence and Obstructions to Classification
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/2022,07/28/2022
* Aristotelis Panagiotopoulos,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 110,000.00

It is an empirical reality of our mathematical practice?and perhaps an
inexorable artifact of any adequate mathematical formalism?that complex
mathematical objects come with many different, yet equivalent, concrete
descriptions. This multiverse of equivalent descriptions tends to grow in
complexity as the associated objects of study become more complex, and it often
becomes very difficult to solve the associated ?classification problem?, i.e.,
to design an efficient method for telling whether two concrete descriptions
correspond to the same object or to two different objects. It is a notoriously
hard problem for example to decide whether two different concrete solutions of
Einstein?s equations are descriptions of the exact same physical reality and an
open problem to find measurable quantities which are invariant under the
arbitrary change of coordinates. Invariant descriptive set-theory is an area of
mathematical logic which provides a formal framework for measuring the intrinsic
complexity of such classification problems and for deciding, in each case, which
types of invariants are ?too simple? to be used for a complete classification.
It also provides an important link between topological dynamics and the meta-
mathematics of classification as best exemplified by Hjorth?s theory of
turbulence. Unfortunately, few things are known beyond the point of turbulence.
Indeed, dynamical phenomena beyond the point of turbulence reside in groups of
symmetries which are neither locally-compact nor non-archimedean, rendering
classical methods of harmonic analysis and discrete model theory insufficient.
However, a series of recent breakthroughs coming from the work of the PI and
others suggest some new strategies for dealing with such dynamics. Through this
program we initiate the systematic study of such dynamical phenomena which are
?wilder? than turbulence and which can serve as obstructions to more general
forms of classification.

The proposed research program features four independent?yet mutually
interacting?projects. The first project addresses the question of whether there
exist obstructions to classification by actions of the unitary group of the
infinite dimensional separable Hilbert space. In doing so it will examine the
connections between the Borel reduction hierarchy and some recent developments
in metric model theory regarding the correspondence between stability/NIP and
reflexive/Rosenthal representability. The second project focuses on the dynamics
of homeomorphism groups. Among others, it addresses the long-standing open
problem of whether the homeomorphism group of the interval admits a turbulent
action and it proposes some ?higher dimensional? variants of turbulence which
could be used as obstructions to classification by actions of homeomorphism
groups of n-dimensional compacta. The third project proposes a unified framework
for extracting the geometric content of various turbulent phenomena which are
associated with dynamics of Banach spaces. The fourth project addresses several
questions regarding the dynamics of Polish groups that do not admit two-sided
invariant metrics which stem from the recent work of the PI and others.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
