
* 9306150
* Mathematical Sciences: Model Theory for Analytic Structures
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/1993,06/17/1993
* David Marker,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 11/30/1996
* USD 78,000.00

The investigator will continue his research on the model theory of structures
related to real and complex numbers. In particular, he will focus on
definability questions in expansions with extra analytic structure. Most of his
work over the past five years has been concentrated in this area. He will
attempt to prove further results of the following character. (1) Marker,
Macintyre, and van den Dries have shown that the structure of the real numbers
with exponentiation and restricted analytic functions is O-minimal and admits
elimination of quantifiers. O-minimality implies that there is a rich structure
theory for the definable sets. (2) Marker and Pillay have shown that any non-
trivial reduct of an algebraically closed field that contains addition is strong
enough to recover the full field structure. (3) Marker has shown that if any
non-trivial real structure is added to the complex numbers, then the real
numbers are definable. These latter two results can be thought of as attempts to
examine the boundary of algebraic geometry. The first says that weakening
algebraic geometry leads to little more than linear geometry. The second says
that extending algebraic geometry leads to the full complications of real
algebraic geometry. While "definability" is a logical notion, often it turns out
that the definable sets are ones which arise naturally and are of great
importance. Model theoretic methods provide a new tool for their study. For
example, the sets definable in the structure of the real numbers with
exponentiation and restricted analytic functions arise naturally in studying
analytic geometry, dynamical systems, statistics, and control theory.
