
* 9401451
* Mathematical Sciences: Rigid Analytic Geometry and Logic
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/15/1994,02/15/1996
* Leonard Lipshitz,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 227,000.00

9401451 Lipshitz L. Lipshitz, Z. Robinson and their students will continue their
investigation of rigid subanalytic and semianalytic sets (i.e. subanalytic and
semianalytic sets over an algebraically closed field which is complete with
respect to a non-Archimedean absolute value). This investigation will entail
further work on the algebra and geometry of the rings of separated power series.
Among other topics, they will investigate unique factorization, uniformization,
Stein factorization, the singular locus theorem, and sheaf theory over these
rings. Methods to be used will be nonstandard models and quantifier elimination
from mathematical logic, together with techniques from commutative algebra and
algebraic geometry. The sets of points in real space defined by systems of
equations and inequalities among analytic functions are called analytic sets.
The projection (i.e. the shadow) of such a set on a lower dimensional subspace
is called subanalytic. Real subanalytic sets arise in several branches of
mathematics, such as differential equations and geometry. Similar classes of
sets arise naturally, for example in number theory, over fields different from
the real numbers, where the notion of distance has rather different properties.
These sets, however, share many of the nice properties of their real cousins.
Lipshitz, Robinson and their students will continue their investigation of the
properties of these sets, using methods from mathematical logic, commutative
algebra and algebraic geometry. ***
