
* 9403187
* Mathematical Sciences: Model Theory and Universal Algebra
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/1994,07/01/1994
* Ralph McKenzie,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1995
* USD 52,100.00

9403187 McKenzie The principal investigator recently proved that the problem of
determining whether a finite algebraic system has a finite equational basis is
algorithmically unsolvable, and he is attempting to extend this result to quasi-
equations. Results showing that some natural problem is algorithmically
unsolvable, as in Godel's proof 1931 , are very fundamental, because they reveal
inherent limitations both to practical and to theoretical computation. The
unsolvability of Tarski's finite equational basis problem is solid but
unsurprising evidence that finite algebras can exhibit complexity of a kind that
is not found in the classical algebras, i.e. in finite groups, rings or
semigroups. The name "algorithm" means a general procedure for solving a problem
or performing a calculation. Godel's proof was essentially a demonstration that
there can be no algorithm to determine all true arithmetic properties of the
natural numbers. Ideas implicit in his proof were developed by others into the
modern mathematical theory of algorithms (recursive functions, Turing machines),
which led as well, through the work of Alan Turing and John von Neumann, to the
later development of the stored program computer. Algebra is a rich source of
algorithms, many of which easily exceed the capabilities of modern computers. In
fact, some of the deepest results of modern mathematics are centered on
algorithmic problems in algebra, and this continues to be a lively area of
research. It is not illogical to suggest that important breakthroughs in
practical computation may eventually derive from this theoretical work, although
nobody today can foresee in detail how this would come about. ***
