
* 9501415
* Mathematical Sciences: Groups of Finite Morley Rank
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/1995,03/13/1997
* Huseyin Nesin,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 36,446.00

9501415 Nesin Nesin's work concerns the classification of simple groups of
finite Morley rank. Morley rank, a 30-year-old concept due to Michael Morley,
measures in some sense the complexity of the structure. In a structure of finite
Morley rank, certain subsets (the so-called definable subsets) are endowed with
a natural number, and these natural numbers behave like the "dimension" of the
set to which they are attached. For example, every variety over an algebraically
closed field is a structure of finite Morley rank. In particular, every
algebraic group over an algebraically closed field is a group of finite Morley
rank. The Cherlin-Zil'ber conjecture states a partial converse: A simple group
of finite Morley rank is an algebraic group over an algebraically closed field.
If true, the conjecture will show that the concept of algebraic group is
independent of the base field when the latter is known to be algebraically
closed: just a concept of dimension satisfying certain simple axioms is enough
to insure that a simple group is an algebraic group, i.e., a geometric object.
Apart from its use in model theory, this almost philosophical (even
metaphysical!) consequence of the conjecture suffices to make the subject
worthwhile. If the conjecture is false, it will give rise to new groups that are
not algebraic but that look very much like both infinite algebraic and finite
groups. Nesin's research is a fundamental part of the program of showing the
Cherlin-Zil'ber conjecture. The primary purpose of mathematics is the
understanding of geometry and natural numbers. Algebra was invented to
understand better the nature of geometry and numbers. The concept of dimension
is, of course, very important in geometry; in general, any geometric object has
dimension. One can ask the reverse problem: suppose each object in a class has a
dimension and that these dimensions behave well, i.e. they satisfy some natural
axioms. Is it then true that th ese objects are geometric? The work of Nesin
concerns this problem in a particular setting. His objects are groups. His
research is part of a large project whose goal is to show that groups on which a
certain concept of dimension is defined are groups of transformations of a
geometric object. ***
