
* 9504788
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Model Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/1995,04/01/1996
* Anand Pillay,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Carol Wood
* 05/31/1997
* USD 54,000.00

9504788 Pillay A substantial part of the project concerns the interaction
between logic and differential algebra. On the one hand a new Galois theory for
differential fields is developed, using model-theoretic methods (and
generalising the Picard-Vessiot theory), and various inverse Galois problems are
posed. On the other hand, it is asked whether a differential field which
supports a model-theoretic dimension theory must be differentially closed
(namely contain solutions to all algebraic differential equations over the
field). Other components of the project involve (1) more traditional questions
in model theory such as determining the number of models of complete theories,
and (2) studying groups definable in O-minimal theories, which amounts to trying
to develop a reasonable theory of Lie groups over arbitrary real closed fields.
The understanding of collections of symmetries (also called groups) is an
important part of mathematics and of its applications. Pillay's project concerns
symmetries arising from various situations: differential equations, algebraic
equations, and more abstract contexts. He will use methods from logic
(specifically model theory) to analyse, identify, and make connections between
such groups of symmetries. The expressive power of logic thus applied will gain
concrete mathematical information. ***
