
* 9510377
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Model Theory: Strongly Minimal Fusions and Other Homogeneous-Universal Models
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1995
* Kitty Holland,IL,Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diamond
* 05/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9510377 Holland Holland's research is in model theory, a branch of mathematical
logic. In recent years, many new structures of interest to model theorists have
been constructed as homogeneous-universal models for classes of finite models
with a notion of dimension. Among these new structures are the new strongly
minimal structures built from existing ones by the method of fusion introduced
by Hrushovski. Holland has begun a general, systematic study of arbitrary
fusions from a geometric point of view. The new perspective gained therefrom
enabled Holland to produce a simple, more transparent construction than that of
Hrushovski in a particular case. She intends fully to generalize the
simplification and to continue the systematic study of fusions both from a
geometric point of view, to see what new information the provide on the
classification of geometries that arise from strongly minimal structures, and
from a model theoretic point of view, to see whether variations on the strongly
minimal construction might provide further examples of model theoretic interest.
In parallel, Holland intends to work toward a unified framework in which to view
all of the new work on homogeneous-universal models. Holland intends to use the
planning period to refine her research project, formulating the specific,
plausible conjectures that should constitute a credible NSF proposal. ***
