
* 9614851
* Mathematical Sciences: A Model-Theoretic Approach to Proof Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/1996,07/24/1996
* Jeremy Avigad,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

While Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory provides a broad and flexible framework for
the formalization of mathematics, recent proof-theoretic research has shown that
a good deal of day-to-day mathematical argumentation correlates more closely
with much weaker subsystems of second-order arithmetic. In this project Avigad
will use model-theoretic techniques to explore the finitary combinatorial
consequences of these theories. This includes finding Ramsey-theoretic
independences akin to the Paris-Harrington theorem, and developing a
combinatorial, model-theoretic approach to ordinal analysis. The aim of
mathematical logic is to create formal models that describe various aspects of
mathematical practice, and apply mathematical techniques to the analysis of
these models. Since the beginning of this century, two conflicting and
antagonistic views of mathematics have shared an uneasy coexistence. From a
classical point of view, mathematics is "about" the infinite, yielding powerful
and compelling abstractions. From a constructive point of view, mathematics must
always have some concrete, computational meaning, from which it derives its
applicability. This project aims to obtain a better understanding of the
interplay between these two aspects of mathematical practice, through the formal
exploration of infinitary assumptions and their finite, combinatorial
consequences.
