
* 9619880
* Descriptive Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
* 04/15/1997,01/06/1999
* Alexander Kechris,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 12/31/2000
* USD 173,835.00

Abstract: The general aim of this project is the development of the theory of
definable actions of Polish groups, the structure and classification of their
orbit spaces, and the closely related study of definable equivalence relations.
This work is motivated by basic foundational questions, like understanding the
nature of complete classification of mathematical objects up to some notion of
equivalence by invariants, and creating a mathematical framework for measuring
the complexity of such classification problems. This theory is developed within
the context of descriptive set theory, which provides the basic underlying
concepts and methods. On the other hand, in view of the broad scope of this
theory, there are natural interactions with other areas of mathematics, such as
the theory of topological and transformation groups, topological dynamics and
ergodic theory, model theory, and recursion theory. One of the fundamental
questions that arises in many fields of mathematics is that of classifying a
given collection of objects that has been studied in this field. This amounts to
providing a "catalog" or "listing" of these objects, in principle not unlike
that of cataloging species in biology or stars and galaxies in astronomy. If
such a classification is possible, one has a "complete" understanding of the
mathematical structures involved. Otherwise a more or less "chaotic" behavior is
expected. It is thus very important to understand under what circumstances a
classification is possible. This difficult foundational question is further
complicated by the fact that what constitutes an acceptable classification is
very much dependent on the particular field of mathematics studied, so the
criteria for a "good" classification in one area might not be appropriate in
another. At its basic level, this project aims to develop a general quantitative
theory, which in many situations can precisely measure the complexity of a
classification problem and thus provide objective means by which one can decide,
in any given field, whether a satisfactory classification of the objects in
question is possible. This is achieved by associating with each collection of
objects to be studied an appropriate concept of "magnitude" or "size", which in
a precise sense measures the difficulty of its classification problem. This new
theory of "size" is investigated in this project.
