
* 9622579
* Mathematical Sciences: Infinite Combinatorics and Applications
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/1996,01/15/1997
* Menachem Kojman,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 40,000.00

DMS-9622579 PI: Menachem Kojman Carnegie-Mellon University Cantor's discovery of
infinite cardinals and his study of their arithmetic gave birth to axiomatic set
theory, now accepted as a foundation to mathematics. In spite of the dramatic
effect the discovery of infinite cardinals had on mathematics, some of the
simplest questions regarding their arithmetic remained unanswered, such as how
large the continuum is. The answer finally obtained to this question, by Godel
and Cohen, was that the cardinalities of powers of regular cardinals, in
particular that of the continuum, are independent of ZFC. The chaotic world-view
which emerged after Cohen's and Easton's independence results was challenged
some years later by Silver's theorem about powers of singulars, and eventually
by Shelah's work on cardinal arithmetic, which restored a dimension of order and
regularity to the arithmetic of singular cardinals. The current project employs
set theoretic methods, especially those infinite combinatorics discovered in the
context of cardinal arithmetic, to study a variety of phenomena in infinite
mathematical structures, such as embeddability and homogeneity. Infinite sets
come in different "sizes", called cardinals: for example, the whole numbers and
the real numbers are both infinite but the set of real numbers has the greater
cardinal. Infinite cardinals have their own arithmetic; one can add, multiply
and take powers, as with ordinary arithmetic. Research in the arithmetic of
cardinals led to the development of Axiomatic Set Theory, which in turn has
provided a foundations for mathematics. There are two kinds of infinite
cardinals, Regular and Singular. The arithmetic of Regular cardinals was studied
first and shown to be chaotic. The arithmetic of Singular cardinals turns out to
be better behaved. In recent years a coherent theory has developed, called "pcf
theory" by its inventor, Saharon Shelah, bringing some order to the realm of
cardinal arithmetic, order which was conspicuous in its absence for almost a
century. This project employs pcf theory to discover patterns and interrelations
among other infinite mathematical structures, in order to classify these
structures according to complexity, generality, and various symmetry properties.
