
* 9625445
* Mathematical Sciences: An Algebraic Measure of Computational Information Content
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/1996,07/17/1996
* Manuel Lerman,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 01/31/2000
* USD 63,000.00

DMS-9625445 PI: Manuel Lerman University of Connecticut Degree Theory analyzes
the possible situations in which a program's oracle has the knowledge to predict
how other specified oracles will act, through the use of an algebraic structure
introduced by Post and Kleene fifty years ago. One of the main goals of Degree
Theory has been to determine how closely this algebraic structure captures the
notion of information content. In other words, there is a desire to determine
whether oracles with different information content look different algebraically,
or- if not- whether this inability to differentiate between two oracles is
reflected in the algebraic structure in some more subtle way. The main tool for
the study of the algebraic model of information content is the "priority
method". Lerman is a co-developer of a framework which allows one to apply this
technique in very general situations. The technique has not only been applied to
study structural questions about information content, but has found applications
to other areas of mathematical logic and computer science. Modern computing is
interactive; programs pause frequently to ask for input from an oracle (the
user) before continuing. Thus the true universal model for computing is one in
which an oracle is appended to the computer. This project concerns the analysis
of situations in which one oracle has the knowledge to predict how other
specified oracles will act. Lerman is a co-developer of a framework which is
used to analyze such programs, and is currently refining this framework to more
easily determine whether such programs can be combined without producing
conflicts. Insights obtained from the framework will apply to a range of
situations involving computer programs with users who are providing input to the
programs.
