
* 9626212
* Mathematical Sciences: Determinacy, Inner Models, and Generic Embeddings
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/1996,06/21/1996
* Derrick DuBose,NV,University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/2000
* USD 92,967.00

17 From: cwood@nsf.gov (Carol Wood) at NOTE 5/24/96 8:17AM (2834 bytes: 52 ln)
To: jwhitehu at nsf11, ahorton at nsf11 cc: cwood@nsf.gov at NOTE Subject:
DuBose/Burke abstract (UNLV, 9626212) ------------------------------- Message
Contents ------------------------------- Text item 1: Text Item Date: Wed, 22
May 1996 14:58:28 -0700 (PDT) From: DERRICK DUBOSE <dubose@nevada.edu> To: Carol
Wood <cwood@nsf.gov> Subject: abstracts Mime-Version: 1.0 Dear Carol, below are
the two abstracts (finally). I shall be waiting for any comments, suggestions,
etc. On my portion, I was somewhat general, instead of specifically indicating
that in particular, I am interested in the determinacy strength of mice with so
many measurables above some fixed number of Woodin cardinals. I guess this is
fine, being general, and better satisfies the purpose of the abstract?? Thanks
in advance for any comments, Derrick
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DMS-9626212 Derrick DuBose/Douglas Burke Douglas Burke and Derrick DuBose are
involved in this project. The research of Douglas Burke is primarily concerned
with generic embeddings in set theory. These embeddings have been instrumental
in using new axioms (large cardinals) to prove statements that are undecidable
in the usual, basic axioms of set theory. In particular, they have many
applications in descriptive set theory and combinatorial set theory. Burke has
two long term goals in his research program: (i) to apply large cardinals and
generic embeddings to combinatorial questions (and apply combinatorial results
to questions about generic embeddings), and (ii) to extend the connection
between large cardinals and definable well-orderings of the real numbers to
larger classes of definable sets. Derrick DuBose has been engaged in
establishing correspondences between inner models closed under sharp functions
and the determinacy of classe s near the bottom of the analytic hierarchy. He
intends to establish similar correspondences involving classes higher up in the
analytic hierarchy. He will also continue to investigate moderate determinacy
assumptions and the determinacy strength of small "mice" and of mild large
cardinal properties. During the last fifty years, many natural mathematical
questions have been shown to be independent of the usual axioms of set theory.
In order to decide such questions, new axioms have been introduced. Of
particular importance are Large Cardinal Axioms and Determinacy Hypotheses. The
Large Cardinal Axioms are axioms of infinity, whereas determinacy hypotheses
state that certain definable infinite games have winning strategies.
Surprisingly, a strong connection exists between these two groups of axioms.
Also both are important in that they decide many properties about sets of real
numbers and other ``small'' sets.
