
* 9634565
* Mathematical Sciences: Computability in Mathematics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/1996,07/08/1996
* Peter Cholak,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/2000
* USD 64,500.00

DMS-9634565 Peter A. Cholak Cholak's main interest is in the interaction between
various mathematical structures and different measures of computability. One
such important mathematical structure is that of the computably enumerable sets
-- those sets which can be enumerated by a Turing machine, with the relation of
set inclusion. Cholak's project aims at understanding the relationships between
the definable sets, the various dynamic properties of these sets, and the
automorphisms of this structure. For example, Cholak wishes to determine the
complexity (in terms of the above measures) of the question whether two
computably enumerable sets are in the same orbit. This could help one show that
certain jump classes are invariant within this structure. Another part of the
project is to explore whether every partition of pairs has a non-high
homogeneous set. Such a result would improve our understanding of the proof-
theoretic strength of Ramsey's Theorem for pairs and of Weak Konig's Lemma.
Cholak works in computability theory, an area of mathematical logic. Cholak's
main interest is in the interaction between various mathematical structures and
different measures of computability. For example, the most generally used model
of computability is that of the Turing machine -- more or less an ideal computer
running without any memory or time bounds. Cholak's research concerns the sets
which can be listed using a Turing machine, with the hope of further
understanding the relationships between sets which can be defined by formulas.
Additionally, his research concerns various dynamic properties of these sets --
how fast or slow their enumeration is, and their information content.
