
* 9703945
* Combinatorics, Large Cardinals and Forcing
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/1997,05/17/1997
* James Cummings,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/2001
* USD 73,919.00

The project to be undertaken is a program of research in set theory,
investigating the axiomatic set theory Zermelo-Fraenkel with Choice (ZFC). The
topics to be investigated include the combinatorics of singular cardinals,
questions about Souslin and Aronszajn trees, Woodin's theory of genepic
iterations and "canonical" models, and the theory and applications of Radin
forcing. An expository book with Woodin about Radin forcing and its applications
will be completed. The techniques to be used in the program are those of
combinatorial set theory, forcing, inner model theory and descriptive set
theory. The unifying theme of the problems under consideration is that they are
all connected in some way or other with large cardinals. The aim of this
proposal is to investigate some mathematical problems about infinite sets, using
tools from mathematical logic. The theory of infinite sets lies at the heart of
modern mathematics, in the sense that all mathematical objects can be
represented as sets and all mathematical proofs can be represented as proofs in
set theory. Mathematical logic is a discipline in which mathematical techniques
are applied to prove results about "formal systems" such as axiomatic
mathematical theories or (more recently) computer programming languages.
Progress on the problems should lead to new mathematics and the development of
new logical tools.
