
* 9704981
* Mathematical Sciences: Model Theory and Rigid Analytic Geometry
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/1997,02/09/1999
* Leonard Lipshitz,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 05/31/2001
* USD 159,000.00

Lipshitz and Robinson propose to continue their collaborative investigation in
two distinct but related directions: analytic geometry over fields with a non-
Archimedean (ultrametric) absolute value, and the model theory of ultrametric
fields with analytic structure (i.e., the theory of subanalytic sets). Classical
affinoid rigid analytic geometry is based on rings of strictly convergent power
series-power series convergent on products of "closed" discs. The proposers have
introduced new rings of power series convergent on products of "closed" and
"open" discs. These rings of separated power series share many of the desirable
algebraic properties of the smaller rings of strictly convergent power series.
Lipshitz and Robinson propose to develop local and global rigid geometry over
these rings, in analogy to the classical case. This will represent an extension
of the classical theory to the case of relative rigid geometry over "open"
polydiscs. On the model theory side, Lipshitz and Robinson propose to complete
their development of the theory of rigid subanalytic sets based on the rings of
separated power series by proving a Uniformization and a Singular Locus Theorem.
They also propose to continue their development of the theory of rigid
subanalytic sets based on the rings of strictly convergent power series. The
methods employed come from model theory, commutative algebra and algebraic
geometry. The sets of points in real space defined by systems of equations and
inequalities among analytic functions are called analytic sets. The projection
(i.e., the shadow) of such a set on a lower dimensional subspace is called
subanalytic. Real subanalytic sets arise in several branches of mathematics such
as differential equations and geometry. Similar classes of sets arise naturally,
for example in number theory, over fields different from the real numbers, where
the notion of distance has rather different properties. These sets, however,
share many of the nice properties of their real cousins. Lipshitz, Robinson and
their students will continue their investigation of the properties of these
sets, using methods from mathematical logic, commutative algebra and algebraic
geometry.
