
* 9704918
* Issues in the Foundations of Mathematics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/1997,06/18/1997
* Harvey Friedman,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/1999
* USD 60,000.00

Friedman proposes to continue his work establishing the independence from the
usual axioms of mathematics (i.e., Zermelo-Frankel set theory with the axiom of
choice) of some simple and basic finite combinatorial statements. Recent work of
the PI discusses versions that assert that in every collection of finite
functions satisfying a certain coherence condition, some element has a very
strong combinatorial property related to Ramsey theory. He proposes to relate
these examples to the fast growing numerical functions associated with the
relevant large cardinal axioms. In addition, he has discovered a family of
transfer principles which establish a new kind of formal relationship between
finite set theory and transfinite set theory. In particular, he has shown that
certain large cardinal axioms are equivalent to transfer principles asserting
that any statement of a simple kind that is true about the functions on the
natural numbers is true about the functions on the ordinals. The PI proposes to
extend this work to stronger large cardinal axioms, and also to formulate and
investigate related transfer principles from the hereditarily finite sets to
arbitrary sets. An independent statement is a mathematical assertion which
cannot be proved true or false within the usual axioms for mathematics. The
previously known independent statements have certain unsatisfactory features
which make them very atypical of normal everyday mathematical assertions.
Friedman has discovered some examples which are much closer to normal
mathematics in terms of both concreteness and naturality and proposes to
continue the search for more concrete and natural examples. His examples also
have the positive feature that the assertions can be proved using certain well
studied new axioms for mathematics (so called large cardinal axioms), but not
otherwise. The PI also has established an entirely new way in which these new
axioms arise - they can be thought of as the natural extension of known facts in
the context of the inte gers. He proposes to extend this new way of looking at
these new axioms for mathematics to yet stronger new axioms for mathematics.
