
* 9704337
* Complexity in the Constructive and Intuitionistic Theory of Reals
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/1997,10/05/1999
* Miklos Erdelyi-Szabo,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/2001
* USD 76,943.00

The proposed project includes research into topics in the constructive and
intuitionistic theory of the reals. The research will focus on the constructive
theory of real closed fields and on the various topological models of the reals.
Particular emphasis will be placed on the complexity of the theories under
investigation and on the decidable fragments of these theories including the
questions of definability and axiomatizations. Results about the models help to
find fragments of the language whose truth in the real number system (as defined
by Bishop) can be decided, and this fact is provable constructively, or in an
intuitionistic metatheory. Using the decidability results, the next step is to
look for first order axioms for the decidable fragments of the constructive
and/or intuitionistic theory of real closed ordered fields and to analyze the
structure of elements and sets definable in these fragments. The work then would
turn to the direction initiated by Scowcroft: towards the model-theoretic study
of the relative strength of axiomatizations of a constructive first order theory
of the reals. Connections to recent developments about the decision procedure of
S2S and to related game-theoretic approach to concurrent programming are to be
investigated, as well as the relationship between the theory of a Heyting
algebra and the properties of the corresponding model for intuitionistic
analysis. In most cases computations involve real numbers. The proposal's aim is
to look at the structure of reals - for instance, (maybe infinite) decimal
fractions with addition and multiplication - from a constructive point of view.
This means, for example, that it is not enough to show that a real number, or a
function from reals to reals with particular properties exists, a method is
required to find arbitrary approximations of the number or of the values of the
function in question. The first step in this practical approach is to find
constructive proofs that questions like "is there a number/funct ion with such
and such properties?" can be answered. Then from the proof itself, if the answer
is yes, one may obtain the method mentioned above. One way to approach this
problem is by looking at various models of the constructive/intuitionistic
theory of the reals, and this is the starting point of the present proposal. The
results then help to find the method when there is such, and also to find the
problems where in general there is no such method.
