
* 9704520
* Applied Mathematical Logic
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 05/15/1997,05/17/2001
* Kenneth Kunen,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 10/31/2001
* USD 180,000.00

Research will be conducted on automated reasoning, on mathematics, and on the
use of automated reasoning (AR) techniques to solve mathematical problems. The
"pure" mathematics topics include investigations into set theopy, topology, and
measure theory. The properties of the standard (Lebesgue) measure on the real
numbers are well understood, but various generalizations of Lebesgue measure
lead to interesting open questions. The proposer plans further work on measure
extension axioms, which involve extending Lebesgue measure to measure additional
(non-measurable) sets of real numbers. He also plans to consider measures on
other topological spaces. The "pure" AR topics include improving the technology
for linked resolution and automatic lemma generation. In addition, a number of
topics involve integrating AR and mathematics by using AR to derive mathematical
theorems. In particular, it is proposed to continue work on algebraic systems
such as quasigroups and loops; one specific project here is to find a structure
theory for G-loops. It is also proposed to work on single axioms for groups.
Besides these specific questions in algebra, it is planned to look at the
general problem of transcribing machine-generated proofs into meaningful form.
Work is also proposed on verification systems, which are designed to use a
computer to check the correctness of existing mathematics. There are three
distinct, but related, threads to this research. The first thread involves the
expansion of our knowledge of traditional pure mathematics, without any specific
practical application in mind. The other two involve automated peasoning (AR)
tools. AR allows the computer to derive logical conclusions from given
knowledge. This subject has been in existence since the 1960s, but it is only in
recent years that the tools have become powerful enough to discover conclusions
which could not have been discovered without human assistance. The second thread
involves a continuation of the proposer's work in impr oving the AR tools and
using these tools to create new results in mathematics. This is of interest not
only for the mathematics itself, but because it demonstrates the power of the
tools, which can then be applied to reasoning tasks in other areas of science
and engineering, as well as to autonomous decision making by robotic agents. The
third thread involves verification systems; these systems do not discover new
mathematics, but rather are used as an automated database to collect and verify
existing mathematics. One potential application to advanced mathematics is the
use of the computer as a referee to validate new mathematical results. On the
more elementary level, these tools can provide an accessible intelligent
database of mathematical knowledge, which can be accessed by users of
mathematics. The difference between this and traditional database methods in
cataloging mathematics is that the computer has "understood" and verified the
knowledge it has, so that the the knowledge may be accessed by idea or concept,
rather than by keywords.
