
* 9704541
* Mathematical Sciences: General Frameworks for Classification Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/1997,05/05/1999
* Steven Buechler,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/2001
* USD 99,000.00

Professor Buechler's proposed research is in stability-theoretic classification
theory, a subfield of model theory. In recent years, methods developed in the
context of stability theory have been used to analyze structures such as pseudo-
finite fields, pseudo-algebraically closed fields, difference fields, and
quadratic forms over finite fields. This research has yielded applications to
arithmetic number theory (due largely to Hrushovski). Model-theorists now have a
good understanding of how these dependence relations fit in a general framework.
Buechler proposes to generalize techniques from the geometrical stability theory
of superstable theories to this broader class. This research is likely to give
insight into the model-theoretic properties of bilinear forms and groups
definable in structures such as those mentioned above. Buechler also intends to
set a more general framework for arguments based on ranks and dependence
relations. Much of mathematics involves the classification of an abstract
collection of objects in terms of concrete, well-understood objects. The
classification of finite simple groups is one instance of this principle. Model
theorists study classification results in an abstract setting, addressing
questions such as: When can we prove that a classification theorem exists, even
when the particular theorem is unknown? How can we tell when a particular
classification theorem is the best possible result for a given collection of
objects? When are two classification theorems special cases of a more general
result? In the past twenty years model theorists have gone a long way towards
answering these questions for collections of objects axiomatized in a relatively
simple manner. While this research is carried out in abstract setting, it has
spawned concrete results in differential algebra and arithmetic number theory.
Buechler proposes to expand the mathematical context in which these results
apply. He will also find a more abstract notion of classification theorem which
encompasses several existing examples. This may lead to a greater understanding
of results related to Fermat's Last Theorem.
