
* 9707156
* Workshop in Recursion Theory and Complexity Theory to be held in Kazan, Russia in July, 1997
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
* 03/15/1997,02/26/1997
* Steffen Lempp,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 02/28/1998
* USD 15,500.00

ABSTRACT: The proposal is to support travel by U. S. scientists to a one-week
workshop in computability theory to be held in Kazan, Russia, in July 1997, to
be organized by Profs. Marat Arslanov (Kazan State University) and Sergei
Goncharov (Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk Branch) as well as Steffen
Lempp (University of Wisconsin-Madison) and Robert Soare (University of
Chicago). The proposed workshop (to be held jointly and at the same location as
a workshop in complexity theory, organized by Profs. Razborov and Ablayev) is
the first meeting of its kind, designed to allow close contact between
approximately thirty Russian and thirty scientists from the U. S. and other
Western countries. Computability theory, the study of unsolvable problems in
mathematics, is a well-established branch of mathematical logic, and is
particularly strongly represented in the United States and Russia. For obvious
political reasons, interaction between the two countries in this area has been
quite limited in the past. Research interests have also developed in somewhat
different directions within the field; e. g., the emphasis in Russia is on
applications of computability theory to algebra, whereas in the United States,
classical computability theory is more dominant. On the other hand, close
connections between the various directions obviously exist, as is evidenced by
the small amount of cooperative research already taking place. While the
political barriers have by now mostly disappeared, severe financial difficulties
have proven to be almost as great an obstacle to mutual cooperation in the
field. It thus appears that the only way to organize a meeting including a large
number of Russians is to organize one within Russia, cutting travel expenses for
Russian participants and counting on the non-Russian participants to be able to
raise travel funds more easily.
