
* 9802843
* Logic and Computability
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/1998,10/11/2000
* Richard Shore,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 09/30/2001
* USD 149,229.00

The proposed project includes research into a broad range of topics in
computability theory (recursion theory) and logic, both theoretical and applied
to other areas of mathematics and computer science. Included in the first area
are investigations of the structures of sets and functions ordered by different
notions of relative complexity of computation. Particular emphasis will be
placed on the complexity structures of sets which are effectively enumerable and
on the most general notion of relative computability as defined by unrestricted
Turing machine computations. Computation procedures that place effective bounds
on the access to oracle information or the run time of the computations will
also be investigated, as well as reductions between real numbers based on the
relative rates of convergence of effective approximations to the real numbers.
Applications of the methods of pure computability theory will be made in the
areas of computable algebra and model theory. The second area includes the study
of structures representable by finite automata, decision procedures, the
analysis and development of nonmonotonic logic, concurrent programming models,
and applications of linear programming ideas and algorithms to data structures
and logic programming. A primary focus here will be the logical and mathematical
foundations of hybrid (continuous and discrete) control theory as well as the
practical implementation of algorithms for these subjects based on the
theoretical work being done.

The work proposed in the first area is directed at a better understanding of the
fundamental notions of computability and relative difficulty of computation for
different tasks. The theoretical work deals both with the abstract notions of
computability as well as with applications to specific branches of, and
questions in, other areas of mathematics. One important application (within
mathematics) concerns the general question of what starting information is
needed to be able to compute other aspects of many important classes of
mathematical structures. In practical terms, the results at times indicate that
there are no algorithms for certain important tasks or that more information
than might have been expected is needed to write programs calculating the
desired results. The second area deals more directly with developing the
mathematical (and especially logical) tools needed for the crucial areas of
program verification, data management, and automated control of real-world
complex systems. Commercial applications are expected for some of this work and
there has already been a spin off to a start-up company developing several
applications including data compression and network management algorithms.
