
* 9803417
* Tame Groups, Universal Graphs, Automorphism Towers, and Cofinalities of Infinite Groups
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 06/15/1998,06/07/2000
* Gregory Cherlin,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 05/31/2001
* USD 167,901.00

Cherlin proposes to collaborate with a team of eight researchers on the
classification of connected simple tame groups of finite Morley rank, using
methods suggested by experience with finite groups: it is anticipated that all
such groups are algebraic. In addition Cherlin, working with Shi, seeks to
introduce model theoretic methods into the study of universal graphs, and to
show the role of the model theoretic algebraic closure operator for this class
of problems. Thomas will study interactions of set theory and group theory in
connection with automorphism towers and the cofinalities of infinite analogs of
finite groups, making use of forcing, pcf theory, and large cardinals, as well
as character theory. An outstanding problem is the relationship of the
cofinality of the infinite symmetric group to Blass' invariant, the groupwise
density. The role of matrix groups in modern mathematics is well established and
occupies a central place in both pure and applied mathematics. It has been
conjectured that these groups also play a predominant role in the detailed
analysis of many apparently unrelated structures of general type. One of the
goals of the present project is to confirm this in the so-called ``tame case'',
which is more immediately accessible. A separate goal is to demonstrate that
standard ideas of logic (model theory) can cast new light on existing problems
in combinatorics (graph theory). It is hoped that graph theorists will
themselves adopt these methods in such cases. The work of Thomas uncovers
previously unsuspected relations between algebraic and set theoretical issues,
and should lead to new ``forcing'' tools, which are among the most powerful
foundational tools of modern set theory. The general thrust of the proposal is
to show how techniques arising naturally in one area can be transported
fruitfully to other subject areas.
