
* 9803643
* RUI: Outer Models and Forcing
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/1998,06/25/1998
* Maurice Stanley,CA,San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 12/31/2001
* USD 85,659.00

Stanley proposes to continue his work in set theory in two areas, namely,
infinitary combinatorics and class forcing. One group of combinatorial problems
concerns characterizing which stationary sets can contain closed unbounded
subsets in cardinal and GCH preserving outer models. Every stationary subset of
aleph-one has this property. Previous work has shown that in general there is no
such first-order characterization for subsets of aleph-two. On the other hand,
for a restricted class of subsets of the successor of aleph-omega, such a
characterization is possible. Some interesting cases remain open. Similar
characterization questions can be asked regarding partitions and trees. Another
area for continued work is the study of outer models and class forcing.
Notwithstanding some technical qualifications, essentially only one method is
known for constructing outer models, namely, Cohen's forcing method. Work to
this point has shown that this is not an accident: Granted a technical
assumption, every outer model is a class forcing extension, in one sense of the
notion. An open problem is to characterize outer models that are class forcing
extensions in a certain stronger sense. One point of this work is reducing
certain set theoretical questions to more concrete combinatorial questions. All
mathematical statements can be translated into statements about sets. If a given
statement is mathematically provable, then the corresponding statement about
sets is derivable from the axioms of set theory. Thus statements whose
translations are neither provable nor refutable from the axioms of set theory
are themselves neither provable nor refutable mathematically. Such statements
are said to be "independent". In some cases, a given mathematical object may
have a certain property for provable reasons; in others, for independent
reasons. One subject of this research is, for a certain class of objects, to
determine whether it is possible to characterize those objects which have
certain properties for pr ovable reasons. Surprisingly, it can be shown that in
some cases this is not possible---which objects have the specified property
depends on global features of the entire universe of sets. Another subject of
this research is class forcing. Essentially, only one method is known for
proving that statements are independent, namely, Cohen's forcing method. Recent
work has shown that there is a good reason for this. In many cases, any
independence result that can be obtained can be obtained by class forcing, in
one sense of the term. However, this sort of class forcing is combinatorially
far removed from the sort that is typically used to establish independence
results. It is a goal to close this gap (or to explore why it is not possible to
close it). A hope is that this will provide a means of reducing certain problems
to tractable questions regarding forcing.
