
* 9970255
* Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/1999,03/12/2003
* W. Hugh Woodin,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2005
* USD 406,000.00

9970255 Woodin The investigator will continue his study of the relationships
between large cardinals, determinacy, descriptive set theory, and forcing
axioms. The focus of his project is the fine structure of determinacy and its
metamathematical consequences concerning the Continuum Hypothesis.

Is every infinite set of points in the line either countable, i.e.,
equinumerous with the integers, or else equinumerous with the set of all points
in the line? This is Cantor's continuum problem. Modern set theory began 35
years ago with P.J. Cohen's proof that Cantor's continuum problem was unsolvable
on the basis of the customary axioms of set theory.

Axioms of Infinity were proposed by Goedel 50 years ago as candidates for new
axioms that solve otherwise unsolvable problems. The results of 30 years of
research have domonstrated that this is true for the classical problems of
descriptive set theory. In particular, the theory of the projective sets (the
``true'' axioms for second order number theory) is now arguably settled. The
nature of Cohen's proof is such that this success cannot be directly repeated
for Cantor's continuum problem. Nevertheless, recent results indicate progress
can be achieved, for these results suggest a key asymmetry concerning potential
solutions to the continuum problem. The implications of this asymmetry, and the
technology behind this discovery, are the main topics for the research to be
undertaken.






