
* 9970459
* Topics in the Foundations of Mathematics
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/1999,07/26/1999
* Harvey Friedman,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/2002
* USD 97,800.00

9970459 Friedman This project will continue Friedman's work establishing the
independence from the usual axioms of mathematics (i.e., Zermelo-Frankel set
theory with the axiom of choice) of some simple and basic combinatorial
statements. These assertions involve sequential constructions of finite graphs
and trees, where at each stage a feature of the construction is minimized. This
is in some analogy with the so called ``greedy'' constructions in computer
science. The assertions tell us that such constructions can be performed in such
a way that the resulting object has strong and natural combinatorial properties
related to Ramsey theory (a branch of combinatorics). These combinatorial
statements are provable from certain large cardinal assumptions, but not from
the usual axioms of mathematics. Results in this connection from prior NSF
support were used as an integral part of an undergraduate course in the computer
science department at UCSD. In addition, under prior NSF support, Friedman has
discovered a new kind of elementary constraint on sequences from a finite
alphabet. For each finite alphabet, there is a bound on the length of any
sequence satisfying this constraint. In one letter, this longest length is 3. In
two letters, this longest length is 11. In three or more letters, this longest
length is demonstrably incomprehensibly enormous, and is closely connected to
various topics in mathematical logic and combinatorics. These topics include
fast growing functions, provably recursive functions, fragments of Peano
arithmetic, and proof theoretic ordinals. This topic was explored by gifted high
school students this past summer at the University of Chicago, where students
came up with 11 for two letters. Friedman will continue his investigation of
this and other related problems involving such simple constraints. In this
connection, Friedman has begun a fruitful collaboration with Randy Dougherty
that involves substantial computer exploration. Friedman has managed to
establish the independence from the usual axioms of mathematics of some
remarkably concrete combinatorial statements. These involve the construction of
finite mathematical objects subject to certain constraints. The assertions tell
us that such constructions can be performed so that the resulting object has
properties of a kind that are normally studied in combinatorics. Results in this
connection from prior NSF support were used as an integral part of an
undergraduate course in the computer science department at UCSD. In addition,
under prior NSF support, Friedman has discovered a new kind of elementary
constraint on sequences from a finite alphabet. The longest length of a sequence
subject to this constraint (for a three-letter alphabet) is demonstrably
incomprehensibly enormous, and is closely connected to various topics in
mathematical logic and combinatorics. This topic was explored by gifted high
school students during the summer of 1988 at the University of Chicago, where
students came up with the correct number of 11 for an alphabet of two letters.
Friedman will continue his investigation of this and other related problems
involving such simple constraints. In this connection, Friedman has begun a
fruitful collaboration with Randy Dougherty that involves substantial computer
exploration. ***
