
* 9971352
* Algebras and ordered sets: structure, enumerability, decidability
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/1999,07/31/2001
* Ralph McKenzie,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2003
* USD 163,700.00

9971352 McKenzie McKenzie will investigate algorithmic questions that involve
properties of finite algebras determined by the varieties and quasi-varieties
they generate: Is there an algorithm to determine if the quasi-equations valid
in a finite algebra A are finitely based? Is there an algorithm to determine if
the quasi-variety generated by A possesses a natural duality? Is the class of
finite algebras possessing a finite equational basis recursively enumerable? Is
the class of finite algebras generating a residually large variety recursively
enumerable? Additionally, he will work toward a complete determination of all
finitely generated varieties that possess definable principal congruences.
Farley is working productively on a large variety of problems in duality theory
and combinatorics of ordered sets. Most significant is the conjecture that all
perfect sequences of a chain-complete ordered set converge to the same ``core,''
up to isomorphism, and, closely related, the conjecture that the fixed-point
property is preserved under direct products of (unrestricted) ordered sets.
Farley and McKenzie will attempt to prove Birkhoff's cancellation conjecture for
exponents of finite ordered sets in the case where the exponent is dismantlable.
I. Universal algebra is a branch of mathematics that deals with the unknown. The
old adage, that if it looks like an orange, smells like an orange, and tastes
like an orange, then it IS an orange, does not apply. One can have a collection
of objects about which all we know is that one can add and multiply them like
numbers, and that the ``usual'' rules apply --- for instance, x+y always equals
y+x --- but still not be dealing with numbers. Given a particular mathematical
system, call it A, there will be a whole variety of mathematical systems that
satisfy the same algebraic rules. McKenzie will examine what one can say about
this variety of systems if one just knows about A. II. The theory of ordered
sets is a branch of mathematics that deals with, well, order: If one has a
collection of objects, and it makes sense to ask, ``Is object P bigger than
object Q?'' then one has an ordered set. For instance, the collection N of
natural numbers (1,2,3,4,...) is an ordered set. Ordered sets can be added and
multiplied like numbers --- N*N is the collection of pairs of points (a,b) where
a and b are natural numbers. A natural question to ask is: If P and Q are
ordered sets with a particular property, does P*Q have this property? Farley
will address this question when the property is the "fixed point property"; this
is a difficult long-standing problem. Farley and McKenzie will also attempt to
solve a problem dealing with the exponentiation of ordered sets, a problem over
50 years old. ***
