
* 9972613
* Model Theory and Representation Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/15/1999,08/09/1999
* Ivo Herzog,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2003
* USD 61,229.00

9972613 Herzog Let L be a finite dimensional simple Lie algebra over an
algebraically closed field of characteristic zero. The classification of the
finite dimensional simple representations of L is one of the fundamental results
in representation theory. Herzog's project is to extend the classification to
the simple pseudo-finite dimensional representations of L -- a representation is
called pseudo-finite dimensional if in the language of L-modules it satisfies
the axioms for a finite dimensional representation. The project involves
describing the topology induced by the Ziegler spectrum on the space of simple
pseudo-finite dimensional representations of L. For the Lie algebra of two-by-
two matrices of trace zero, it is a compact Hausdorf space the cardinality of
the continuum, of which the finite dimensional simple representations form an
open, dense and discrete subspace. A group is the mathematical concept used to
study the structure of symmetries of an object that may occur in physics or the
other natural sciences. In the mathematical theory of representations, the goal
is to study a group G by classifying all the objects -- the representations of G
--- of which G is a symmetry group. For many groups, this program has met with
stunning success by associating to G a Lie algebra L whose representations
mirror those of G, and then classifying the representations. The objective of L.
Herzog's project is to study the finite dimensional representations of certain
Lie algebras L, using the methods of mathematical logic. The project focuses on
the infinite dimensional representations X of L that are called pseudo-finite
dimensional. These representations are virtually finite dimensional, in the
sense that the limited power of expression of the language being used cannot
distinguish X from the finite dimensional representations. In previous work,
Herzog has applied the Compactness Theorem of Goedel to show that there exist
uncountably many ``simple'' pseudo-finite dimensional representations. However,
a single such representation has yet to be discovered, and part of Herzog's
project is to construct a concrete example. ***


