
* 9988855
* Real analytic geometry and model theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2000,03/19/2002
* Christopher Miller,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2004
* USD 78,246.00

Miller proposes to continue his research on the model theory of expansions of
the field of real numbers, concentrating on further developing the model theory
and analytic geometry associated with o-minimal, and certain other well-behaved,
expansions of the field of real numbers. He intends to do this by applying
techniques from descriptive set theory and geometric measure theory in addition
to the model-theoretic and analytic-geometric techniques usually associated with
o-minimality. In turn, Miller hopes to apply model-theoretic techniques to
questions in descriptive set theory and geometric measure theory. Miller has
also begun to collaborate with applied mathematicians and control engineers on
applications of model theory to hybrid control systems, and intends to continue.

Many results of so-called classical mathematics are very general; they apply to
a wide variety of input, so to speak, so we must expect to have to deal with a
correspondingly wide variety of output. However, we could hope that if the input
is, in some respect, particularly well behaved, then the output would be
similarly well behaved. This turns out to be true in many important cases, but
to see this usually requires new, more constructive proofs of classical results,
as well as a deeper understanding of the good properties of the input. Before we
can even begin such projects, though, we need some way of deciding which
mathematical objects (inputs) should be considered as well behaved, and which
should be considered as troublesome. This can be a difficult matter. The theory
of o-minimal structures on the real field, a sub-discipline of mathematical
logic, has been developed in large part to deal with this issue. This has been a
rapidly-developing area for the last decade, with many contributions from---and
cooperation between---several branches of mathematics and logic. Applications,
and potential applications, of these developments have been found in areas as
diverse as theoretical economics, neural-net learning theory, and hybrid control
systems.
