
* 9988620
* Diophantine Definability and Decidability Over the Algebraic Extensions of Global Fields
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 08/01/2000,08/01/2000
* Alexandra Shlapentokh,NC,East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2004
* USD 80,781.00

ABSTRACT

The investigator will study the issues of Diophantine definability and
decidability over global fields and their algebraic extensions. The long term
goal of the project is to gain insight into Diophantine (un)decidability of Q
and rings of algebraic integers of number fields. The immediate goal is to study
Diophantine definability over some subrings of number fields and function
fields. In particular, if one thinks of the field as a ring where all the primes
are allowed to occur in the "denominators" of the elements, then integers and
rings of integral functions and numbers, where we understand the problem
relatively well, can be considered as rings where no primes or only finitely
many primes are allowed in the denominator. Thus a natural intermediate step for
the project is to understand what happens in the rings where infinitely many
primes are allowed to appear in the denominator of the divisors of the elements.
These rings constitute the main focus of study by the Principal Investigator. A
related issue is the problem of defining of integrality at sets of primes using
polynomial equations. This problem has been solved for many fields for the case
when the prime sets are finite. However, even for the finite sets the question
is open for the primes whose residue fields are algebraically closed. The
investigator also plans to study this problem with the goal of identifying
situations where this kind of integrality is not definable in Diophantine terms.

In 1900, during an International Congress of Mathematicians, a great German
Mathematician David Hilbert presented a list of problems which had great
influence on the development of Mathematics in the XX century and whose influnce
is likely to extend to the XXI century. The tenth problem on the list asked a
question which, if rephrased in modern terms, can be stated as follows. Is there
a computer program which can determine whether an arbitrary polynomial equation
in several variables has solutions in integers (whole numbers) ? The answer
turned out to be "no". It took many years to obtain and it finally emerged in
the late sixties in the work of Yurii Matyasevich building on results of Julia
Robinson, Martin Davis and David Putnam. There has been speculation that Hilbert
did not expect this answer. He hoped for an algorithm to "solve" all polynomial
equations. Such an algorithm would also solve all polynomial equations where the
answers are allowed to be fractions. The absence of the computer program for
integer solutions left the question wide open for the case when we allow
rational numbers (fractions) as solutions. The answer to the question of what
happens when we allow solutions to polynomial equations to be fractions is the
long term goal of the project. However, this problem currently seems too hard to
approach directly. As in many other situations in Mathematics, a gradual assault
is probably necessary. As a first step in our program we plan to move from
integers to fractions in stages. If one thinks of rational numbers as a
collection of numbers where any non-zero number is allowed in the denominator,
and integers as a collection of numbers where no number is allowed in the
denominator, one can visualize an intermediate step as a the study of
collections of numbers where some but not all numbers are allowed in the
denominator. The investigator's immediate goal is to study such sets of numbers.

Finally we should note that polynomial equations over rational numbers are
present in virtually every part of Mathematics and its applications. Thus
understanding their logic properties is likely to shed light on many other
problems.


