
* 0094089
* Macroscopic Properties of Heterogeneous Media and Development of the Applied Mathematics Curriculum
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2001,06/29/2005
* Yury Grabovsky,PA,Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 329,573.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0094089 Mathematical Sciences: CAREER: Macroscopic
properties of heterogeneous media and development of the applied mathematics
curriculum

Abstract

0094089 Grabovsky

The unifying idea of this project's research is the general Hilbert space
approach to homogenization due to Milton. There are three major issues based on
this approach that will be investigated. One concerns the exploration of the
convexity properties of G-closures with the goal of developing new numerical
approximations to the elusive set. This approach may lead to the new analytic
results in several basic cases, where the G-closure is still not known. The
second issue is to make use of the new formula for effective tensors in terms of
the W-transformation of Milton for studying effective behavior of the random
media. That formula provides a new series expansion for the fields and effective
tensors of the random composites. The new expansion is shown to converge rapidly
even for a relatively high contrast media. Finally, we will develop a new and
exciting idea of space-time composites proposed recently by Lurie. The space
time composites refer to composites whose electromagnetic properties change
rapidly in time. These temporal oscillations may be a result of high frequency
vibrations of the composite specimen or of an active nature of the material
itself.

This project's research is centered on the investigation of properties of
complex and smart materials. Examples of such materials include composites (used
in spacecraft, airplanes, cars, skies, golf clubs, etc.), random media like
rock, clay or bone, novel active materials that are used in sensors and
actuators. This grant provides funding for a variety of research and educational
activities that includes a small elasticity demonstration lab. The main purpose
of the lab will be to heighten students' interest in mathematics through the
inclusion of experiments and demonstrations. The lab will also facilitate
involvement of undergraduates in mathematical research and interdisciplinary
interaction throughout the College of Science and Technology at Temple
University. The grant will also support a multi-prong applied research program
unified by the common mathematical tools used in this research. One of the goals
of this project is the prediction of properties of composite materials. Success
in this direction may make it possible to reduce or eliminate expensive and
time-consuming measurements of elastic properties of composite materials by
providing good theoretical predictions. Another application is to the study of
high-contrast disordered media, of interest in hydrology for prediction of the
permeability of large volumes of sedimentary rock based on local measurements.
The permeability is a crucial property of soil that determines how ground water,
oil or pollutants propagate underground. Yet another application is to the novel
field of space-time composites: composite materials whose components are in
rapid relative motion or whose components have the ability to change their
properties rapidly in time without mechanical motion. The success of this part
of the project will be essential for designing and understanding the new
generation of smart materials that are able to respond quickly to a changing
environment.
