
* 0133511
* CAREER: Partial Differential Equation-based Image Processing with Applications to Radiation Oncology
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2002,02/27/2002
* Doron Levy,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

In the past decade, new nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) have
been developed for various image processing applications, such as noise
reduction, edge detection, image segmentation and restoration. While the
attention of the scientific community in this area predominantly focused on
creating the new PDEs, very little attention was paid to developing numerical
algorithms that approximate their solutions. The few numerical algorithms that
are currently used suffer from a variety of problems: they are not accurate
enough, too slow, and not fault-free. In this project, the investigator develops
accurate, efficient, and robust numerical algorithms for nonlinear PDEs in image
processing. The research activities are based on the investigator's extensive
work in the field of hyperbolic conservation laws, and include numerical methods
for the Hamilton-Jacobi equations, fast algorithms for high-order nonlinear
PDEs, algorithms for computing steady-state solutions, numerical homogenization
of Hamilton-Jacobi equations and multi-resolution analysis, analysis of
nonlinear diffusion equations, constrained morphing active contours and geodesic
flows, and "non-blind" algorithms for image processing. A portion of the
research activities focuses on improving existing algorithms in order to solve a
specific imaging problem in radiation oncology treatment planning. The
investigator develops novel mathematical techniques for image processing and
uses these techniques for solving problems in the field of radiation oncology
imaging. Radiation oncology treats cancer by delivering relatively small doses
of radiation to tumors in order to eliminate cancer without destroying or
chronically damaging healthy tissues in and around the growth. CT and MRI scans
are used as three-dimensional anatomical models to ensure that the treatments
conform geometrically to the tumor target. This process depends critically upon
identifying the location of the tumor as well as the healthy organs (in order to
minimize the dose of radiation in these areas). Despite extended research, the
existing mathematical tools for image processing are unsuitable for clinical
medical applications. The segmentation of the CT and MRI scans is still carried
out by manual tools, and consumes about one-half of the time required to plan
the treatments. The investigator designs accurate and reliable automated
algorithms that would significantly shorten this time and have a big impact on
radiation oncology. He integrates into his work educational activities that
demonstrate the importance of applied mathematics in a broad spectrum of
sciences. Special emphasis is given to applications of computational mathematics
in biology and cutting-edge technologies. The planned educational activities
include programs for junior-high, high-school, undergraduate, and graduate
students. The investigator works to increase the gender and ethnic diversity in
the mathematical sciences by encouraging under-represented groups to study
applied mathematics and choose it as a future career.
