
* 0239771
* CAREER: Analytic and Geometric Aspects of Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2003,05/14/2007
* Donatella Danielli,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

PI: Donatella Danielli, Purdue University DMS-0239771

Abstract: ******************************************** The research part of this
proposal presents a collection of problems motivated by the study of elliptic
and parabolic free boundary problems, calculus of variations, and geometric
measure theory. The P.I intends to study free boundary problems of interest in
flame propagation, and related to Lord Rayleigh's conjecture that among all
clamped plates of a given area, the circular one gives the lowest principal
frequency. One of the main objectives of the proposed research is to prove
regularity properties of the free boundary. Another area of interest is the
optimal regularity of the solution and of the free boundary in the subelliptic
obstacle problem. The necessary tools from harmonic analysis and PDEs for the
study of these problems will be developed concurrently. The P.I. has also a
program aimed at developing the regularity theory of minimal surfaces in Carnot
groups. Such program entails the study of several basic questions. Among these,
we mention the existence and characterization of traces on lower dimensional
manifolds of Sobolev or BV functions. This issue is instrumental also in the
study of the Neumann problem for sub-Laplacians. In connection with questions
arising in geometry, the P.I. intends to develop a regularity theory for
subelliptic fully nonlinear equations modeled on the classical Monge-Ampere
operator. This program involves establishing an appropriate version of the
celebrated Alexandrov-Bakelman-Pucci maximum principle, which in turn requires
the investigation of a suitable notion of convexity. The P.I. is also interested
in studying the method of ``moving spheres" for so-called Weingarten
hypersurfaces, and in its use to prove symmetry properties of solutions to fully
nonlinear equations. The P.I. proposes to integrate this research plan with
several educational activities. In particular, we mention the organization of an
annual Summer Symposium at Purdue University. The P.I. will supervise
undergraduate research projects as part of Purdue's REU program. At the K-12
level, the P.I. hopes to hook receptive young minds organizing fun, hands-on
mathematics workshops at the local science museum, as well as in the framework
of Expanding Your Horizons conferences. To increase the representation of women
in the scientific community, the P.I. will also continue mentoring women in
science.

Free boundary problems naturally arise in physics and engineering when a
conserved quantity or relation changes discontinuously across some value of the
variables under consideration. The free boundary appears, for instance, as the
interface between a fluid and the air, or water and ice. One of the proposed
projects aims at studying regularity properties of the free boundary in burnt-
unburnt mixtures. The results of this investigation will lead to a better
understanding of the models, to the improvement of simulation methods, and
ultimately to a precise description of how flames propagate in non-homogeneous
media. The P.I. has also a research program that lies at the interface of
calculus of variations, partial differential equations, and geometric measure
theory. The focus is on the study of analytic and geometric properties of
solutions to variational inequalities and PDEs involving a system of non-
commuting vector fields. The problems described in the proposal not only arise
in a variety of mathematical context (e.g. optimal control theory, mathematical
finance, and geometry), but are also of interest in other fields such as
mechanical engineering and robotics. The P.I. is committed to the training of
future generations of mathematicians, and to increasing the representation of
women in the scientific community, via the organization of a variety of
educational activities for graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students.
