
* 0239734
* CAREER: Methodology for Statistical Computing in Massive Datasets: Parallel Approaches to Cluster and MCMC Estimation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2003,04/07/2003
* Ranjan Maitra,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 172,467.00

CAREER: Methodology for Statistical Computing in Massive Datasets: Parallel
Approaches to Cluster and MCMC Estimation

DMS 0239734

PI: Ranjan Maitra

This project is aimed at developing practical methodology for statistical
analysis and estimation in massively sized databases. Because of automated data
collection methods, there is now a surfeit of severely multi-dimensional
records. Grouping them into homogeneous clusters to better understand them is a
desirable goal in a variety of applications, yet classical statistical methods
are computationally infeasible in many cases. I propose to develop parallel
methodology for this context. Although the methodology and theory developed will
be quite general and for potential use in applications ranging from business,
medicine, the environment, software quality assessment, I will conduct the
research in the context of three scientific collaborations. The first pertains
to the US Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) self-reported Toxic Releases
Inventory (TRI) databases, where profiling the different facilities in terms of
their product, demographic and business information can improve the accuracy of
records, as well as better characterize them vis-a-vis their emissions mix. The
second project is to assess the reliability of functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) scans, with a view to understanding the cognitive processes of
the brain, as a first step to patient care and therapy. The third application is
in bioinformatics where the goal is to cluster microarray data and also to
analyze two-dimensional proteomic gel images. This will help in isolating genes
and understanding their relationship with different disorders.

Clustering is in general a very difficult problem, with empirical solutions even
for very moderately sized datasets. I propose to develop multi-pass
methodologies in several different scenarios. I also propose multi-scale
simulation approaches to estimation in a high-dimensional context. One of the
biggest challenges faced by simulation methods due to high dimensionality is the
low mobility around the space to be traversed because of its vastness. I propose
to address this issue by connecting these high-dimensional spaces to lower-
dimensional ones (which are significantly smaller) and by using these lower
scales to traverse from one corner of the higher-dimensional space to another. A
final goal of this five-year plan is to investigate the development and
estimation in more complex models for proteomic gel data. Most of the plans
proposed will be possible only with a parallel computing interface. This is
increasingly critical in a large number of scientific applications, and I
propose to simultaneously provide statistics students with the necessary
expertise by designing suitably tailored graduate and undergraduate classes.
