
* 0239097
* CAREER: Time Reversal and Inverse Problems in Wave and Particle Propagation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2003,08/14/2003
* Guillaume Bal,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 502,236.00

Bal The investigator and his students study wave and particle propagation in
heterogeneous media and related inverse problems. More precisely, they analyze
the refocusing and stability properties of time reversed waves, which can be
used in non-destructive testing and wireless communication. They also analyze
photon propagation in human tissues to understand how the properties of these
tissues can be imaged from photon intensity measurements. Numerical tools and
software are developed to simulate the aforementioned forward and inverse
problems. The investigator also develops a course on theoretical and numerical
inverse problems. In many applications a good understanding of wave and particle
propagation in complicated media is necessary: seismic wave propagation
generated by earthquakes, acoustic wave propagation to destroy kidney stones
(lithotripsy), microwave propagation in wireless communication, or photon
propagation in optical tomography, a quite powerful imaging technique to detect,
for instance, brain tumors and finger arthritis. The investigator devises
theoretical and numerical tools to analyze wave and particle propagation and to
understand how it can be used to solve practical problems, such as the maximal
capacity of communication that can be obtained in a specific environment, or the
minimal size tumor that can be imaged in optical tomography. It is also a
primary goal of the investigator to teach coming generations of undergraduate
and graduate students the novel techniques that have emerged recently in the
applied mathematical community to address these problems.


