
* 0314129
* CAREER: Solutions, Spectrum and Dynamics of Schrodinger Oerators
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 10/01/2002,03/05/2003
* Alexander Kiselev,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2008
* USD 303,177.00

ABSTRACT

PI: Alexander Kiselev Proposal: DMS-0129470 Institution: University of Chicago

The research will focus mainly on two directions. The first objective is to
further study and apply to concrete quantum systems of interest the criteria
relating behavior of solutions of Schroedinger equation, spectrum and dynamics.
In particular, the applications may shed new light on the dynamics and spectrum
of certain classes of random and quasiperiodic operators, such as Fibonacci
Hamiltonian, as well as provide a better general understanding of the quantum
transport phenomena. The second objective is to continue the study of advanced
WKB methods for one-dimensional Schroedinger operators, using the tools of
harmonic analysis. WKB methods are a classical part of quantum mechanics, and
their main goal is to find a good approximation for the wave function of the
system under certain natural assumptions. This project will pursue the
development of new WKB-type techniques, which can be applied to obtain
information about dynamics of a class of Schroedinger operators. Extensions to
higher dimensions will also be sought.

The spectral and dynamical theory of Schroedinger operators is the cornerstone
of Quantum Mechanics. This theory describes the laws which govern behavior of
the quantum particles, such as electrons, atoms and molecules. Much of the
fundamental scientific knowledge about many important physical processes (such
as, for example, chemical reactions or conduction properties of various
materials) comes from the theory of Schroedinger operators. This project focuses
on the development of new methods in spectral and dynamical theory of
Schroedinger operators which may allow a new approach to some long-standing
problems in Quantum Mechanics. These problems concern, in particular, the
conductance properties of materials with impurities and of quasicrystals, and
have direct applications to modern engineering devices, wave guides and
transistors to name two. The project will also involve development of a modern
mathematical methods curriculum for undergraduate students majoring in biology
and chemistry. Given rapidly evolving interface between mathematics and these
sciences, a new set of ideas and material needs to be incorporated into such
service courses. In addition, graduate courses will be developed with the main
objective to help beginning graduate students make a transition to independent
research.


