
* 0449689
* CAREER: Large and Multi-Dimensional Solutions of Conservation Laws
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,12/30/2004
* Helge Jenssen,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth J. Shaw
* 08/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

Understanding the properties of nonlinear Partial Differential Equations (PDE)
is a fundamental challenge in modern pure and applied mathematics. The goal of
the research projects is to gain new insight into three specific areas of
evolutionary PDE. (A) Large solutions of one-dimensional systems of conservation
laws: The combined effects of large data and nonlinear effects pose a basic
challenge as well as being of obvious importance in applications. Building on
existing work this project aims at giving further examples of blowup solutions,
understanding their stability properties, and identifying assumptions
guaranteeing global existence of large solutions.

(B) Existence and qualitative properties of solutions for particular systems of
multi-dimensional systems of conservation laws. Multi-dimensional equations
display an exceedingly rich variety of behaviors and there is currently no
general existence result available for global solutions. Recent examples of
blowup demonstrate that the small variation theory for one-dimensional systems
cannot be generalized to several space dimensions. The research aims at a
"bottom-up" approach where insight is obtained from specific cases. The systems
will be chosen to provide simplified, but non-trivial, examples with strong
structural constraints. The goal is to create a toolbox of methods that can be
applied to more general systems. Both analytical and numerical tools will be
employed to gain insight into the structure of the solutions.

(C) The Navier-Stokes equations for fluid flow provide a basic model of
importance in a wide range of applications. The goal of this project is to
investigate three issues: formation of vacuums (cavitation), the effect of
including temperature dependence in the transport coefficients (viscosities and
heat conductivity), and multi-dimensional flows with large amplitudes. The
various projects will also address the significant numerical challenges one
faces in computing large or multi-dimensional solutions, and flows containing
vacuums. Vice versa, exact solutions will be used to benchmark various
computational codes.

The projects aims at a better understanding of how nonlinear mechanisms interact
with one- or multi-dimensional effects in equations that are extensively used in
physical models, ranging from properties of materials and to fluid flow and
meteorology. While these issues are of independent theoretical interest they are
also of obvious importance in applications to Science and Engineering. Several
of the projects require development and testing of high performance computer
codes with important applications in everyday simulations. A combined approach
of analytical techniques, modeling, and numerical calculations will enhance
basic understanding of fluid flow and its applications.
