
* 0546209
* CAREER: Algebraic Combinatorics and its Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2006,01/13/2006
* Alexander Postnikov,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER proposal includes problems related to algebraic and enumerative
combinatorics and its applications to geometry of polytopes, representation
theory, inverse boundary problems, and algebraic geometry. The proposal
discusses permutohedra and their generalizations, which are certain convex
polytopes related to Coxeter arrangements. The PI suggests three different
approaches to calculation of volumes and Ehrhart polynomials of such polytopes.
He introduces new mixed Eulerian numbers with remarkable combinatorial
properties. Various generalizations of permutohedra include Stasheff's
associahedra, Pitman-Stanley polytopes, polytopes related to wonderful
compactifications of De Concini-Procesi, etc. There are intriguing parallels
between these polytopes and generalized associahedra related to Fomin-
Zelevinsky's theory of cluster algebras. The next part of the proposal is
related to Schur positivity. The PI with collaborators have recently resolved
several open Schur positivity problems that attracted a lot of attention,
including Fomin-Fulton-Li-Poon's conjecture and Okounkov's conjecture. They plan
to apply their techniques to prove several other prominent conjectures. The
proposal mentions a general Schur positivity conjecture involving a mysterious
polytope, which might have relations with the Klyachko cone and lead to new
interesting combinatorics. The proposal discusses the inverse boundary problem
for networks and its relations with total positivity. Networks parametrize the
totally positive cells on the Grassmannian. This construction has links with
Fomin-Zelevinsky's results on double Bruhat cells and with their theory of
cluster algebras.

This CAREER proposal describes new initiatives in research and education in the
area of combinatorics. Combinatorial techniques play an increasingly important
role in other fields such as algebra, geometry, computer science, probability
theory, physics, biology, cryptography, etc. Both the research and the
educational components of the proposal aim on applications of combinatorics. The
proposal discusses several important combinatorial problems on the frontiers of
modern mathematical research. These problems involve counting or enumerating
various discrete mathematical objects, say, vertices of a polytope or pieces in
a decomposition of a complicated geometrical object into simpler objects. These
problems would help to understand, clarify, and simplify nontrivial mathematical
concepts and constructions. The proposed research project would have impact in
several fields, including algebraic geometry (which studies geometrical objects
using algebra), representation theory (which studies symmetries), theory of
convex polytopes, and theoretical physics. The educational part of the proposal
includes plans for a new course on modern applications of combinatorics. The PI
is planning to encourage graduate and undergraduate research. Combinatorial
problems are appealing for undergraduate students because these problems are
intuitive and easy to formulate but yet quite challenging. The proposal
describes plans for using interactive visual tools and demos, applets, and
animations in teaching future combinatorics courses.
