
* 0644613
* CAREER: Tripodal Geometry and Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2007,11/09/2011
* Indira Chatterji,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Tripodal spaces are metric spaces for which given any three points, there exists
a choice of geodesics between them that intersect in a common point, called a
median point. This type of metric has many natural examples including trees and
products of those, taxi-cab metrics on the plane or the space of phylogenetic
trees. I plan on developing this notion of tripodal geometry and show many more
examples of spaces admitting tripodal metrics, examples such as SL(4,R). Spaces
that almost admit a tripodal metric allow for many more examples keeping some of
the tripodal features. Groups acting on tripodal spaces have some low complexity
features such as being nicely embeddable in Euclidean spaces.

Groups arise in many scientific fields because they encode symmetries of
physical, biological or other systems, therefore it is important to study them.
It is impossible to say anything useful about all groups, so we divide them into
classes and study each class separately. I am interested in classes of groups
that arise as symmetries of geometric objects, such as tripodal spaces.
Understanding something about the geometry of these objects often can be
translated into algebraic information about the group. I plan to develop tools
from algebra and analysis to study tripodal geometry, with a particular emphasis
on understanding geometric properties which only become apparent on a large
scale.
