
* 0645585
* CAREER: Random Surfaces and Conformal Probability
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 02/01/2007,01/23/2007
* Scott Sheffield,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2009
* USD 599,602.00

The investigator will study spatial problems of probability theory, with a
particular focus on random surfaces and two dimensional random objects with
conformal symmetries, such as planar Brownian motion, the Gaussian free field,
the Schramm-Loewner evolution, and the conformal loop ensembles. In addition to
their intrinsic beauty, these objects find applications in quantum field theory,
statistical physics, and the theory of random surfaces. A guiding principle of
the proposer's research is that many problems in stochastic geometry are best
understood in terms of random surfaces and height functions (in discrete
settings) and random distributions such as the Gaussian free field (in continuum
settings).

Two dimensional random geometries are important in part because many problems in
statistical physics (such as the way crystal surfaces fluctuate) are essentially
two dimensional. Since the path-breaking work of Belavin, Polyakov, and
Zamolodchikov in the 1970's and 1980's, it has been understood---at least
heuristically---that the laws of certain macroscopic observables of these
systems should be invariant under conformal maps from one planar domain to
another. Over the past two decades, physicists have developed sophisticated non-
rigorous techniques for understanding the properties of random objects with
conformal symmetries. During the past few years, several mathematicians have
begun to rigorously prove some of the predictions from the physics literature,
along with many additional results. Many of the these problems have natural
higher dimensional analogs that we are only beginning to understand. The
investigator's proposed activities include efforts to bring new graduate
students into this emerging field and to assist them in their studies and
careers.
