
* 0746778
* Career: Sparse directional multiscale representations: theory, implementation and applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,05/06/2008
* Demetrio Labate,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2010
* USD 422,024.00

Labate 0746778

The investigator develops, implements, and applies a new multiscale
representation method for multidimensional data. The proposed shearlet approach
encompasses the mathematical framework of affine systems and, to date, is the
only method able to combine optimal sparsity (few coefficients to compute), fast
transforms through the power of multiresolution analysis (fast computation) and
full mathematical justification and framework (great flexibility and
versatility). The sparsity of the proposed shearlet representation is a direct
consequence of its genuinely multidimensional multiscale character, and its fast
implementation a consequence of its affine mathematical structure. The project
is organized into three main directions of investigation, with several specific
goals. First, the mathematical framework underpinning the shearlets is
investigated to set the foundation for the construction and analysis of
optimally sparse multidimensional representations. Next these representations
are applied to the decomposition of functions spaces and operators. More
specifically, the shearlets are used as building blocks of anisotropic function
spaces. This step has significant implications in approximation theory, in the
study of Fourier integral operators, and for various nonstandard regularity
spaces associated to partial differential equations. Third, shearlets are
applied to problems from image processing and image analysis. Specifically,
improved algorithmic implementations are developed and applied to image
denoising, edge detection and shape recognition. Tests are conducted on
biomedical data to address specific application-driven problems, including
geometric reconstruction of neuronal morphology from confocal images and
neuronal classification.

Over the past twenty years, multiscale methods and wavelets have revolutionized
signal processing and stimulated an impressive amount of research in mathematics
and engineering. In fact, wavelets provide optimally efficient representations
of one-dimensional data and have fast numerical implementations. As a result,
wavelets are successfully employed in a number of strategic applications,
including the new FBI fingerprint database and JPEG-2000, the new standard for
image compression. In spite of their remarkable success, wavelets are far from
being optimal in general. Even though they outperform other traditional methods,
they fail to capture intrinsic geometrical features of multidimensional
phenomena. For instance, they do poorly at dealing with features such as the
edges of an image or the boundary surfaces of a solid object, and, as a
consequence, they are unable to handle efficiently the ever larger
multidimensional data sets which are required by many modern applications. By
contrast, the approach addressed in this project is truly multidimensional and
opens the door to a new generation of highly efficient methods for the storage,
transmission and processing of data. The applications arising from this research
facilitate technological advances in sensitive applications such as remote
sensing, medical diagnostics, data transmission and classifications, video
surveillance, and storage of data.
