
* 0747659
* CAREER: Computational Geometric Mechanics: Foundations, Computation, and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,06/10/2009
* Melvin Leok,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 01/31/2010
* USD 202,426.00

Date: November 21, 2007 Proposal: DMS- 0747659 PI: Leok, Melvin Institution:
Purdue University Title: CAREER: Computational Geometric Mechanics: Foundations,
Computation, and Applications

ABSTRACT

Symmetry, and the study of invariant and equivariant objects, is a deep and
unifying principle underlying a variety of mathematical fields. In particular,
geometric mechanics is characterized by the application of symmetry and
differential geometric techniques to Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics, and
geometric integration is concerned with the construction of numerical methods
with geometric invariant and equivariant properties. Computational geometric
mechanics blends these fields, and uses a self-consistent discretization of
geometry and mechanics to systematically construct geometric structure-
preserving numerical schemes. The proposed research will combine theoretical and
computational tools arising from Dirac mechanics and geometry, noncommutative
harmonic analysis, and uncertainty quantification to dramatically extend the
applicability of computational geometric mechanics and geometric control to
engineering problems that evolve intrinsically on nonlinear spaces, such as Lie
groups and homogeneous spaces. This will provide insights into the canonical
discretization of Dirac constraints, nonholonomic constraints, and
interconnected systems. In addition, the study of uncertainty in the context of
geometric control will improve the robustness and reliability of the resulting
numerical and computational tools.

This research will improve our ability to control interconnected systems of
autonomous vehicles in a robust and efficient fashion, by explicitly taking into
account the uncertainty inherent in our knowledge of the surrounding
environment. Our results will be applicable to the control of distributed sensor
networks, consisting of an interconnected set of satellites, unmanned aerial
vehicles and underwater vehicles. Such sensor networks are an exciting new
development in the field of remote sensing that has the potential to
dramatically increase the efficiency, coverage, and reliability of the
information we obtain about our oceans, environment, and climate. More broadly,
most complex engineering systems can be expressed as an interconnected system of
more elementary components, and our mathematical framework will allow us to more
readily understand complex systems in terms of the behavior of its component
parts and the manner in which they are interconnected.
