
* 0747656
* CAREER: Topics in Nonlinear Wave Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2008,05/05/2011
* Dan Geba,NY,University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 450,869.00

The nonlinear wave equations, that arise in specific problems in areas like
general relativity, elasticity or field theory, are quite well understood from
physical point of view. However, to claim a rigorous mathematical picture, there
is still work to be done, and this is why solving problems connected to these
equations could lead to new ideas and new interpretations in their area of
origin. This project plans to investigate issues like local well-posedness,
lifespan of low regularity solutions, and blowup phenomena. Also, the
investigator will focus on similar problems for stochastic nonlinear wave
equations. It is likely that recent advances for deterministic hyperbolic
equations (e.g. vectorfield method, wave packet parametrices) could improve the
current state of the art for these problems, which have applications in
mathematical finance.

Problem solving is widely considered as one of the focal points in the
instruction process of mathematics. The investigator will work on an educational
plan integrated into the above research program, which has both an undergraduate
component and a K-12 outreach one. The former includes the continuous
development of the current Problem Solving Seminar, together with the creation
of new courses both at undergraduate and graduate level, which will address the
subject of partial differential equations. The K-12 component focuses on the
creation of a Rochester Area Math Circle, aimed at middle-school and high-school
students with an interest in solving challenging math problems. This activity
will feature weekly lectures, problem sessions and math olympiads, in which a
wide range of math educators and students will be involved.
