
* 0748333
* CAREER: Analysis and Modeling for Image Processing Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 02/01/2008,01/17/2008
* Selim Esedoglu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The investigator, together with his students and collaborators, will tackle
important analytical and computational problems from image processing and
computer vision that arise also in a variety of other fields, such as computer
graphics, population dynamics, and materials science. A significant analytical
component of the research program will focus on better understanding the
coarsening phenomena observed in ill-posed diffusion equations that are
encountered in such disparate fields as image processing (where they appear in
models of image segmentation), granular flow (where they describe the formation
of shear bands in granular materials), and population dynamics (where they model
aggregation of certain types of bacteria). A second component of the research
program will develop novel numerical algorithms for efficient computation of the
motion of multiple phases under geometric motions arising as steepest descent
for energies that contain bulk and surface tension terms. These interfacial
motions are frequently encountered not only in fundamental image processing and
vision procedures such as image segmentation, but also in materials science
where they can describe grain boundary motion in polycrystalline materials. A
number of numerical ideas will be utilized in this direction, including the
level set method and some novel alternatives to it. The algorithms will be
tested on large scale computations of high scientific interest, such as three
dimensional simulations of grain growth in materials, using many grains. In
addition, the investigator will continue his research program in extending
successful image processing models to the context of surface processing in
computer graphics.

The image processing and computer vision tasks that will be impacted by results
from this research program include image denoising and segmentation, which are
fundamental preliminary operations that are needed whenever useful information
is to be extracted from images or video automatically. The goal of image
denoising is to remove artifacts and noise from images so that subsequent
operations can be performed more reliably. The goal of segmentation is to
identify parts of an image occupied by distinct objects. Examples of practical
applications where these procedures play a primary role include medical imaging,
face recognition, and target identification and tracking. Insights gained from
the analytical component of this research program will elucidate the nature of
some of the most popular but incompletely understood techniques developed for
these vision tasks, and consequently allow more effective use of these
techniques. The new computational methods that will be developed as a major part
of the project will allow efficient and accurate solution of the numerical
problems encountered in these computer vision applications, and thus reduce the
computer time needed for knowledge extraction from images and video. The
numerical issues from computer vision that will be targeted by this research
program have a lot in common with numerical issues seen in some central problems
in materials science. This connection will in particular make it possible to
apply the new computational methods to large scale simulations of the motion of
grain boundaries in materials; this computational capability is highly desirable
and would be invaluable in predicting the performance and reliability of
materials.
