
* 0748636
* CAREER: The topology of smooth and symplectic 4-manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2008,07/18/2013
* Scott Baldridge,LA,Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2015
* USD 452,869.00

In this proposal Baldridge works on two research strands: The study of the
geography problem in 4-dimensions and the study of symplectic 4-manifolds that
admit a circle action. The first strand centers on the ``Symplectic Poincare
Conjecture,?? a question about whether or not the topological space of the
complex projective plane has a unique smooth structure that supports a
symplectic form. The second strand centers on a question first posed by C.
Taubes: if the product space of a 3-manifold and a circle admits a symplectic
form, does the 3-manifold fiber over a circle? Baldridge?s previous work in each
strand has formed and influenced his work in the other--the two strands are
deeply connected. The research in this proposal would investigate the following
questions related to the conjectures above: (1) Which manifolds with small Euler
characteristic admit smooth exotic structures? Which of those exotic structures
admit a symplectic form? (2) Are there criteria under which a symplectic
4-manifold is (up to diffeomorphism) uniquely defined by its topological data?
(3) What interesting phenomena occur in the geography problem as one gets close
to the Bogomolov-Miyaoka-Yau line? (4) Which circle bundles over a fibered
3-manifold admit a symplectic form?

A 3-manifold is a space that locally looks like the familiar space in which we
live. If one imagines replacing every point in the 3-manifold with a circle of
points in a nice way, one gets an example of a 4-manifold with a circle action.
Here `action' means a rotation of the space along each circle. Four manifolds
with circle actions have many nice periodic and symmetry properties, which makes
them particularly suitable for modeling and testing physical theories. (For
example, the space-time universe we live in is an example of a 4-manifold which
may have a circle action.) These manifolds are especially useful for modeling if
they also have a symplectic structure--a key ingredient in almost all the
equations of classical and quantum physics. Baldridge will investigate the
shapes of symplectic 4-manifolds with circle actions and of 4-manifolds in
general. This investigation is done by constructing new examples of smooth and
symplectic 4-manifolds and by distinguishing 4-manifolds from each other by
relating invariant features of a 4-manifold to the number of solutions of
certain systems of nonlinear partial differential equations on that manifold. In
addition to his research work in mathematics, Baldridge will strive to help the
next generation of U.S. citizens learn mathematics through his work on three
projects. The first project is to complete a comprehensive college curriculum
for prospective elementary and middle school teachers. The second is to bring
outstanding mathematicians to Louisiana State University to be ``Scholars in
Residence?? to interact with participants in a new professional Master?s degree
program for teachers. The final project is professional development for teachers
in a high-need school district that has the potential to create a replicable
model for building high-performing mathematics programs in high-need schools.
