
* 0748389
* CAREER: Statistical Learning from Data with Graph/Network Structures
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2008,07/06/2012
* Ji Zhu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The research aims to develop new statistical methodologies and associated theory
that incorporate the network/graph structure in the data. Such data are becoming
increasingly common in various fields. Specifically, the investigator studies
three different but related problems: a) statistical learning on networks via
random walks, which includes semi-supervised classification for two and multiple
classes, clustering, and analysis of categorical data; b) learning network
structures, which deals with the situation where one is interested in
identifying the underlying network structure from the data; c) variable
selection with structural constraints, which deals with variable selection when
there is inherent structure among the variables or parameters.

Recent advances in computing and measurement technologies have led to an
explosion in the amount of data that are being collected in all areas of
application. Much of these data have complex structure, in the form of text,
images, video, audio, streaming data, and so on. This proposal focuses on one
important class of problems, viz, data with network or graph structure. Such
data are common in diverse engineering and scientific areas, such as biology,
computer science, electrical engineering, economics, sociology and so on. While
there has been extensive research on networks (primarily outside the field of
Statistics), much of it deals with characterizing and modeling network
structures. The goal of the current research program is to exploit the network
structure as additional information and develop statistical methods that take
into account the structure of relationships between the data. The research
program will make significant contributions in several areas, including
Statistics, Biology, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, IOE, Physics,
Psychology and Sociology. The educational program also includes substantial
initiatives that will involve undergraduate and graduate students and expose
them to state-of-the-art research in the topics related to the proposal. These
include new courses, summer workshops, mentoring, and software development.
