
* 0748482
* CAREER: Scaling and self-similarity in nonlinear science-education and research
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/01/2008,05/22/2008
* Govind Menon,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2014
* USD 560,658.00

Date: November 21, 2007 Proposal: DMS- 0748482 PI: Menon, Govind Institution:
Brown University Title: CAREER: Scaling and self-similarity in nonlinear
science-education and research

ABSTRACT

Empirical scaling laws are often the only signature of order in complex
nonlinear problems. Such laws arise in diverse areas such as the study of
biological networks, earthquakes and fully turbulent flows. The investigator's
research vision is to bring some of these laws within the scope of rigorous
mathematical analysis. To this end, seemingly unrelated problems are treated
within a unified framework that combines mathematical methods from dynamical
systems, partial differential equations and probability theory. Explicit
connections between these areas are used to provide a fundamental understanding
of the microscopic origin of `universal' scaling laws in (a) models of domain
coarsening in materials science and physical chemistry, (b) dynamic scaling of
transport coefficients in polymer chemistry, (c) models of turbulence. Analogies
with classical probability are also used to guide new investigations of
universality in dynamical systems. These research goals are closely tied to
concrete improvements in education and training. Scaling and self-similarity are
used as a unifying theme in a program for curricular innovation for
undergraduates that stresses the extraction of simple quantitative answers from
complex models. This includes the development of new freshman and senior
seminars and an REU program.

This mathematical research is motivated by problems of fundamental technological
significance in fluid mechanics, materials science and physical chemistry.
Studies of domain growth in materials science improve understanding of the
stability of binary alloys and coarsening of nanoscale islands on thin-film
substrates. Improved numerical methods for the simulation of polymers advance
the analysis of biochemical flows, such as the manipulation of individual
strands of DNA in confined channels. A deeper understanding of universality in
dynamical systems enhances knowledge of the transition to chaos in several fluid
flows, and is the first step in the control of such flows. The plans for
undergraduate education place early emphasis on the basic utility of scaling
analysis in emerging areas for the application of mathematics such as biology,
physical chemistry and geosciences. They also include the development of
innovative expositions at the undergraduate level of successful mathematical
research in these fields. This contributes to a growing demand for mathematical
sophistication in these areas, and is critical for sustained impact. The
educational plans stress small classes, undergraduate research, and outreach to
under-represented groups, in the firm belief that careful, individual mentoring
of students is the foundation for a diverse and talented scientific workforce.
