
* 0748760
* CAREER: Fluctuations and fitness - fundamental limits and selection conflicts
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, EVOLUTIONARY ECOLOGY
* 06/01/2008,07/26/2012
* Johan Paulsson,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 05/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

Natural selection occurs at all levels of biological organization. At higher
levels it favors cooperation between lower-level units and at lower levels it
favors cheaters that exploit the common good for their own interests. The
corresponding molecular mechanisms are best characterized for the replication
control genes of plasmids in Escherichia coli that face selection at two
distinct levels: plasmid copies that systematically over-replicate relative to
their cellmates have a higher chance of fixing in descendent cells, but these
cells typically have a lower chance of fixing in the population. To analyze the
conflict, the mathematical frameworks for multi-scale selection and drift in
cells will be extended, focusing on conflict suppression mechanisms, meta-
control of selfishness, and how cooperation is prevented by clonal interference.
In addition, an experimental platform will be developed to test how different
conditions select for altruism or selfishness, and monitor the dynamics of the
conflict by mapping arising mutations to the known control systems.

All social elements--from microorganisms to humans--can benefit from both
cooperation and selfishness, and the most successful behavior depends on the
parameters of the social scene. The investigators have identified a clean-cut
conflict between selfish and altruistic elements in one of the simplest and best
studied processes in bacterial cells: Self-replicating pieces of DNA get an
immediate advantage by selfishly over-reproducing, but then instead indirectly
suffer because they impose a larger burden on the cells upon which they rely.
Because other aspects of this system are so well-studied, this provides a unique
opportunity to rigorously analyze a complex phenomenon like cooperation in terms
of molecular mechanisms and physical chemistry. General rules for such conflicts
will be mathematically derived and experimentally tested, determining conditions
for altruistic behavior and identifying mechanisms that enhance or suppress
selfishness. By focusing on testable theorems and broad intuitive principles,
the results are equally important for education and research.
