
* 0845368
* CAREER: New Statistical Methods for Massive Spatial, Temporal and Spatial-Temporal Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2009,03/18/2014
* Yongtao Guan,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Dimension reduction plays an essential role in reducing the complexity of data
so that the most useful information in data can be successfully extracted. Most
existing dimension reduction methods are developed under the assumption that the
data are independent. Consequently, they may be inefficient and sometimes even
inappropriate for analyzing spatial/temporal data which are often naturally
correlated. The proposed research intends to fill in this gap by developing
inverse regression based dimension reduction methods for data arising from three
different types of spatial/temporal processes: spatial point processes,
recurrent event processes and quantitative spatial processes. Specific goals of
the project include 1) developing general frameworks and methods for conducting
dimension reduction for both univariate and multivariate spatial point processes
and 2) generalizing these methods to the cases of recurrent event processes and
quantitative spatial processes. Special attentions will be given when the
dimension of the response is also high. In addition, the PI will also develop
computationally efficient analytical tools such as second-order analysis for the
modeling of massive recurrent event process data.

With the fast development of modern data collection technologies, especially
with the increased availability of more accurate Global Positioning System and
Geographical Information System, large-scale spatial, temporal and spatial-
temporal data have become rapidly available in recent years. Many of these data
are massive and highly complex in nature, posing unprecedented challenges to
data analysis. The proposed research will develop efficient statistical tools
that can be used to analyze such data. The PI will collaborate closely with
field scientists from various disciplines to apply these tools to solve real-
life problems that have motivated this research. Specific goals of these
collaborations includes, but are not limited to, 1) improving the understanding
of tropical forestry diversity, 2) better assessing the health effects of air
pollution on asthmatic children and 3) providing more accurate spatial
predictions of US watershed characteristics such as discharges and fluxes. Key
educational components of the project include providing interdisciplinary
statistical trainings to students especially minority students at both the
graduate and undergraduate levels and helping three local high schools improve
their AP Statistics teaching.
