
* 0847173
* CAREER: Integrative and Comparative Tensor Algebra Models of DNA Microarray Data from Different Studies of the Cell Cycle
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, NUM, SYMBOL, & ALGEBRA COMPUT
* 08/15/2009,03/19/2014
* Orly Alter,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2015
* USD 400,053.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Future discovery and control in biology and medicine will come from the
mathematical modeling of large-scale molecular biological data, such as DNA
microarray data, just as Kepler discovered the laws of planetary motion by using
mathematics to describe trends in astronomical data. In prior work,
generalizations of the matrix computations that underlie theoretical physics
were developed, and their use was pioneered in creating models from DNA
microarray data. These models have been used to predict mechanisms that govern
the activity of DNA and RNA, including a previously unknown mechanism of
regulation that correlates DNA replication initiation with RNA expression during
the cell cycle, the first mechanism to be predicted from mathematical modeling
of microarray data. Preliminary experimental results verify this computational
prediction, demonstrating for the first time that mathematical modeling of
microarray data can be used to correctly predict previously unknown cellular
mechanisms. This work will now be extended by creating the first tensor algebra
models, integrating and comparing different types of cell cycle data from
different studies and organisms and under different conditions. This project
will result in innovative mathematical frameworks for large-scale data analysis,
as well as new insights into the cellular program of cell division. For example,
one preliminary tensor model is the only mathematical framework to date that
enables comparison of data from multiple organisms without being limited to
similar genes among these organisms. This model promises to reveal universality
and specialization of evolutionary, biochemical and genetic pathways that are
truly on genomic scales. Another preliminary model enables integration of data
from time courses under different perturbations into a coherent picture of the
effects of these perturbations on cell cycle progression. This model promises to
uncover previously unrecognized causal coordination of cellular activities.

Recently developed high-throughput technologies, such as the DNA microarray,
make it possible for the first time to record the complete molecular biological
signals that guide the progression of cellular processes, i.e., tell cells what
to do and when and where to do it. Biology and medicine today may be at a point
similar to where physics was after the advent of the telescope. The rapidly
growing number of large-scale data sets holds the key to the discovery of
cellular mechanisms, just as the astronomical tables compiled by Galileo and
Tycho enabled accurate predictions of planetary motions and, later, the
discovery of universal gravitation. Just as Kepler and Newton made these
predictions and discoveries by using mathematical frameworks to describe trends
in astronomical data, so future discovery and control in biology and medicine
will come from the mathematical modeling of large-scale molecular biological
data. In this project, mathematical frameworks for large-scale data analysis are
developed and used to create models from microarray data, and predict cellular
mechanisms. For example, earlier work predicted a previously unknown mechanism
of regulation that correlates the beginning of DNA replication with RNA
transcription, the process by which the information in DNA is transferred to
RNA, during the cell division cycle. This is the first mechanism to be predicted
from mathematical modeling of microarray data. Preliminary experimental results
verify this computational prediction, demonstrating for the first time that
mathematical modeling of microarray data can be used to correctly predict
previously unknown cellular mechanisms. This project will now extend this work
by creating models that integrate and compare different types of cell cycle data
from different studies and organisms and under different conditions. Models such
as these may become the foundation of a future where physicians model and
control biological systems as readily as engineers model and control physical
systems today. In this future, cancer and disease can be stopped or reversed,
damaged tissues can be engineered to regenerate, and aging can be slowed or even
halted altogether.
