
* 0847524
* CAREER: Canonical metrics, complex Monge-Ampere equations and geometric flows
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2009,08/07/2009
* Jian Song,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2015
* USD 426,952.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0847524 Principal Investigator: Jian Song

The proposal focuses on a number of projects on canonical metrics and stability,
geometric flows and complex Monge-Ampere equations. Such problems are
fundamental in complex analysis and complex geometry, in tight relation to
partial differential equations, algebraic geometry and mathematical physics. The
recent progress and influx of new ideas from Ricci flow, pluripotential theory
and the minimal model program in algebraic geometry have unravelled a deep, rich
and unifying structure. The PI will investigate the limiting behavior of the
Kahler-Ricci flow and its connection to the classification theory for algebraic
varieties, inspired by Perelman's breakthrough in Hamilton's program to resolve
the geometrization conjecture by Ricci flow. In particular, the PI aims to study
the relation between the formation of finite time singularities of the Kahler-
Ricci flow and the algebraic surgery in the minimal model program in algebraic
geometry. The PI also intends to continue his study on canonical metrics of
Einstein type on algebraic varieties and understand the analytic and geometric
aspects of the singularities of such special metrics. The PI also plans to study
the uniform approximation problem of the Monge-Ampere geodesics in infinite
dimensional symmetric space by those in the finite dimensional Bergman spaces.
The precise understanding of this problem will give new insight into Yau's
conjecture on the relation between Kahler-Einstein metrics and certain stability
in the sense of geometric invariant theory. The outcome of the proposed research
will develop new tools and give profound insights and understanding of geometry
and the structure of the universe.

Problems in the proposal arise naturally from our attempts to understand
nonlinear differential equations from geometry and physics. The solutions to
these problems will have strong impact on other fields of sciences such as
physics and cosmology in the deep understanding of our universe. The method of
analyzing singularities of nonlinear equations will have wide applications in
physics, engineering and economics. Furthermore, the PI plans to disseminate the
exciting research at the interface of geometry and analysis to a broad audience
through lectures and workshops. The proposed project will bring in research and
teaching innovation in mathematics from various disciplines and have an
immediate beneficial effect on undergraduate and graduate students at Rutgers as
well as in the regional mathematical community. The PI will also organize and
participate in the integrated research/education programs and activities that
will promote the education level of the nation.
