
* 0847074
* CAREER: Interdisciplinary Mentoring Program in Analysis, Computation, and Theory (IMPACT)
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2009,03/14/2014
* Jeffrey Humpherys,UT,Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This work focuses on the stability theory of nonlinear waves and coherent
structures, with an emphasis on front propagation arising in the continuum and
kinetic theories of compressible flow. This class of problems models key real-
world phenomena such as shock layers in a viscous gas or plasma, detonations in
a reactive gas, and the propagation of phase boundaries in a viscous fluid.
During this project, we will explore long-standing open questions about the
stability of many-variable and multi-dimensional dissipative traveling waves, in
particular those of compressible fluid flow. Our technical approach centers
around Evans function computation and related spectral techniques, energy
estimates, and asymptotic ordinary differential equation techniques including
the gap, tracking, and conjugation lemmata, blow-up methods, and geometric
singular perturbation theory; also included are techniques in bifurcation
theory, spectral theory of linear operators, and nonlinear partial differential
equations.

Nonlinear waves and coherent structures are ubiquitous in nature and occur in
many scientific disciplines including ecology, oceanography, fluid dynamics,
combustion, plasma physics, optics, neuroscience, and material science. The
mathematical models of these phenomena are very complex and will require a wide
range of new and emerging analytical and computational techniques for their
exploration. Our primary goal is to understand the nature of these waves and
structures in the presence of disturbances. The overarching question is: will a
given wave or structure persist when it is disturbed, or will it instead
bifurcate into something else? Our aim is to develop quantitative mathematical
tools to aid in the exploration of these phenomena, particularly methods that
will be of practical use in engineering, physics, biology, chemistry, and
manufacturing. The majority of the direct costs in this program go to funding
graduate student research as part of a larger vertically integrated
interdisciplinary mentoring program seeded by NSF Grant No. 0639328. Under the
investigator's supervision, graduate students conduct their own research, while
also assisting in the mentoring of undergraduate researchers in our program.
This gives the undergraduates more opportunities for help and guidance, while
also giving the graduate students a chance to reinforce their understanding by
teaching, and also to develop leadership skills. The goal of this model is to
produce a strong and vibrant pipeline of young scholars in the mathematical
sciences who will be well equipped to meet the challenges of a globally
competitive scientific workforce.
