
* 0908613
* CAREER: Inferences on Large-Scale Multiple Comparisons: The Temptation of the Fourier Kingdom
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/05/2008,05/09/2011
* Jiashun Jin,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 342,188.00

This research project is to create new tools for large-scale multiple
comparisons. In particular, the investigator develops new tools in the frequency
domain to tackle problems in this field. The project includes (a). Introduce
Fourier analysis as a tool for multiple comparisons. The investigator devotes to
push the boundary of the field by harnessing the power of Fourier analysis. The
Fourier analysis has been repeatedly proven to be a powerful tool in many
scientific areas, but has seldom been used in the field of large-scale multiple
comparisons. (b). Develop practically feasible tools, and lay out theoretic
frameworks for studying the optimality of the tools. (c). Extend and apply the
developed methodology and theory to the analysis of massive data generated in
various scientific fields, including comparative genomic hybridization (CGH),
cosmology and astronomy, and gene microarray.

Modern data acquisition routinely produces massive data sets in many scientific
areas, e.g. genomics, astronomy, functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI),
and image processing. The vision is that advances in massive data analysis will
enable scientist from various fields to quickly extract the information they
need, and at the same time, benefit the statistical discipline both with a
broader scope of theory and methodology but also with a deeper understanding of
nature and science. The project pushes the boundary of the field by introducing
new ideas for problem solving, developing new tools and novel theory, and
applying the tools to other scientific fields including but not limited to
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), cosmology and astronomy, and gene
microarray.
