
* 0956209
* CAREER: Diophantine Analysis of Dynamical Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2010,06/03/2014
* Yitwah Cheung,CA,San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The principal investigator will work on problems from the theory of dynamical
systems related to Diophantine properties of real numbers. The first part of the
project involves the development of combinatorial models for semisimple flows
that generalize the symbolic description of the geodesic flow on the modular
surface given by continued fractions. These models will provide important tools
for addressing several open problems in Diophantine approximation, including the
famous Littlewood Conjecture, Schmidt's Conjecture (on successive minima of a
lattice), and determining the Hausdorff dimension of the set of singular
vectors. This part of the project may also involve some numerical studies. The
second part of the project focuses on problems related to the ergodic theory of
rational billiards. One objective will be to test the validity of the
conjectural picture that every nonergodic Teichmuller geodesic arises from a
Masur-Smillie-type construction. Another objective is to understand how the
Hausdorff dimension of the set of nonergodic directions depends on the
Diophantine properties of the underlying translation surface or rational
billiard. The theme unifying the two components of the project is the technique
of extracting useful information from the evolution of a discrete subset of
Euclidean space under the action of a linear group.

The approach followed by the principal investigator is inspired by a dynamical
systems viewpoint and has already led to breakthroughs in number theory. Further
open problems are expected to be solved via this approach. The improved
understanding of so-called semisimple flows that will result from the first part
of the project can likely be used to develop efficient algorithms for generating
rational approximations to irrational vectors and finding short vectors in
lattices. These problems are of immense interest to computer scientists for
their numerous applications, especially to cryptography. The investigation of
nonergodic directions in the second part of the project is motivated in part by
the recent discovery (by the principle investigator and his collaborators) of a
striking phenomenon known as the "dichotomy of Hausdorff dimension" that has
never before been observed in the dynamics of billiards (the term "billiards"
here refers to a mathematical model for a certain type of collision, not to the
activity one observes in pool halls). A better understanding of the mechanism
that produces this phenomenon may potentially provide the basis for a new model
to explain critical phenomena and may be of interest to physicists. On the human
resource development side, the project involves the training of graduate
students to become research mathematicians.
