
* 1014112
* CAREER: Discrete Structures in Continuous Contexts
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/15/2009,04/15/2010
* Ezra Miller,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2011
* USD 87,793.00

The unifying idea behind the investigator's research is to isolate combinatorial
structures that govern or arise from continuous data. Projects based on this
idea range from computational geometry of polyhedra to equivariant algebraic
geometry. First examples include a variety of open problems concerning the
computational complexity of shortest paths on convex polyhedral spheres, as well
as the deeper geometry controlling this complexity. The polyhedral methods
underlying the metric combinatorics that arises in this context have potential
applications to graph-coloring questions, to the construction of cycles
representing characteristic classes on piecewise linear manifolds, and to
algorithmic questions in computational biology. The central issues shed
fundamental light on the nature of convexity and polyhedrality in combinatorics
and topology. In other projects under the umbrella of extracting discrete
phenomena from continuous objects, the investigator and his colleagues study the
combinatorics of degenerations of algebraic varieties, often in the presence of
Lie group actions. The irreducible components in such degenerations can index
summands in formulas from combinatorics and representation theory, thereby
giving geometric explanations for the formulas' positivity. The degenerations
themselves are defined using techniques from symbolic computational algebra.
Many systems in nature and throughout mathematics involve continuously varying
quantities, such as volume or temperature. Surprisingly, finding order in such
systems is sometimes equivalent to isolating finite or discrete pieces of
information---analogous to identifying the solid, liquid, and gas phases of a
material---from the underlying continuous framework. In the investigator's
research, the revealed discrete structures produce abstract mathematical rewards
of deep aesthetic and theoretical significance. However, concrete applications,
especially in the form of exact algorithmic calculations by computer, often
arise as byproducts of characterizing continuous systems by way of discrete
data. The investigator uses his research as a context in which to foster a
vertically integrated mentoring environment, modeled on interactive advising
programs more common in laboratory sciences, aimed at involving undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students in their development as teachers as well as
researchers.


