
* 1054289
* CAREER: The Wave Equation on Black Hole Backgrounds
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2011,05/21/2015
* Jason Metcalfe,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 410,853.00

The primary goal of the proposed research is to improve the understanding of the
decay for solutions to the wave equation on black hole backgrounds. Kerr
spacetimes and perturbations of such are of particular interest, due to
aspirations to contribute to a proof of the stability of this family of
solutions to Einstein's equations. Recent work has focused on proving localized
energy estimates and Strichartz estimates, which are both measures of the
dispersive nature of the wave equation which are known to be fairly robust. The
former have played a key role in Tataru's recent proof of the long conjectured
Price's law, which asserts a certain decay rate for solutions to the wave
equation on the Schwarzschild and Kerr backgrounds. A key feature of these
blackhole spacetimes which demands extra attention is the existence of trapped
rays. In flat space, light travels on lines which escape to infinity. Thus
packets of a solution which are initially overlapping but traveling in even
slightly different directions quickly spread out, and this spreading promotes
decay. On Schwarzschild, the paths on which light travels are dictated by the
geometry, and in particular, there is a region, called the photon sphere, where
photons can orbit the blackhole. Such trapping, where the rays remain in a
compact set, is a known obstacle to certain dispersive estimates, such as
localized energy estimates. Trapping also occurs on the Kerr family of
spacetimes, though its geometry is more complicated.

General relativity asserts that the universe is a (1+3) dimensional curved space
and that gravity corresponds to the curvature of this space. A common
description is to think of the universe as a trampoline. A mass, such as a
bowling ball, which is placed on the trampoline causes it to curve in such a way
as to attract other objects on the surface. Einstein's equations model the
curvature and evolution of such curvature of universes. Though Einstein's
equations are quite nonlinear, a few special solutions are known. These are
typically found by imposing many symmetries to simplify the equations. Of
particular relevance to this proposal are the Minkowski space time, the family
of Schwarzschild space times, and the Kerr family of space times. These
correspond to the flat solution, to spherically symmetric black holes, and to
rotating black holes respectively. A natural question to ask is whether these
solutions are stable. That is, if one starts close to, say, a member of the Kerr
family of space times, will it necessarily remain close to a member of the Kerr
family. The only rigorous proofs of (nonlinear) stability are for the Minkowski
space time, which began with the seminal work of Christodoulou and Klainerman.
The stability of the Kerr family of space times is a major open problem in
mathematical relativity which has been garnering much interest recently. A
thorough understanding of the decay properties of the wave equation on such
backgrounds is considered to be prerequisite knowledge to any proof of such
stability. The studies in this proposal are expected to directly contribute to
this. The teaching components of this proposal consist primarily of the
development of a course on general relativity as well as a first year seminar
course. The research and teaching components are integrated through reading
seminars and directed research projects.
