
* 1055210
* CAREER: New Statistical Methods for Classification and Analysis of High Dimensional and Functional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2011,08/09/2015
* Yichao Wu,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Recent technology advances have generated data of unprecedented size and
complexity across different scientific fields. To analyze such complex data, the
principal investigator (PI) aims to develop new statistical methodologies. The
PI proposes to study four interrelated research topics. First, the PI focuses on
large-margin classification and proposes new large-margin classifiers to deliver
competitive classification and conditional class probability estimation. He also
proposes to address the question of whether a soft or hard classifier is
preferred for a particular classification task and how to incorporate estimated
conditional class probability to improve dimension reduction for data with a
categorical response. Second, the PI proposes an extension of the least angle
regression to deal with generalized linear models and, more generally, a
strictly convex optimization problem. The new solution path is piecewise given
by systems of ordinary differential equations and can be slightly modified to
get the corresponding LASSO regularized solution path. Third, data with a sparse
and irregular functional predictor are considered. New response-based
dimensional reduction methods are proposed for such data using cumulative
slicing and a viable scheme is also proposed to extend large-margin classifiers
to analyze such data. Fourth, the PI focuses on the semi-parametric multi-index
regression. By noticing that the Hessian operator filters out the effect of the
linear component automatically, the PI provides a direct estimation scheme to
estimate the space spanned by the multiple indices. The new scheme differs from
existing methods in that it does not require estimating the nonparametric link
while estimating the space spanned by the multiple indices as in other existing
approaches.

The proposed statistical methodology innovations are widely applicable in
various fields. For example, the proposed new large-margin classifiers can be
applied to analyze genomic data with a categorical response such as cancer type;
new ordinary differential equation based solution path algorithms can used to
analyze survival or binary genomic data to identify important predictors; while
analyzing longitudinal data of aging, the new proposed statistical methods for
sparse and irregular functional data will be useful. In order to facilitate the
use of the proposed new methods, the PI will implement them in R or Matlab and
make new software available to the public along with the corresponding research
reports. The success of the proposed research will help to improve public
health.
