
* 1055286
* CAREER: Sparse Modeling Driven by Large-Scale Genomic Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2011,05/28/2015
* Qing Zhou,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Massive and high-dimensional data arise frequently in biology and genomics.
Regularization and sparsity are critical components for modeling such data and
extracting information. Broad success of sparse modeling methods, such as the
Lasso, has encouraged fast development in this area. However, most existing
methods were developed under the frameworks of linear models and generalized
linear models. The complex structures in genomic data require further
development beyond existing methods. To this end, proposed are three novel
sparse modeling methods with sophisticated model structures driven by large-
scale gene expression data, protein binding data and DNA sequence data. The
first method, motivated by modeling the relationship between protein binding and
gene expression, constructs linear regression models on the terminal nodes of a
decision tree. The decision tree partitions the population into subgroups
according to the predictors. Each subgroup has its own sparse linear regression
model between the response and the predictors. Two types of regularization, one
on the regression coefficients and the other on the size of the tree, are used
to encourage sparsity. The second method concerns the construction of tight
clusters for gene expression data by penalizing the difference in grouped
parameters between two tight clusters and between a tight cluster and the null
cluster. Block-wise coordinate descent in conjunction with majorization is
developed to maximize the regularized likelihood function. The third method,
motivated by the motif finding problem, aims at sequence pattern discovery. A
dictionary model is used to partition a sentence into words, which represent
sequence patterns, and single letters. A novel regularization through the
Kullback-Leibler divergence is developed for the product-multinomial model for
words, which can achieve sparsity in estimating the cell probabilities. This
regularization is used to construct a sparse dictionary that contains only a
small number of words. A generalized EM algorithm is proposed for parameter
estimation and solution path construction.

As efficient analysis of large-scale high-dimensional data is critical in many
fields of science and engineering, the proposed research is of great current
interest. Particularly, the proposed methods are ready for applications to
front-edge research areas in genomics and molecular biology, where massive data
sets have been continuously generated. To accelerate such applications, free
computer packages and self-contained software are being developed for users to
analyze their own data. On the other hand, this proposal contains many
innovative statistical methodologies that may contribute significantly to
statistics and computational sciences. Finally, the proposed research is
integrated with educational activities by developing new and improving existing
courses at both undergraduate and graduate levels.
