
* 1056471
* CAREER: Defects and singularities in liquid crystalline and bacterial systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2011,02/07/2011
* Ibrahim Fatkullin,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2016
* USD 438,133.00

Fatkullin DMS-1056471

The investigator addresses problems in liquid-crystalline and bacterial systems
related to formation, evolution, and interaction of singularities and defects.
Such singularities manifest themselves in mathematical equations when the
underlying physical models lose validity on a given scale. To study such
systems, one must connect often quite disparate physical models arising at
different length and time scales. The investigator employs a combination of
modern analytical and numerical methods introduced by him for the Onsager model
of nematic liquid crystals and Keller-Segel model of bacterial chemotaxis. In
particular, he investigates liquid-crystalline systems such as polydisperse and
biaxial nematics, smectics, and elastomers; phenomenon of formation and
interaction of particle aggregates in bacterial chemotaxis. He creates the
Multiphysics Modeling Lab: a center for research and education in methods of
mathematical modeling and computer simulations. This establishes a collaborative
environment involving students at the University of Arizona as well as
(utilizing the close connection of the investigator with the Tucson Math Circle)
the local K-12 students in projects on modeling and simulation of complex
systems.

The fundamental significance of the areas of this project has been widely
recognized, e.g., by a Nobel Prize awarded in 1991 to P.-G. de Gennes for
fundamental contributions to our understanding of order phenomena in complex
systems, and by a Microsoft Award in 2006 to D. Bray for his work on chemotaxis
on E. coli. The practical applications of the project range from liquid-
crystalline display (LCD) technology to understanding the functioning of our
immune system. Recently, the analytical and numerical methods employed in the
investigations of such systems have matured enough to allow for new significant
advances in these fields. Achieving this is the primary scientific goal of this
project. Beyond that, the interdisciplinary nature of this program is perfect
for illustrating the power of mathematics in describing diverse natural
phenomena and is suitable for involving students of all levels. The Multiphysics
Modeling Lab involves graduate and undergraduate students in active applied
mathematics research and promotes mathematics and science among the K-12
students and educators via close integration with the system of math circles.
Such activities are essential for improving the general level of scientific
education in our society.
