
* 1056263
* CAREER: Geometric inequalities, asymptotic geometry, and geometric measure theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 05/15/2011,09/04/2012
* Stefan Wenger,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2012
* USD 42,609.00

This project concerns the study of isoperimetric and related geometric
inequalities in various settings. One of the principal goals of the project is
to explore connections between the growth of isoperimetric functions and fine
metric and measure theoretic properties of the asymptotic cones of the
underlying space. A better understanding of these connections will in turn have
applications to problems in various branches of geometry, analysis, and
geometric group theory. The PI has already made contributions in this direction
in the recent past. The project includes a significant educational component;
its principal aim is to bring together groups of young researchers from
different fields of expertise in geometry and analysis and to foster interaction
between these groups through targeted activities. One of the activities the PI
will organize is an annual Summer School for advanced graduate students and
recent Ph.Ds on various topics of current research interest at the juncture of
geometry, analysis, and geometric group theory, with all talks given by
participants on pre-assigned articles.

Isoperimetric problems have been studied since the time of the Ancient Greeks.
In its simplest form, the isoperimetric problem asks which shape of a closed
curve with a given length can cover the largest area on a plane. In modern
mathematics, isoperimetric problems play an important role in many fields,
notably in geometry, analysis, probability theory, and group theory. The present
project aims at gaining a deeper understanding of the connections between
isoperimetric problems and problems from other fields, such as for example large
scale geometry, a field which has been influential in many branches of
mathematics in recent years. Roughly speaking, large scale (or asymptotic)
geometry is the study of geometric properties of objects "seen from far away".
From this perspective, a dotted line for example is indistinguishable from a
solid one.
