
* 1056737
* CAREER: Problems in regularity theory for linear and nonlinear partial differential equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2011,05/07/2015
* Hongjie Dong,RI,Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 545,456.00

Linear and nonlinear partial differential equations arise in many areas of
mathematics, such as differential geometry, stochastic control theory and
mathematical finance. This project focuses on the investigations of elliptic and
parabolic equations with rough coefficients, systems arising from linear
laminates and composite media, and evolutionary equations from fluid mechanics.
The first part of the project is to systematically investigate the regularity
and the strong solvability in Sobolev spaces for both linear and nonlinear
possibly nonlocal equations of elliptic and parabolic type. The novelty of this
research is that coefficients are allowed to be merely measurable in some of the
independent variables. The second part of the project concerns partial
differential systems arising from linear laminates and composite media. The
emphases are in local and global smoothness of the gradient of weak solutions to
these systems and the higher regularity near boundary points. The third part
regards the regularity theory for several models of nonlinear parabolic
equations in mathematical fluid mechanics. Several problems about the partial
regularity as well as regularity criteria of weak solutions to the Navier-Stokes
equations will be addressed.

The proposed research will have significant applications in areas as diverse as
biology, physics, economics, and finance. For instance, the equations describing
fluid flow have been widely used to model ocean currents, the weather and
climate, air flow around a airplane, and motion of stars inside a galaxy, to
name a few. They have various important applications such as the optimal design
of aerodynamic shapes. To disseminate his work and increase its impact, the P.I.
will integrate these research projects into the larger framework of the
undergraduate and graduate training at Brown University. Besides recruiting and
advising students in science and engineering with a special emphasis on under-
represented groups, training students in conducting research in differential
equations, the proposed educational activities will also include the
organization of a summer workshop on equations in fluid mechanics and mentoring
undergraduate mathematical competitions.
