
* 1149677
* CAREER: STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR TOPOLOGICAL AND GEOMETRIC DATA ANALYSIS
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2012,05/26/2016
* Alessandro Rinaldo,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this proposal is to develop new theories and methods
for estimating topological and geometric features of lower-dimensional sets
based on noisy high-dimensional data. To this end, the investigator has
formulated two separate but highly interdependent sets of research goals. The
first set of research goals is the integration of statistical theory with
methods of topological data analysis. Recent breakthroughs in computational
topology have made it possible to compute topological invariants of sets from a
collection of points in Euclidean spaces. Though the potential for high-
dimensional statistical inference of these new types of data summaries is
significant, their statistical properties are still largely unexplored. The
investigator proposes to 1) to develop a comprehensive theory of minimax (and
adaptive) estimation of topological properties of sets and 2) to create
statistical procedures for non-parametric testing and de-noising based on
topological invariants. The second set of research goals pertains to the
traditional geometric data-analytic task of clustering in high-dimensions, and
it is aimed at advancing the theory and practice of high-density clustering.
Recent progress in the theory of clustering has demonstrated that clustering
using density estimation can perform well in high-dimensional settings, and that
the notion of high-density clustering provides a natural probabilistic framework
for describing and analyzing clustering problems in great generality. Thus, the
investigator intends 1) to generalize and refine the high-density clustering
problem under weak conditions on the data-generating mechanism and 2) to
investigate the theory and use of data resampling techniques for parameter
tuning in high-density clustering and density estimation. A common thread in the
proposed research is the reliance on density estimation, as a tool for both
accurate high-dimensional clustering and smoothing/de-noising of topological
features.

In the last few decades, advances in data acquisition technologies have led to
an explosion in the collection and diffusion of large-scale datasets, across a
variety of scientific fields. The unprecedented magnitude and complexity of
modern databases pose formidable challenges to statisticians, both of
theoretical and methodological nature, and has required the development of new
statistical tools for data analysis. Modern high-dimensional statistics is
predicated on the key assumption that, while the data are observed in a high-
dimensional space, the intrinsic complexity of the data-generating mechanism is
in fact significantly smaller and, therefore, learnable in computationally
efficient ways. This research proposal capitalizes on this premise, and
describes an array of methods for summarizing, discriminating, visualizing and
clustering high-dimensional noisy data and for extracting salient low-
dimensional features. The proposed research encompasses several novel and open
research problems at the interface of mathematics, computer science, statistics
and machine learning. The procedures studied in the proposal are of broad
applicability and promise to be used in a multitude of scientific areas, such as
medical imaging, neuroscience, astrophysics, biology, genetics, geophysics and
sensor networks, just to name a few. The broader impact of this project also
includes interdisciplinary training of students in statistics, mathematics and
computer science.
