
* 1151478
* CAREER: MPS-BIO: Mathematical Modeling and Experiments of Neuromechanical Pumping
* DMS,FD-Fluid Dynamics, Cellular & Biochem Engineering, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2012,07/20/2016
* Laura Miller,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 504,236.00

The broad goal of this proposal is to create mathematical models of the
electrophysiology and neuromechanics of an organ and organism whose dynamics
rely on environmental cues and electrical activation through the action of
pacemaker cells. Recent advancements in computational fluid dynamics have
enabled researchers to efficiently explore problems that involve moving elastic
boundaries immersed in fluids for problems such as cardiac fluid dynamics, fish
swimming, and the movement of bacteria. These advances have also made modeling
the interaction between a fluid and a neuromechanical model of an elastic organ
or organism feasible. This project will focus on the development and
implementation of such models for two problems: 1) fluid transport through the
pumping of tubular hearts, and 2) feeding currents generated by the pulsation of
jellyfish bells. This proposal leverages existing computational algorithms for
fluid-structure interactions, whereas the mathematical novelty lies in coupling
this technology to living boundaries. The models will integrate feedback between
the conduction of action potentials, the contraction of muscles, the movement of
tissues, and fluid motion. For example, mathematical models will be developed
that couple action potentials triggered by noisy pacemaker cells to the
generation of tension through appropriate muscle and Ca2+ models. The non-
Hookean material properties and geometry of highly deformable heart tubes and
jellyfish bells will also be quantified and accurately modeled using discrete
differential geometry.

This work will combine computational, mathematical, and experimental tools to
ultimately answer some of questions posed in one of the five grand challenges in
organismal biology: Integrating living and physical systems. Integrative
mathematical models of the neurobiology, muscular mechanics, elasticity, and
fluid dynamics of pumping tubular hearts and jellyfish bells will be developed.
While great strides have been made in the modeling and simulation of each of
these components separately, coupling these fields remains elusive. The working
proposition that motivates this research is that modeling the complete
neuromechanical system is more tractable for the two selected problems than
almost any other given their relative simplicity. The results of this research
may also provide a framework for the development of integrative models of other
fundamental biological problems such as the movement and regulation of waste
through the intestines, air through the lungs, and lymph through the lymphatic
system. The educational focus of this proposal is to implement a unified
training program for mathematicians and biologists centered on mathematical
modeling in biology. The proposed educational activities will include a first
year seminar in epidemiology, a course and associated text on mathematical
modeling in comparative biomechanics for biologists and mathematicians, and a
summer program for mathematical biologists at the UNC Galapagos Center. This
educational program is motivated by the fact that it will be critical to train
mathematics and biology students at this interface in order to rise to the
scientific challenges that will be posed during the 21st century.
