
* 1253481
* CAREER: Spatial Modeling and Computation of Cell Signaling in Cell-to-Cell Communication
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, Systems and Synthetic Biology, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2013,06/11/2013
* Ching-Shan Chou,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 403,854.00

Cell-to-cell communication is fundamental to cell and system functions. Proper
communication between cells relies upon precise control and coordination of
extracellular and intracellular signaling, as well as the induced cellular
responses such as cell morphogenesis. This project is to study cell-to-cell
communication through yeast mating system using mathematical modeling and will
be conducted in close collaboration with experimentalists. The project will
develop the models and the computational framework for a multi-cell environment
that includes complex extracellular and intracellular signaling networks and the
cell morphological changes. Numerical methods will be developed to meet the
computational modeling challenges.

Cells interact with their environment or with other cells through sensing and
making responses such as cell movement and cell shape change. These processes
require precise coordination of intricate cellular networks and the resulting
responses. This project will use mathematical modeling and computation to
examine the interaction between cells and the underlying networks. The models
and computational framework developed in this research can be applied to other
systems, such as neural and immune systems, in which cell-to-cell communication
is central to their function. Therefore, this project can aid medical research.
The research in this project will be integrated with educational activities in
computational and mathematical methods, with the aim of training undergraduate
and graduate students for interdisciplinary research in mathematical biology.
