
* 1253402
* CAREER: Classification and rigidity for von Neumann algebras
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2013,06/12/2017
* Adrian Ioana,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2020
* USD 550,000.00

The goal of this mathematics research project by Adrian Ioana is the
classification of von Neumann algebras arising from groups and actions of groups
on probability spaces. Von Neumann algebras do not contain significant
information about the group or action that they were constructed from.
Nevertheless, in the past decade, Popa's deformation/rigidity theory has led to
an explosion of rigidity results. These show that many properties of groups or
actions can be recognized by looking at their von Neumann algebras. Ioana will
develop new methods to study rigidity for von Neumann algebras. Three specific
directions of research will be pursued. Firstly, Ioana will expand the scope of
super-rigidity for von Neumann algebras by providing new examples of groups and
actions that can be entirely reconstructed from their von Neumann algebras. A
second direction concerns Cartan subalgebras of von Neumann algebras. Finally,
Ioana will investigate the notion of orbit equivalence for group actions.
Several research projects on these topics will further the discovery of new
knowledge in all of these directions.

This mathematics research project is in the general area of operator algebras,
and it deals with the classifications of von Neumann algebras. These algebras
are connected and have direct applications to a number of areas of science, such
as quantum computing, biology (structure of DNA) and engineering (cell phone
design). As part of this mathematics research project, the principal
investigator Adrian Ioana will develop two new courses at the undergraduate and
graduate level, respectively. Ioana is currently mentoring several graduate
students and running a seminar in areas close to the research-related content of
this project. In addition to supporting graduate students, Ioana will hire and
mentor one postdoctoral scholar. Ioana will also organize a research workshop,
whose goal is to acquaint young researchers with some of the latest exciting
developments on the topics pertaining this project. Finally, Ioana will train
high school students and college students to participate in mathematics
competitions.
