
* 1255631
* CAREER: Sparsity-aware Sampling Theorems and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2013,09/13/2017
* Rachel Ward,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 419,985.00

Many signals of interest in data analysis have lower-dimensional structure than
their ambient dimension suggests. Exploiting this latent structure in sampling
and reconstruction strategies can dramatically increase algorithmic robustness
to both noise and missing data. The theory of compressed sensing shows that if a
signal of interest is sparse --- that is, well-approximated by some small subset
of a dictionary of basis elements, then the signal can be acquired from a
reduced number of measurements and reconstructed using efficient convex
programming techniques. However, current compressed sensing theory is limited
largely to finite-dimensional, well-conditioned, and uniformly bounded
dictionaries, and these restrictions limit the scope of applications. Using
notions such as variable-density and weighted sparsity, the investigator and her
colleagues aim to develop a range of structure-dependent sampling theorems that
merge finite-dimensional sparsity constraints with infinite-dimensional
smoothness constraints, and which naturally extend the compressed sensing
methodology to infinite-dimensional and unbounded function systems. As a related
goal of this proposal, the investigator has teamed up with professors in
computer science and electrical engineering at UT Austin to develop an
interdisciplinary statistical signal processing seminar series. The investigator
has also recently established the first Association for Women in Mathematics
student chapter at UT Austin in order to foster the advancement of women in
mathematics.

Broadly speaking, this proposal puts forth theoretical tools that can be used to
design strategies for acquiring high-dimensional data as efficiently as
possible, given any known lower-dimensional structure of the data and within the
framework of the acquisition process at hand. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
is one driving application. Here, one would like to reduce the MRI scan time as
much as possible while still acquiring a clear image of the brain, neck, or
other internal structure. By exploiting the underlying structure of natural
images, such as the localization of information content of the image to
boundaries between different materials in the brain, MRI scanning technology can
become significantly cheaper and faster, and preliminary experiments by the
investigator and collaborators suggest that the sampling strategies put forth in
this proposal have the potential to speed up MRI scan timestenfold. Uncertainty
Quantification is another application of the proposed research. Here, one is
interested in analyzing the sensitivity of high-dimensional nonlinear models to
small changes in input parameters. Applications range from the design of civil
infrastructure to be robust in the face of extreme climate, to the assessment of
the stability for climate models with respect to perturbations in initial
weather conditions. Generally speaking, Uncertainty Quantification involves
repeatedly perturbing the initial conditions of the model at hand, simulating
the model at each of these perturbations, and analyzing the resulting output
statistics. Since such simulations are expensive for high-dimensional nonlinear
models, one would like to derive strategies for simulating perturbed input
parameters so as to gain as much information about the model from as few
simulations as possible.


