
* 1255203
* CAREER: Super-Resolution and Subwavelength Imaging
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/15/2013,09/15/2017
* Laurent Demanet,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2018
* USD 480,000.00

Demanet 1255203

The investigator aims to put the super-resolution phenomenon of signal
estimation on a quantitative footing, and to explore the consequences of
reliable super-resolution in tomographic imaging. The estimation of a signal
from the knowledge of its Fourier transform in a band qualifies as super-
resolved when the fine structure of the signal is recovered on a length scale
smaller than the inverse of the band's width --- the so-called Shannon-Nyquist
scaling. It is a poorly understood, yet real and decidedly nonlinear numerical
phenomenon. Sparsity has been suggested as a principle according to which super-
resolution reliably occurs. However, recent insights from analysis of convex
programs indicate that a second principle, sign compatibility, is needed in
tandem with sparsity to unlock positive results. Building on this, the
investigator seeks quantitative guarantees of a new kind for successful signal
recovery up to the ideal resolution level that no method can beat. Such results
would generalize the theory of compressed sensing in the regime of very coherent
dictionaries, where no restricted isometry-type property can be expected to
hold. The investigator also studies algorithms based on translation-invariance
such as the matrix pencil method, modified matching pursuits, precorrective
filtering, and generalizations to higher dimensions. He explores implications,
both positive and negative, for tomographic imaging modalities such as seismic
and synthetic aperture radar in the subwavelength regime.

The project aims to design advanced, nonlinear processing methods to deliver
higher image resolution and interpretation levels in situations where the data
come with poor frequency content, such as in the case of a blurring. A
methodical understanding of the possibilities offered by super-resolution could
eventually transform the methods by which information is extracted from data in
a host of inverse problems, ranging from medical imaging (MRI, fluorescence
microscopy) to geophysical imaging (exploration seismology) and defense
applications. The project also offers an opportunity for students to acquire
strong interdisciplinary training at the intersection of computational
mathematics, modern data processing, and tomographic imaging. Graduate curricula
typically fall short of covering this evolving material in a satisfactory way,
even though there is a great demand in industry for quantitative-minded
specialists who can operate as experts on all these fronts. The investigator is
involved in several initiatives to introduce this new research area widely,
through the organization of graduate summer schools, the administration of an
internship program geared toward minorities, and remote teaching via MIT's
online educational platforms OCW and EdX.
