
* 1258675
* CAREER: Multiple Dirichlet Series, Automorphic Forms, and Combinatorial Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2012,07/01/2013
* Benjamin Brubaker,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 199,615.00

In this proposal, Principal Investigator Brubaker intends to study automorphic
forms on finite covers of split, reductive algebraic groups known as metaplectic
forms. More precisely, he will investigate the Fourier-Whittaker coefficients of
metaplectic Eisenstein series induced from parabolic subgroups. When the degree
of the cover is trivial, this reduces to the case of Eisenstein series on linear
algebraic groups as studied by Langlands, Shahidi, and others, which have been
instrumental in formulating and proving portions of the Langlands program. By
studying metaplectic forms in families ranging over all finite covers (including
the trivial one), surprising new structure emerges. Brubaker and his
collaborators have demonstrated that the resulting Fourier-Whittaker
coefficients contain Dirichlet series in several complex variables (so-called
``multiple Dirichlet series'') whose coefficients are described in terms of
crystal graphs. These crystal graphs encode information about representations of
quantum groups, which are deformations of the universal enveloping algebra of a
Lie algebra. In this situation, the relevant Lie algebra is associated to the
Langlands dual group of the group on which one builds the Eisenstein series. The
proposal seeks to develop this theory more completely and explore the novel
connections it suggests between number theory, quantum groups and combinatorial
representation theory.

Langlands' program was initially conceived as a stunning collection of
conjectures relating functions with interesting arithmetic properties (e.g.,
counting the number of integer solutions to an equation) to functions with good
analytic properties (e.g., having symmetries and being the solution of a natural
differential equation). But similar kinds of duality have been observed in
geometry and mathematical physics, leading to geometric and quantum versions of
the Langlands programs, respectively. In short, these dualities have become a
lens through which a large portion of modern mathematics and mathematical
physics can be organized and understood. However, the explicit underlying
mechanisms which relate, for example, arithmetic functions to analytic functions
remain largely a mystery. In these projects, Principal Investigator Brubaker
with his collaborators and students will use the data provided by the above
special examples to attempt to find such a mechanism and attempt to better
understand the relationships between various incarnations of the Langlands
program in arithmetic, geometry, and physics. An equally important component of
the projects is the training of students at all levels by creating a tiered
system of mentoring. To bolster these efforts, a set of course materials will be
developed to reflect the changing emphasis in modern number theory on analytic
techniques, focusing on computational approaches and example-based learning to
reinforce concepts
