
* 1351898
* CAREER: PDE approaches to Physical Phenomena driven by Gravity and Diffusion
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2014,06/04/2015
* Juhi Jang,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 01/31/2016
* USD 146,429.00

This project is concerned with the investigation of physically important
phenomena driven by gravity and diffusion, based on partial differential
equations (PDE) approaches. In particular, such diverse phenomena as collapse of
stars or generation of vortices at the interface between two fluids give rise to
similar mathematical models. These model equations (Euler-Poisson, Navier-Stokes
systems, Fokker-Planck equations, kinetic transport and Boltzmann equations) are
widely used to describe the motion of compressible fluids and gases. They have
rich applications in mathematical sciences and engineering and pose formidable
mathematical challenges. This project aims to advance knowledge in this
fundamental area of mathematics and to influence other domains of mathematics.
Results will provide some evidence to other disciplines such as astrophysics,
plasma physics, aerodynamics, and computational physics, chemistry, and biology,
and may lead to scientific and technological advances. The research project will
be integrated with educational and outreach activities such as student research
projects, one-to-one mentoring activities, course development, summer schools
for undergraduate and graduate students and interdisciplinary conferences. The
project will strengthen the Applied Mathematics program at University of
California-Riverside by means of integrated research, education and outreach
activities. Through summer schools and conferences, it will be providing
excellent learning opportunities for students with one of the goals being to
broaden participation of underrepresented groups.

In particular, the following topics will be studied: (i) gravitational collapses
of the Euler-Poisson system, the dynamics of rotating stars, relativity and
radiation, (ii) Rayleigh-Taylor instability and the counterpart stability of
two-fluid compressible Navier-Stokes system with or without surface tension,
(iii) absorbing, elastically and inelastically reflecting boundary collisions
for the kinetic Fokker-Planck equations, (iv) multi-scale dynamics from the
kinetic transport and Boltzmann equations in the presence of boundary: theory
and computation. The goal is to find a mathematical framework where these
physical phenomena can be captured and to develop an appropriate mathematical
theory by using PDE methods.
