
* 1352386
* CAREER: Random spaces and groups
* DMS,PROBABILITY, TOPOLOGY, Combinatorics, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2014,06/11/2018
* Matthew Kahle,OH,Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

The PI will investigate the topology of random cell complexes and the geometry
of random groups. Phase transitions are one important theme -- vanishing
thresholds for homology or homotopy groups as some parameter varies, for
example. Also of interest are more geometric notions, such as isoperimetric
inequalities and hyperbolicity. Random cell complexes provide high-dimensional
analogues of expander graphs, a subject that has been a very active lately, with
connections to random matrix theory. The probabilistic method provides a
powerful and general framework for generating objects with extremal geometric
properties, and progress in this area will lead to intriguing new examples and
counterexamples in topological combinatorics and geometric group theory.

This research draws on several areas of mathematics to study subtle qualitative
features of randomly generated shapes. These interactions are of intrinsic
interest within mathematics itself, and the work is also being done with a eye
towards practical applications in the emerging area of topological data
analysis. The educational activities supported by the grant will be naturally
integrated with the research, and the PI will mentor graduate and undergraduate
researchers working on projects related to the grant. The PI will continue to be
involved with various outreach activities: Colorado Math Olympiad, Canada/USA
Mathcamp, math circles, undergraduate math clubs, and problem solving seminars.
