
* 1352597
* CAREER: Analysis of Surface Water Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 05/15/2014,05/10/2018
* Vera Mikyoung Hur,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 04/30/2021
* USD 419,779.00

The PI will develop new technical tools in partial differential equations and
other branches of mathematics, and she will extend and combine existing tools,
in order to tackle several long-standing open problems in theoretical aspects of
water waves. They include (1) the global regularity versus finite-time blowup
for the initial value problem, (2) the existence of traveling waves and their
classification, (3) the stability and instability of traveling waves. Emphasis
is placed upon the large scale dynamics and genuinely nonlinear behaviors, an
acute understanding of which ultimately hinges upon analytical proofs. Emphasis
is placed upon the use of the Euler equations in hydrodynamics rather than
simple approximate models such as the Korteweg-de Vries equation. The PI
proposes to foster applied mathematics at her host institution. She will
continue organizing seminars and conferences, and she will disseminate her
research through conference presentations, seminars and colloquia. The PI
proposes to enhance the undergraduate ODE curriculum and develop new graduate
courses. She plans to involve undergraduate and graduate students in her
research and mentor graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. The PI will
encourage women and minorities to pursue careers in mathematics, science and
engineering, and improve the pipeline for women research mathematicians.

The problem of water waves concerns the wave motion at the interface separating
in two or three dimensions an incompressible inviscid fluid below a body of air,
acted upon by gravity and possibly surface tension. Describing in an idealized
fashion what may be observed in an ocean or a lake, water waves are a perfect
specimen of applied mathematics. They host a wealth of wave phenomena, ranging
in length scale from ripples driven by surface tension to tsunamis and to rogue
waves. They provide source and inspiration to several branches of mathematics.
Furthermore they impact outside of mathematics, from hydraulics to weather
prediction. The water wave problem, notwithstanding, presents profound and
subtle difficulties for rigorous analysis, modeling and numerical simulations.
For one thing, the interface between the water and the air is a priori unknown
and to be determined as part of the solution, namely a free boundary.
Incidentally, free boundaries are mathematically challenging in their own right
and they occur in numerous situations such as the melting of ice and the
stretching of a flexible membrane over an obstacle. To make things worse,
boundary conditions at the free surface are severely nonlinear. This project
will develop new tools to advance understanding of these challenging problems.
