
* 1438957
* CAREER: Subsampling Methods in Statistical Modeling of Ultra-Large Sample Geophysics
* DMS,STATISTICS, Other Global Learning & Trng
* 08/01/2013,08/09/2015
* Ping Ma,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2017
* USD 306,695.00

Remote sensing of the Earth's deep interior is challenging. Direct sampling of
the Earth's deep interior is impossible due to the extreme pressures and
temperatures. Our knowledge of the Earth?s deep interior is thus pieced together
from a range of surface observations. Among surface observations, seismic waves
emitted by earthquakes are effective probes of the Earth?s deep interior and are
relatively inexpensively recorded by networks of seismographs at the Earth's
surface. Unprecedented volumes of seismic data brought by dense global
seismograph networks offer researchers both opportunities and challenges to
explore the Earth?s deep interior. The key challenge is that directly applying
statistical methods to this ultra-large sample seismic data using current
computing resources is prohibitive. To facilitate geophysical discoveries that
can enhance our understanding of the Earth?s deep interior using current
computing resources, the investigator proposes a family of novel statistical
methods under a subsampling framework. The proposed methods provide an
opportunity to study various distinct statistical problems, such as function
estimation and variable selection, in a unified framework. The investigator will
establish asymptotic and finite sample theory to investigate the approximation
accuracy and consistency of the proposed methods.

How to analyze ultra-large sample data creates a significant challenge in almost
all fields of science and engineering. Scientists and engineers develop various
solutions to tackle the problem, such as developing cloud computing for
aggregating a wide range of computing resources and building powerful
supercomputers. However, the high cost of these solutions creates an
extraordinary budget barrier for researchers. The proposed subsampling methods
provide alternative methods to surmount this challenge. The theory to be
established will benefit a wide spectrum of research in science and engineering.
They will offer a unique educational experience for both undergraduate and
graduate students to participate in cutting-edge statistical and
interdisciplinary research and inspire new lines of researches in three distinct
fields: statistics, geophysics, and computational biology.
