
* 1452392
* CAREER: Polynomials, Geometry, and Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, GOALI-Grnt Opp Acad Lia wIndus, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2015,08/12/2019
* Sarah Koch,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 02/28/2021
* USD 486,642.00

Dynamical systems are all around us: they govern the motion of the planets, the
weather, the stock market, the ecosystems in which we live. These systems depend
on a variety of parameters, and as these parameters change, the corresponding
system is affected. Understanding how dynamical systems change with different
parameters is a very complicated and delicate question which is not even
completely understood in the simplest of mathematical models. The research
outlined in this proposal explores connections between different perspectives on
parameter spaces associated to particular dynamical systems. For example, one of
the most intriguing ways to view these parameter spaces is algebraically; that
is, these parameters spaces are intimately related of roots of polynomials, an
area of mathematics that, a priori, has no obvious connection to dynamics.
Investigating these mysterious and somewhat surprising connections is one of the
main research goals outlined in this proposal. This proposal also contains a
substantial outreach component to share mathematics with high school students
through mathematical fieldtrips to the Mathematics Department at the University
of Michigan, and to give graduate students and postdocs opportunities to learn
from each other through a series of workshops, which will be followed by
companion conferences at the University of Michigan.

A major goal in the field of complex dynamics is to understand dynamical moduli
spaces. The most successful endeavor in this regard has been the study of the
moduli space of quadratic polynomials where the Mandelbrot set lives; the
Mandelbrot set is a universal object in complex dynamics. Much of the structure
of the Mandelbrot set can actually be revealed through algebraic data; that is,
there are distinguished algebraic integers in the Mandelbrot set (ie, roots of a
certain collection of polynomials with integer coefficients), and these points
are dense in the boundary. In the first part of this proposal, we consider
collections of algebraic integers (or roots of collections of polynomials)
arising naturally in the parameter space of an iterated function system. We take
the topological closure of these roots and (following some work of others)
develop a dynamical theory of the iterated function system to better understand
the structure of this set. Much of the discussion unfolds in a way parallel to
that for quadratic polynomials except there are some surprising differences and
still many interesting questions to explore which link geometry, dynamics,
algebra, and Galois theory. The second part of this proposal is centered around
algebraic data and Thurston's Topological Characterization of Rational Maps, one
of the most important theorems in complex dynamics. Associated to a
postcritically finite rational map on the Riemann sphere, are three different
kinds of linear operators. These operators naturally arise in the setting of
Thurston's theorem, each acting on a finite-dimensional vector space. The
characteristic polynomials of these operators have rational coefficients, so the
corresponding eigenvalues are algebraic. This proposal explores possible
connections that these operators (and their eigenvalues) have with each other,
and connections that these operators (and their eigenvalues) have with the
geometry and dynamics of the original rational map.
