
* 1454864
* CAREER: Entropy in dynamics: connections with geometry, algebraic numbers, and bioscience
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2015,04/20/2019
* Daniel Thompson,OH,Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 444,809.00

Dynamics is the branch of mathematics that studies systems that evolve under
time. From its origins in the late 19th century to today, the mathematical
theory of dynamical systems has been inspired by problems in adjacent areas of
mathematics (e.g. number theory, geometry, probability), and other natural
sciences (e.g. celestial mechanics, statistical mechanics, population biology).
This project belongs to that rich tradition, and focuses on deriving fundamental
results for a variety of dynamical systems arising from geometry, number theory
and applied settings. The common thread that unifies these topics is an
'entropic' approach to all the problems under consideration. The entropy of a
dynamical system is a fundamental invariant which measures the complexity of its
orbit structure. The three main research directions of the project are: (1) to
establish uniqueness of measures of maximal entropy and equilibrium states in a
variety of higher dimensional settings of interest to the dynamics and wider
mathematical communities; (2) to give a number-theoretic description of all the
possible entropies that can be achieved within certain natural classes of
dynamical systems; (3) to use information-theoretic interpretations of entropy
and related quantities to give insight to problems in mathematical bioscience.
The project contains a substantial program of synergistic educational
activities, including the development of an after-school math enrichment program
for the Ohio State University Young Scholars Program. The program will develop
fundamental mathematical skills for a talented population of students from
under-represented groups taken from all the major urban areas of Ohio.

Part (1) of the project develops a novel approach to the theory of equilibrium
states, focusing on implementation to non-uniformly and partially hyperbolic
systems. The project develops novel techniques to overcome some of the
traditional obstructions to developing an effective theory in these higher
dimensional settings. The end goal is to use these results to derive numerous
global statistical properties (central limit theorems, large deviations, etc.)
for the systems within our framework. Motivating examples include geodesic flows
in non-positive curvature, and the Teichmueller flow on the moduli space of
quadratic differentials. Part (2) concerns the algebraic description of numbers
arising as entropies of post-critically finite interval maps. A surprising
relationship between the degree of the map and the algebraic properties of these
numbers was identified experimentally in Thurston's final paper. A rigorous
explanation of this phenomenon remains an open problem, which the PI has recast
in terms of identifying zeros of certain complex functions. Part (3)
investigates finitary versions of entropy, and related quantities, in the
mathematical biosciences. The PI will use these quantities, interpreted as
measures of complexity, as tools for detecting structure in large data sets,
particularly those arising in genomic analysis and in the dynamics of
biologically motivated networks.
