
* 1454945
* CAREER: Forcing and Large Cardinals
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 06/01/2015,06/13/2019
* Dima Sinapova,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

The standard axioms of set theory, Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of
choice (ZFC), do not decide many natural questions. For example, the Continuum
Hypothesis (that there is no set whose cardinality is strictly between that of
the integers and that of the real numbers) is independent of the standard
axioms, as shown in 1963 by Paul Cohen through the breakthrough method of
forcing. Since then, a longstanding project in set theory has been to use
forcing for relative consistency results and to study strengthening of the ZFC
axioms. This constitutes the broad motivation of the project: What is possible
in strengthening of ZFC, versus what constraints are imposed by ZFC itself? The
educational component of the project features organizing two workshops and
support for undergraduate and graduate student research.

The main candidates for ZFC strengthenings are large cardinal axioms and strong
forcing axioms. Forcing over a model with large cardinals is also the most
powerful tool for showing consistency results. Combinatorial principles,
especially at singular cardinals are used to understand both the nature of these
extensions, and how much we can do with forcing and large cardinals. Jensen's
square, Shelah's approachability property are "anti-compactness" type principles
that hold in models that sufficiently resemble L. In contrast, the tree property
is a reflection property that resembles large cardinal properties, but can hold
at successor cardinals. The project will focus on the interplay between these
principles and forcing extensions constructed from large cardinals. The PI will
also investigate how they interact with the singular cardinal hypothesis and
Shelah's PCF theory. The latter is mostly decided in ZFC, and provides certain
"canonical invariants," against which one can test new axioms.
