
* 1454893
* CAREER: Trace Formula and Geometric Analysis of Automorphic Forms
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2015,06/05/2019
* Nicolas Templier,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2021
* USD 480,000.00

Many aspects of this research project are intimately related to establishing
instances of randomness in number theory. Number theory is among the oldest
branches of mathematics; its applications to technology are prevalent and vital
for communication systems, data processing, and computational algorithms. The
goals of this project are driven by landmark problems on arithmetic families.
Families arise when assembling and studying together objects that share common
features. Families are often crucial even if one is a priori interested in a
single object and thereby are central to the recent resolution of certain
difficult algebraic and asymptotic questions. These goals of the project are
complemented by concrete initiatives targeted at undergraduate and graduate
education that are centered on developing effective writing and communication
skills. In collaboration with the Institute for Writing at Cornell University,
the PI will organize a monthly seminar on writing, regular writing groups, and
an online wiki that will serve as a communication platform and access to
resources for the general public. The PI will continue to mentor undergraduate
research projects, disseminating knowledge and discoveries while promoting
learning through the investigation of open problems.

This research project aims to develop a quantitative theory of the asymptotics
of special functions, such as characters of representations. The long-term goal
is to solve problems on automorphic periods, subconvexity and non-vanishing of
L-functions, and arithmetic statistics of families. The trace formula is a
fundamental tool in number theory and the development of the Langlands program
in particular. Even though there has been enormous progress, important questions
remain open, notably analytic aspects that are critical for many applications.
These questions are now ripe for investigation following the works of Arthur and
others. An immediate outcome of this research is a Sato-Tate equi-distribution
theorem for families of Maass forms on GL(n), resolving a long-standing problem.
The understanding of the absolute convergence of the geometric side of the trace
formula is currently one of the most urgent problems in the subject. A second
focus is on trace characters, which are a central concern in representation
theory, such as the local Langlands correspondence and functorial transfers. The
PI will work on quantitative aspects that have seen little progress since the
seminal work of Harish-Chandra. Related to this, the PI will continue work on
Whittaker periods, notably towards a conjecture of Zuckerman on the asymptotic
behavior at infinity. The proposed activity is to bring methods from analysis,
geometry, representation theory, and mathematical physics in their full
strength, notably symplectic geometry and integrable systems; an immediate goal
is the systematic study of the quantitative aspects of coadjoint orbits.
