
* 1454817
* CAREER: Maximum likelihood and nonparametric empirical Bayes methods in high dimensions
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 08/01/2015,08/02/2019
* Lee Dicker,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The investigator is combining classical and elegant ideas from statistics
(empirical Bayes, mixture models, and nonparametric maximum likelihood), with
important recent breakthroughs in computing to help develop a rigorous,
practical framework for many problems in modern data analysis. Applications in
genomics and other areas of biology where high-throughput data are generated
form an important part of the project. Beyond biology, the methods developed
during the course of the project are expected to have applications in finance
(e.g. fraud detection), machine learning (e.g. speech, text, and pattern
recognition), and other fields where vast high-dimensional datasets are being
rapidly generated and require accurate, incisive analysis. Another important
aspect of the project addresses questions about reproducibility, which have come
to the forefront in many applications involving high-dimensional data analysis.
To address these questions, the investigator is studying fundamental properties
of statistical risk and risk estimation in high dimensions. Algorithms and
methods developed during the course of the project are being implemented in
easy-to-use and freely available software packages. Project research is closely
integrated with education, via graduate student training and newly developed
courses for graduate and undergraduate students.

The main objective of the project is to develop new methodologies, computational
strategies, and theoretical results for the use of nonparametric maximum
likelihood (NPML) techniques and empirical Bayes methods in high-dimensional
data analysis. This work is fundamentally related to the analysis of
nonparametric mixture models. Empirical Bayes methods have a long and rich
history in statistics, and are particularly well-suited to high-dimensional
problems. Moreover, recent computational results and convex approximations have
greatly simplified the implementation of NPML-based methods. Leveraging these
computational breakthroughs, the investigator is developing novel and scalable
NPML-based methods for high-dimensional classification, high-dimensional
regression, and other statistical problems. New still-faster algorithms for
computing NPML estimators, which take advantage of certain types of sparsity in
the estimated mixing-measure, are also being developed. The investigator is
studying theoretical properties of the proposed methods in high-dimensional
settings. Areas of emphasis for theoretical analysis include convergence rates
and frequentist risk properties of the proposed empirical Bayes methods.
