
* 1455270
* CAREER: Numerical Methods and Biomechanical Models for Sperm Motility
* DMS,FD-Fluid Dynamics, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 06/15/2015,04/18/2019
* Sarah Olson,MA,Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Mammalian sperm must navigate the female reproductive tract, swimming a distance
greater than 1000 times their own length to reach and fertilize the egg. In
order to aid in the treatment of reduced sperm motility, it is important to
understand interactions of the sperm flagellum with different regions of the
reproductive tract. In particular, fluid flow helps bring the egg to the uterus
(in the opposite direction of sperm progression). Recent experiments have shown
that a large percentage of sperm exhibit positive rheotaxis, the ability to
reorient and swim against a background flow. Additionally, sperm will bind and
unbind to the oviductal wall and the role of a background flow on sperm
detachment is not known. The main scientific goals of this project include
further analyzing existing experimental data (through image processing
techniques) and developing new computational models to understand the clinical
importance of migration through the female reproductive tract and sperm binding
and detachment from walls in a background flow. Several new computational
modeling frameworks will be developed to allow simulations of sperm in the
presence of a background flow and a wall. The PI will provide interdisciplinary
training for several students (undergraduate and graduate) as well as one
postdoc in the areas of computational biofluids, image processing of
experimental movies, and model development. In addition, the PI will work to
develop image processing and modeling modules to be used in area High Schools
and at summer programs for High School students at WPI.

The sperm flagellum is an elastic structure that propagates waves of bending
along its length to propel itself through the female reproductive tract.
Understanding the behavior of the interaction between sperm, dynamic elastic
structures, and their surrounding fluid will shed light onto the biophysics of
their 3-dimensional motion and will help determine the clinical importance of
migration through the female reproductive tract in a background flow. Models
will be able to delineate the importance of factors such as sperm rolling, types
of flagellar waveforms, biochemistry, and fluid viscosity for forward
progression of the sperm. In this project, the PI will model the sperm flagellum
as a Kirchhoff rod that is able to bend and twist. The rod is able to achieve
both planar and nonplanar waveforms and the rotation of the rod can be captured
via an orthonormal triad associated with each material point along the
centerline of the flagellum. Through this work the PI will focus on the
following objectives: (1) Understand the types of emergent waveforms and
trajectories of sperm in a background flow at different viscosities; (2)
Determine if rolling is due to calcium mediated changes in flagellar waveforms,
background flow, wall interactions, or hydrodynamic interactions with other
sperm; (3) Investigate the role of background fluid flow on
attachment/detachment of sperm to walls; (4) Extend current numerical methods.
The PI's research will lead to the development of two new numerical methods to
study interactions near a wall and increase accuracy of force calculations
through parametric representations of the structure. These newly developed
methods can also be used for other slender elastic structures such as cilia and
bacterial flagella.
