
* 1552903
* CAREER: Mesoscale computational modeling of intracellular soft matter
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 06/01/2016,07/06/2020
* Anastasios Matzavinos,RI,Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Intracellular networks of entangled or cross-linked polymers, such as the actin
and microtubule cytoskeleton, interact with and respond to mechanical cues from
the environment, influencing how cells grow and divide, how stem cells
differentiate into specific cell types, and how cancer cells proliferate, among
other important molecular and cellular phenomena. In many cases, the structure
of these networks is dynamically altered by the mechanical feedback of lipid
membranes and cytoplasmic flows. However, the majority of current modeling and
computational approaches focus on computational tractability at the expense of
these mechanical feedbacks. A central theme of this project is that the
development of physically realistic models of intracellular polymer networks
(and other biological matter) requires a computational approach that efficiently
integrates the mechanics of the network with the hydrodynamics of intracellular
fluid flows and the mechanical interactions with biological membranes. Such
integrative computational efforts are key to building a better understanding of
intracellular phenomena. In particular, they hold the potential to help diagnose
and treat cytoskeleton-related diseases and guide the development of stem cell
techniques. The proposed work will help with the scientific and professional
development of both graduate students and undergraduate students. It will also
integrate excellent educational opportunities including the development of open
education resources; promoting computer-coding literacy as a means to
investigate physical phenomena through the development of an educational website
with specialized computer coding activities pertaining to the proposed project;
conducting boot camps to train undergraduate students on "Mesoscale
computational modeling of intracellular soft matter" and; working with the
Science Centre at Brown University to engage high school students from
underrepresented communities in scientific computing and the physics of soft
matter.

The PI proposes a synergistic combination of approaches consisting of
dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) simulations and stochastic homogenization
methods. DPD can accurately model the molecular-scale motion of polymers and
fluids without the computational burden that normally makes alternative
simulations (e.g., molecular dynamics) unviable. Stochastic homogenization
methods, on the other hand, provide the means of efficiently extracting bulk
mechanical properties from the mesoscale DPD description. Specific aims of the
project include (i) the development of specialized particle-based methods for
investigating the mechanical interactions between cytoplasmic flows and
intracellular matter, (ii) a computational and analytic investigation of
stochastic homogenization approaches to developing mesoscopic mechanical
descriptions of intracellular matter, (iii) applications of the developed
algorithms to the computational modeling of specific examples of biological
matter, such as the actin cytoskeleton and DNA macromolecules, and (iv) the
clustering and classification of simulation data in order to characterize the
dynamics of biological matter in the systems under investigation. Given the
recent interest in intracellular polymer networks (e.g., the actin cytoskeleton)
as therapeutic targets in a broad array of pathological conditions, including
cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, and kidney disease, the proposed
computational approach is expected to advance significant biomedical
applications, especially therapeutic perturbations of cytoskeletal dynamics.
