
* 1554761
* CAREER: Nonlocal partial differential equations in collisional kinetic theory
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2016,08/09/2019
* Maria Pia Gualdani,DC,George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2020
* USD 322,804.00

This research project is concerned with important physical phenomena driven by
collision and diffusion of particles, whose mathematical description is based on
partial differential equations of kinetic type. It is driven by applications in
gas dynamics and plasma physics as well by mathematical interests in analysis,
partial differential equations and mathematical physics. Kinetic equations are
used to describe evolution of interacting particles, such as gas molecules, ions
and electrons in a plasma. The most famous kinetic equation is the Boltzmann
equation: formulated by Ludwig Boltzmann in 1872, this equation describes motion
of a large class of gases. Later, in 1936 Lev Landau derived from the Boltzmann
equation a new mathematical model for motion of plasma. This latter equation was
named the Landau equation. Despite the fact that many mathematicians and
physicists have been working on these equations, many important questions are
still unanswered due to their mathematical complexity. The proposed research
will fundamentally contribute to this field by bridging the gap between
mathematical analysis and physics and enable further mathematical understanding
of physical phenomena. The work will be enhanced by collaborations at the
national and international levels and will help strengthen inter-institutional
ties. The research program will be integrated with educational and outreach
activities designed to (i) broaden the students' understanding of different
research areas, (ii) provide the students with a modern skill set that is
essential for different career paths, and (iii) promote existing connections
between local institutions in the DC Metro area and help establish new avenues
for collaboration and training of high quality scientific workforce.

The proposed research will advance the knowledge in global properties of
solutions to collisional kinetic mathematical models, improving our
understanding of non-linear dynamics, entropy, equilibrium, and regularizing
effects. The corresponding equations contain integro-differential operators that
are highly nonlinear, singular and with degenerating coefficients. Integro-
differential equations of this type have received increased attention recently:
well-posedness and regularity theory are being developed since many new
applications have emerged, among which conformal geometry, stochastic control
and image processing. The project aims at advancing knowledge in the theories of
kinetic equations, nonlocal integro-differential operators and degenerate
differential operators.
