
* 1554896
* CAREER: Multiscale investigation of cortical actin organization and dynamics
* DMS,Cellular Dynamics and Function, GOALI-Grnt Opp Acad Lia wIndus, Cross-BIO Activities, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 03/01/2016,10/15/2020
* Adriana Dawes,OH,Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 02/28/2022
* USD 604,105.00

Cells rely on a mechanical structure called the cortex to maintain their shape
and to respond to chemical and mechanical cues in the environment. The cortex,
which lies just below the outer membrane of the cell, consists primarily of
polymerized filaments of the protein actin. These actin filaments are cross-
linked by a variety of proteins that can reorient and even move the filaments,
making the cortex a highly dynamic structure. Despite the importance of the
actin cortex for critical cell functions, it is not clear how small scale
interactions give rise to large scale patterns and functions associated with the
cortex. This project will use mathematical modeling to bridge disparate time and
space scales associated with cortical actin dynamics, directly linking molecular
level interactions to the emergence of cell level functional structures. For
this project, novel models will be constructed that draw on a variety of
mathematical approaches, including stochastic models which take into account
infrequent interactions, and continuum models which can track the moving
boundary of the cortex as well movement of proteins in time and space. The
development and analysis of these biologically based models will result in an
improved understanding of actin and its regulation in a cellular context. This
research will also be leveraged to recruit and retain women in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics fields through the development of an
integrated undergraduate course in mathematical modeling, with recruitment of
students through a number of existing programs at Ohio State University,
including Women in Mathematics and Science and Women in Engineering. Students
involved in this project, and in the undergraduate course, will be exposed to
real world mathematics applications and will interact with peers from other
disciplines in a supportive interdisciplinary environment.

Mathematical modeling is an ideal tool for the investigation of complex
biological systems, where experimental techniques are not available or are not
feasible. At the macro-scale level, systems of partial differential equations
will be used to investigate the interplay between biochemical and mechanical
actin dynamics, and the consequence of these dynamics on cell shape. Asymptotic
analysis will be used to explicitly study the role of curvature in actin
dynamics, and moving boundary simulations will be used to study changes in cell
shape. At the mesoscale level, integro-differential equations, which use
integral kernels to describe actin filament dynamics, will be used to study the
formation of large scale actin filament patterns such as asters, vortices and
aggregates. At the micro-scale level, stochastic individual-based models will be
used to determine physical properties of the local actin meshwork and to
determine under what conditions the actin meshwork behaves as a viscoelastic
material. By enforcing consistency across multiple time and space scales in the
proposed models, mechanisms that give rise to cellular structures will be
revealed. Analysis and simulations of these models will present unique
challenges leading to improvement of techniques in several areas of applied
mathematics, including asymptotic analysis, moving boundary simulations,
nonlocal model analysis, and stochastic simulations. The proposed models will be
motivated and validated in a single experimental organism, avoiding
complications from combining in vitro data with in vivo data from multiple
organisms and cell types. The integrated computational and analytical models
resulting from this research will increase our understanding of a fundamental
protein that is critical for proper cell function.
