
* 1555141
* CAREER: Big Computation and the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 06/01/2016,06/10/2020
* Eric Laber,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Emerging infectious diseases (EIDs) account for more than 25% of global disease
burden and more than 32% of global deaths. Current EIDs like Middle East
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS) and antibiotic-resistant superbugs have
the potential to make devastating impacts on public health. The methodologies
under development in this project can be used to translate real-time data on
EIDs into recommendations about where, when, and to whom to apply interventions
so as to minimize negative impacts of the disease while reducing overall
resource consumption. Furthermore, these recommendations are designed to be
immediately interpretable in a subject matter context, thereby empowering
decision makers to incorporate information from complex and heterogeneous data
streams into disease management. Application of these methodologies has the
potential to reduce mortality and morbidity at lower cost than existing
management plans. Furthermore, models underpinning intervention recommendations
will generate new knowledge about EID dynamics.

This research project aims to make fundamental contributions to online
sequential decision making and to create a new statistical framework for data-
driven management of EIDs. We conceptualize the EID as spreading across a finite
set of locations, which might be physical locations in space or nodes in a
network. An allocation strategy formalizes management of an EID and is
represented by a sequence of functions, one per intervention decision, that map
up-to-date information on an EID to a subset of locations recommended for
treatment. An optimal allocation strategy maximizes some mean utility function
over the duration of the EID. Construction of an optimal allocation strategy
from data on an EID is challenging because: (i) the number of allocations is
exponential in the number of locations; (ii) estimation and management must
occur simultaneously; (iii) spatial proximity induces causal interference; and
(iv) an allocation strategy must be interpretable to subject matter experts. We
integrate ideas from statistics, computer science, optimization, and disease
ecology to overcome these challenges. We combine simulation-optimization with
policy-search algorithms to construct an online estimator of the optimal
allocation strategy; this strategy trades off exploring allocation choices that
improve estimates of disease dynamics with exploiting current estimated dynamics
to immediately slow spread of the EID. We show that the treatment allocation
problem can be recast as an infinite-dimensional bandit problem. We leverage
this connection to derive estimation algorithms that scale to very large
allocation problems and are amenable to theoretical study. We combine our
policy-search and bandit-based estimators with a novel class of allocation
strategies that can be expressed as a sequence of if-then statements that are
immediately interpretable to subject-matter experts and can be readily adjusted
based on expert judgment. We derive a non-parametric lower bound on the
approximation error of an estimated allocation strategy within this class; this
bound is used to perform goodness-of-fit tests for the estimated optimal
allocation strategy.
