
* 1564367
* CAREER: p-adic and mod p Galois representations
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2015,12/16/2015
* David Savitt,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2017
* USD 164,909.00

The PI's research is in number theory and representation theory; its goal,
broadly, is to understand the Galois representations associated (sometimes
conjecturally) to automorphic forms and automorphic representations. The PI will
undertake several projects related to the conjectures of Serre, Fontaine-Mazur,
and Breuil-Mezard (and their generalizations) as well as to the emerging p-adic
and mod p Langlands correspondences. The PI will study the weight part of
Serre's conjecture for reductive groups over number fields, with the goal of
giving an explicit Serre weight recipe in considerable generality. The
investigator will produce evidence for generalizations of the Breuil-Mezard
conjecture, and will prove some cases of such a generalization, with
applications to the Langlands program. Another component of the project involves
the explicit reduction modulo p of certain p-adic Galois representations.

Number theory is one of the oldest branches of mathematics. At its most
fundamental, number theory is the study of whole number solutions to equations,
although sophisticated modern techniques can sometimes give the appearance of
being far-removed from this goal. Number theory has many important practical
applications; for instance, most cellular telephone calls are protected by a
code based on elliptic curves, one of the primary objects of study in the
investigator's field. In addition to these broader impacts, this award will
support several educational initiatives, including a transition program for
minority calculus students at the University of Arizona, the development of an
undergraduate problem-solving curriculum, and the recruitment of
underrepresented minority students to high school mathematics summer programs.
The PI is one of the directors of Canada/USA Mathcamp, a summer program for
mathematically talented high school students.
