
* 1603246
* CAREER: An Integrated Proposal Based on The Corona Problem
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 10/01/2015,11/23/2015
* Brett Wick,MO,Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2016
* USD 36,570.00

The research objective of this project is to conduct a deeper study of the
Corona Problem, using tools and techniques developed in interrelated areas of
analysis, with a goal of settling open and important questions. The Corona
Problem can be phrased as a question about left invertibility of matrices in
particular algebras of analytic functions. Additionally, it has formulations in
the areas of operator theory, complex differential geometry, functional
analysis, and commutative algebra. The Corona Problem has served as an impetus
for research in four main areas of analysis: complex analysis, function theory,
harmonic analysis, and operator theory. Additionally, it arises in real-world
applications through the use of control theory to engineering questions. This
research program utilizes knowledge and techniques from these broad areas of
analysis to provide an array of tools with which to approach the challenging
questions raised in this project. The proposed research is based on recent,
significant contributions made by the principal investigatorr and focuses on key
questions connected to the Corona Problem. In particular, the principal
investigator will address questions that relate the Corona Problem to complex
differential geometry via the curvature of canonical vector bundles associated
with the problem. The Corona Problem will additionally be studied for more
general multiplier algebras of analytic functions. Finally, the connection with
the Corona Problem and control theory will be explored via the computation of
the stable rank of rings of analytic functions.

The project's educational component creates a novel "Internet Analysis Seminar"
that provides a forum for researchers in these areas to interact and learn from
one another, both academically and professionally. The seminar includes three
phases involving Internet lectures, working groups, and a final conference. A
primary goal is to increase the collaborative learning and mentoring between
graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and senior faculty across the
country. The seminar takes the standard dissemination of research results
further, providing an open, inclusive setting for junior mathematicians to learn
new research concepts and apply them through group projects with more senior
researchers. Moreover, the project integrates the principal investigator's
current and future research with an ambitious educational component: the
cutting-edge research will provide many of the topics selected for the Internet
seminar, and seminar participants will likely collaborate on future research
projects. Solutions to the research questions investigated in this project will
have countless applications in complex analysis, function theory, harmonic
analysis, and operator theory. Not only will they open the way to additional
mathematical inquiry, but they will also have significant application to real-
world ideas, in particular in the area of control theory. The educational
component seeks to broaden the participation of isolated researchers and
underrepresented groups by creating an open and inclusive research forum in
which any researcher can participate. Participants will be able to work with,
and optimally be mentored by, some of the top experts in their fields regardless
of geographic location.
