
* 1650546
* CAREER: Analysis and Geometry of Measures
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 03/01/2017,05/19/2021
* Matthew Badger,CT,University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 02/28/2022
* USD 410,000.00

Geometric measure theory is a field of mathematics that evolved from
investigations in the 1920s and 1930s into the structure of sets in the plane
with finite length. The term "measure" refers to an abstract generalization of
length, area, or volume, which assigns a size value to every mathematical set.
Traditional outlets for geometric measure theory have expanded in recent
decades. The widespread utility and current use of geometric measure theory in
different areas of analysis justifies its continued development. The research
component of this project seeks to advance our understanding about underlying
structures of general measures and to develop new techniques that will expand
the toolbox that geometric measure theory provides for researchers in adjacent
areas of analysis and geometry. On the educational front, this project will
support a network of early career researchers whose research involves nonsmooth
analysis, including graduate students and postdoctoral researchers who work in a
number areas. Principal activities by the PI include organizing a Workshop for
Postdocs in Fall 2017 and a Conference for Graduate Students with Mini-Courses
in Spring 2019. The two conferences will be linked: postdoctoral participants
from the workshop will be invited to give mini-courses for graduate students in
the follow-up conference. The PI will further integrate research and education
by organizing an analysis learning seminar and mentoring two postdoctoral
researchers at the PI's home institution.

This project focuses on a constellation of questions about the structure of
Radon measures in Euclidean space. The underlying theme is that general measures
may be understood in terms of their behavior with respect to lower dimensional
sets such as finite length curves in the plane and finite area surfaces in
space. This point-of-view originated in the 1920s and 1930s through
investigations by A.S. Besicovitch, which compared and contrasted properties of
finite length sets with properties of rectifiable curves. Later contributions by
A.P. Morse and J.F. Randolph, H. Federer, P. Mattila, and D. Preiss from the
1940s through the 1980s produced a rich theory of qualitative rectifiability of
measures in Euclidean space that are absolutely continuous with respect to
Hausdorff measures; a quantitative theory of rectifiability for Ahlfors regular
measures emerged in the 1990s through the work of G. David and S. Semmes. The
proposed research seeks to broaden our understanding of different notions of
rectifiability of measures in the absence of background regularity hypotheses
from past investigations. Specifically, the PI will look for characterizations
of Radon measures which are carried by countable families of Hölder continuous
curves, Lipschitz graphs, or Lipschitz continuous images of linear subspaces.
This goal requires integration of techniques from modern harmonic analysis and
quantitative geometric measure theory. The PI will explore approaches based on
the PI's work with R. Schul, which characterized Radon measures that are carried
by countable families of rectifiable curves, as well as approaches based on G.
David and T. Toro's extension of the Reifenberg algorithm and approaches based
on K. Rajala's quasiconformal uniformization theorem.
