
* 1654076
* CAREER: Nonconvex Optimization and Identifiability with Applications to Medical Imaging
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2017,08/10/2021
* Rina Barber,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Modern large-scale data sets arising in the physical and biological sciences
often exhibit complex features that do not fit into the framework of existing
methodologies, preventing the information in the gathered data from being fully
utilized. In medical imaging, computed tomography (CT) scans and positron
emission tomography (PET) scans are often best represented with models that are
complex, beyond the scope of most available computational approaches, as
existing methodology and theoretical analysis are mostly restricted to simpler
classes of optimization problems. Since CT and PET scans come with a cost of a
small radiation dose to the patient, better models for the data obtained by
these imaging devices would result in a better tradeoff between the risk due to
radiation and the benefit of obtaining a precise image for effective diagnosis
and treatment. This research project will study a broad framework for complex
optimization problems, applicable to medical imaging and across a range of
problems in the physical and biological sciences, providing concrete methods and
guarantees for many problems arising in these fields. The developed tools will
be implemented on specific image reconstruction problems in CT and PET imaging,
through collaborations with medical imaging researchers who will provide actual
scan data, with the goal of enabling greater diagnostic accuracy for these
popular clinical tools. Methods and code developed under this project will all
be made publicly available. Throughout, the investigator will mentor students
interested in working at the intersection of high-dimensional statistics,
optimization, and medical imaging, and will increase interaction and
communication across these fields through new courses and new collaborations.

Statistical problems arising in many modern applied fields often exhibit a range
of challenging features, including non-convexity and non-differentiability, that
pose significant challenges for high dimensional optimization and theoretical
analysis. The proposed research will explore complex non-convex optimization and
identifiability problems to develop methodology and theory for a broad range of
problems facing applied researchers in practice. The research will study and
develop algorithms that adapt techniques such as sparse or low-rank
optimization, primal/dual methods, and alternating minimization or alternating
descent, with the aim of achieving efficient empirical performance and broad
theoretical convergence guarantees. The resulting methods will be adapted to
address concrete problems in medical imaging, where noisy side information must
be incorporated into the reconstructed image, and where the image representation
is confounded by additional parameters modeling the imaging device.
