
* 1654756
* CAREER: Towards General-Purpose, High-Order Integral Equation Methods for Computer Simulation in Engineering: Analysis, Algorithm Design, and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 08/15/2017,08/06/2021
* Andreas Kloeckner,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Numerical simulation has become an essential tool in nearly all areas of science
and engineering, ranging from engine design to naval architecture, and from
personalized medicine to city planning. Yet, the efficient solution of large-
scale, globally coupled (so-called elliptic) computational problems arising in
these application areas remains a major challenge. Although integral equation
(IE) methods for numerical simulation typically have optimally low cost when
applied to common problems in science and engineering, their impact has been
limited to a small handful of applications by technical obstacles. The purpose
of this project is to take important steps to remove these obstacles. First, the
project will develop novel numerical and symbolic algorithms to reduce the
amount of method design and implementation work required when adapting IE
methods to new classes of applications. This will make the associated cost
savings of these methods more broadly accessible. Second, the project will
design, implement, and analyze parallel algorithms to enable the nation's large-
scale computing resources to be used in conjunction with IE methods. Their
increased computational efficiency will facilitate the study of models with
increased fidelity and higher accuracy. Third, the project will extend the set
of problems that can be attacked with IE methods to those including volume (and
not just surface) data while using highly accurate geometric representations.
Fourth, it will provide a theoretical understanding and practical methods for
automatic control of numerical error in these methods. Lastly, the project will
demonstrate the new methods and their use in the mathematically and numerically
challenging context of fluid dynamics. To foster an understanding of the power
of these kinds of computational tools in the next generation of the nation's
workforce, this project will employ a day-long experience for students in their
formative middle-school years. This experience will convey that computer
modeling and simulation can help understand the world by testing the predictive
power of simple, mechanistic models. Through its reliance on self-contained,
hands-on computer experiments, the experience will be interactive and visually
engaging, require little mathematics preparation, and easily establish
connections with real-world applications of computing. The program focuses on
creating engagement and interest, with the goal of promoting career and
educational choices in mathematics and computing.

Integral equation (IE) methods for computer simulation typically have optimally
low cost, but their impact has been limited to a handful of applications by
technical obstacles. The purpose of this research is to take important steps to
remove these obstacles, by providing: 1. high-order singular quadrature and
infrastructure for fast multipole methods for the evaluation of layer potentials
with general, symbolically given kernels in complex geometry, 2. scalable and
efficient distributed-memory parallel algorithms for the use of IE methods in
large-scale applications, 3. design and analysis of high-order numerical methods
for volume potentials in complex geometry as needed by inhomogeneous partial
differential equations, 4. theory and methods for automatic adaptive mesh
refinement based on a-posteriori error estimates, and 5. a demonstration of the
capabilities of the developed methods and algorithms in the context of the
incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, including high-order finite-element-
method and IE coupling.
