
* 1654589
* CAREER: Nonparametric function estimation: shape constraints, adaptation, inference and beyond
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2017,07/06/2021
* Adityanand Guntuboyina,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Nonparametric statistics is an area of statistics and machine learning that
allows one to model and analyze datasets without making strong prior assumptions
about the data. Data problems where the techniques of nonparametric statistics
are useful come from a wide variety of applied areas including biology,
medicine, astronomy, engineering, economics and operations research. In modern
complex and large datasets, these methods are especially crucial as they enable
the detection of important trends and patterns in the data that may be missed by
traditional parametric statistical techniques. However there exist many
unresolved issues concerning the theory, methodology and application of
nonparametric methods in modern data problems. A systematic study of these
issues will be undertaken in this project which will result in (a) an improved
understanding (in terms of accuracy and uncertainty quantification) of many
existing methods, and (b) novel methods and computational algorithms that will
be useful to applied practitioners in the scientific areas mentioned above. Most
of the proposed projects are collaborative and involve researchers from a
diverse set of universities. The project also contains a well-developed plan of
educational activities which will have a major impact on the education and
training of undergraduate and graduate students at UC Berkeley in statistical
research. In particular, many of the educational activities of the project are
aimed towards undergraduate students, a group that is often given less
importance at large research universities.

Concretely, a wide range of nonparametric models will be studied, covering both
regression and density estimation. In situations where empirically attractive
estimators exist, an elaborate theoretical study is proposed focusing on their
adaptive risk properties. In other situations, estimators and efficient
computational algorithms are proposed together with an analysis of their
accuracy. Important practical problems of inference and uncertainty
quantification are also addressed. The specific regression problems that are
investigated in this project include (a) multivariate convex regression,
univariate trend filtering and additive shape constrained regression where
adaptive risk properties of the natural estimators will be established, (b)
multivariate trend filtering and quasi-convex regression where new estimators
are provided along with efficient computational algorithms, and (c) global and
pointwise inference in shape constrained estimation where uncertainty
quantification will be addressed. In density estimation, the problems
investigated include: (a) log-concave and mixture density estimation where
maximum likelihood estimators will be studied, (b) distributionally robust
optimization and nongaussian component analysis where novel methodology will be
proposed based on shape-constrained density estimation, and (c) robust
approaches to shape-constrained inference where new procedures will be
developed.
