
* 1654725
* CAREER: The Geography of Tame Ordered Structures
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2017,11/18/2021
* Philipp Hieronymi,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 330,379.00

At the heart of logic and model theory lies the observation that within
mathematics there are certain objects that have to be considered tame, and
others that have to be considered wild. Many celebrated results in logic from
the first half of the 20th century concerned the existence of objects considered
wild. Gödel's proof of the undecidability of arithmetic established that this
structure is complicated (or wild) from a logical viewpoint. Such results are
negative in spirit as they point to the limitations of mathematical reasoning.
However, in the second half of the last century the focus changed. Model
theorists found a vast number of tame mathematical structures that exhibit no
such wildness, and for often very different reasons are amenable to model-
theoretic methods. This program of identifying and analyzing tame classes of
structures whose model theory can be understood came to be known as the
geography of tame mathematics, and in its various forms has dominated model
theory throughout the last thirty years. Although arising as a program of
foundational importance, it has led to striking applications of model theory to
other areas of mathematics, most recently to the André-Oort conjecture in number
theory. Since this program is to explore areas of tame mathematics, these
connections are not coincidental at all. The development of such interactions
has proven again and again to have far reaching applications outside of logic
that could not have been envisioned beforehand.

This project continues this line of research in the setting of expansions of the
real line. It aims to settle important open questions within model theory, but
also naturally develops new connections between model theory and other areas in
logic such as neostability and descriptive set theory, and outside of logic such
as geometric measure theory and geometric group theory. The investigator will
lead a large scale investigation of dividing lines between tame and wild
behavior arising in the study of the geometry of definable sets in ordered
structures. Building on early advances, the investigator will determine far
reaching consequences of various logical tameness conditions on the topological
and metric tameness of definable sets. Furthermore, the project comprises new
challenges in the classification of classes of structures considered tame. The
educational component of this CAREER grant ties together the investigator's
research with his teaching and outreach efforts. This project involves
undergraduate and graduate students and young researchers in the investigator's
research program, strengthens the ties between model theory and other branches
of mathematics, and continues the investigator's outreach efforts in the Urbana-
Champaign area.
