
* 1654159
* CAREER: Representing and Classifying Enriched Quantum Symmetry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2017,04/05/2022
* David Penneys,OH,Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2023
* USD 503,540.00

Symmetry plays an important role in mathematics and science. Classically, the
symmetries of a mathematical object form a "group", which is a set with a binary
operation such as the integers with addition. In recent decades, we have seen
the emergence of quantum mathematical objects whose symmetries form a group-like
structure called a "tensor category", which has a collection of objects with a
binary fusion operation. Tensor categories are said to encode quantum symmetry:
they describe topological phases of matter in physics, and they give us quantum
invariants of knots and 3-dimensional surfaces. We are currently seeing the
emergence of new mathematical objects which encode "enriched" quantum symmetry,
which describe interfaces between 3-dimensional and 2-dimensional quantum
systems. At this time, we have several competing formalisms. This project aims
to unify these notions and produce exotic examples through classification. The
educational component of this project includes undergraduate research and Summer
schools on subfactors and quantum symmetry at the Ohio State University. The
project will incorporate the principal investigators current learning materials
and those developed for these programs into a book on subfactor theory. He will
also collaborate with the STEAM Factory at Ohio State University to enhance
general scientific and mathematical literacy in the community.

This project has two main focuses: the representation and the classification of
these new enriched quantum symmetries. Unitary fusion categories have objects
whose dimensions are not necessarily integers, so representing unitary fusion
categories requires von Neumann factors, whose modules have a notion of
continuous dimension. In this project the principal investigator will use his
previous experience in the classification of small index subfactors to classify
quantum symmetries enriched in small unitary ribbon categories. This will study
an enriched operator algebra theory to develop an enriched subfactor theory. The
principal investigator will also develop the theory of bicommutant categories,
which are a higher categorical analog of von Neumann algebras originally due to
Henriques. These bicommutant categories have important connections to conformal
field theory, and they are expected to be an important tool in the
classification of enriched quantum symmetries.
