
* 1749857
* CAREER: Something Old, Something New: Robust Statistics in the 21st Century
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2018,08/22/2021
* Po-Ling Loh,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 315,376.00

Contemporary scientific problems involving large, high-dimensional datasets have
ushered in a new era for statisticians. A largely unexplored area of research
concerns incorporating ideas from robust statistics into the growing collection
of methods for high-dimensional estimation and inference. Preliminary results
hold much promise, but a plethora of theoretical and philosophical challenges
abound when attempting to generalize notions from classical robust statistics to
high-dimensional settings. The investigator will develop new statistical
methodology for high-dimensional robust estimation and derive rigorous theory
for the proposed estimators. This research project is highly interdisciplinary
in nature, cutting across statistics, engineering, and computer science. Results
of the research will be disseminated broadly, leading to cross-pollination
between fields and revitalized interest in robust statistics. In addition, the
investigator will refine and test her methods in radiology applications,
instigating new scientific collaborations and leading to more robust medical
imaging procedures for deployment in medical research. The investigator will
also develop new educational material based on the research that will be
incorporated into cross-listed classes in machine learning at the graduate and
undergraduate levels. The investigator will work to improve the image of
statistics and data science by engaging the wider community through public
speaking engagements and visits to high school math circles across the state of
Wisconsin.

Questions to be explored in this research project include: (1) How do existing
notions of robustness apply to high-dimensional settings? (2) How should high-
dimensional estimation procedures be modified to protect against deviations from
distributional assumptions? (3) How might one quantify the relative robustness
of various proposals? The project aims to generate novel theoretical results
that advance the frontiers of both statistics and optimization theory. New
algorithms will be devised for high-dimensional statistical estimation with
guaranteed accuracy under a broader set of model assumptions. The theoretical
analysis will involve studying a variety of non-convex estimators of independent
interest in the optimization community, with emphasis on objectives and
optimization algorithms that give rise to statistically consistent solutions.
The research project will also address long-standing open questions in robust
statistics involving optimization of low-dimensional non-convex objective
functions, and the investigator will examine a variety of new problem settings
arising in machine learning applications, including adversarially contaminated
data, non-iid observations, and mislabeled datasets dichotomized into training
and testing data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
