
* 1750488
* CAREER: Applicable Kinetic Computation with Boundaries and Rough Media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2018,07/05/2022
* Qin Li,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Kinetic theory describes the dynamics of a large number of particles in a
statistical manner. The theory is central to statistical mechanics and naturally
connects the micro-world described by Newton's law and the macro-world described
by the Navier-Stokes equations. Its applications arise from aerospace
engineering, mechanical engineering, nuclear engineering, and atmospheric
science. In all these engineering fields, rarified gas, photons, neutrons, and
many other types of particles are modeled by kinetic equations. This research
project aims to advance kinetic theory in both abstract and practical ways,
developing novel theory that is widely applicable to systems of central interest
in science and engineering. This research project concentrates on three main
questions in kinetic theory: 1. theoretically and numerically understanding
particles' interactions with boundaries/interfaces, with the focus placed on
understanding the boundary layer behavior; 2. analytically and numerically
relaxing homogeneity assumptions for the media, with both highly oscillatory and
rough media considered; 3. studying uncertainties and sensitivities of the
problem in both forward and backward manner, that is, tracing the propagation of
perturbations in the forward setting to understand how error gets enlarged in
the associated inverse problem. Due to the multi-scale multi-physics nature of
kinetic theory, the theoretical results will largely be obtained from performing
asymptotic analysis on the formal level and regularity theory on the rigorous
level. To tackle the challenges in computation, the PI intends to incorporate
solution structure given by partial-differential-equation analysis, and to
explore randomized solvers that have seen success in data science and compressed
sensing. Throughout the project, the PI intends to collaborate with engineers to
ensure the techniques under development are truly applicable.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
