
* 1750113
* CAREER: Quantifying heterogeneity and uncertainty in the transmission of vector borne diseases with a Bayesian trait-based framework
* DMS,Population & Community Ecology, POP & COMMUNITY ECOL PROG, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 08/01/2018,08/15/2022
* Leah Johnson,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Vector-borne diseases (VBDs) are an important class of infections that impact
humans, wildlife, livestock, and plants. In some regions, VBDs, such as malaria
and dengue, have resurged where previous elimination campaigns have waned. In
other places, the novel introduction and spread of vectors and pathogens, for
example the Asian citrus psyllid and with it huanglongbing (citrus greening), is
occurring due to human facilitated introductions (long distance travel events,
shipping containers, etc.). Transmission of VBDs is complex. The patterns of
transmission that we observe are determined by interactions between vectors,
pathogens, hosts, and their environment. Most disease vectors are small
arthropods; they are sensitive to environmental conditions, such as temperature
or rainfall. It is vitally important to understand how these factors and
conditions affect the dynamics of the vectors in order to better inform
strategies for monitoring and mitigation of VBDs. This CAREER project will
further a general understanding of how environmentally-mediated traits of
vectors (e.g. longevity and fecundity) interact with environmental factors to
impact the transmission of VBDs. Improved quantitative methods will be developed
for predicting when and where transmission will occur and for estimation of the
uncertainty in these predictions.

This CAREER project addresses three main questions: (1) How do we quantify and
model the impacts of environmental drivers on multiple correlated traits of
vectors and thus on VBD transmission dynamics? (2) How can we link mechanistic
or model-based measures of transmission with statistical models of
incidence/transmission to improve predictions of when and where VBD transmission
or emergence may occur? (3) How can we integrate multiple sources of uncertainty
into our models/predictions and how can we communicate this uncertainty in a way
that is useful for decision making? The PI will tackle these questions with a
trait-based framework, initially focusing on two very different but data rich
study systems, dengue and huanglongbing. More specifically, mechanistic
mathematical models that include details on environmentally mediated vector
traits, including trait correlation and heterogeneity, will first be developed.
These models will be parameterized and validated with data from open data
repositories using a Bayesian approach. Methods and tools will be developed for
validating these models, for properly quantifying sources and types of
uncertainty, and for testing interventions and making policy decisions under
uncertainty. Through an integrated approach to statistical training and
collaboration with current researchers in the Virginia Department of Health
(VDH), the project will improve the quantitative and statistical capabilities of
future researchers and public health officials and policy makers. In particular,
the work will include: a) Development of tools and training materials for VDH
employees to use cutting edge modeling techniques; b) Training and experience
for undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers in public
health collaboration through interactions with the VDH; c) Training of
undergraduate biologists in statistics through a revitalized Biological
Statistics course at Virginia Tech; d) Undergraduate research experience in
quantitative biology with a focus on VBDs; e) Training of graduate students in
teaching and mentoring through a seminar course on statistics pedagogy and
through opportunities to co-mentor undergraduate researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
