
* 1751996
* CAREER: Generated Jacobian Equations in Geometric Optics and Optimal Transport
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2018,05/27/2022
* Brittany Froese Hamfeldt,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The design of lenses and mirrors to precisely control the intensity pattern and
phase of light beams is important for many applications including
microlithography, optical data storage, medical treatment, headlight design, and
astronomy. The shape of the lenses or mirrors can be obtained by solving
equations known as Generated Jacobian Equations (GJEs). However, there are
currently no methods available for solving these equations except in the very
simplest settings. This project will introduce new mathematical and
computational techniques for solving GJEs, which will lead to new software that
can solve these challenging equations. These new techniques will be used to
solve several different lens design problems. Complementing this research plan,
the investigator will produce a comprehensive series of video lectures that
teach core mathematical topics within the context of cutting edge research.
These will be used to enhance the classroom environment and attract students
into STEM fields. They will also be made available to the public as free open
courseware that can be used to facilitate self-study in non-traditional learning
environments, complement course content in developing nations, change public
attitudes about the nature and usefulness of mathematics, and inspire women to
pursue mathematics.

The goal of this project is to introduce new analytical and numerical techniques
for solving a large class of Generated Jacobian Equations (GJEs) on the plane
and sphere. Typical GJEs need to be supplemented with a global, nonlinear
constraint on the solution gradient. This project will introduce an equivalent
local formulation and develop a robust theory of weak solutions. This will be
used to establish criteria that ensure convergence of numerical methods. The
investigator will introduce generalized finite difference methods for solving
GJEs on the plane. These will be analyzed, implemented, and used to solve
several lens design problems. By exploiting local coordinates, the investigator
will also design generalized finite difference methods for solving GJEs on the
sphere, which will be applied to problems in geometric optics and optimal
transportation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
