
* 1751339
* CAREER: Multi-Scale Modeling of Biological Gels by Coupling Langevin Equations and Fractional Viscoelastic Constitutive Models
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, Division Co-Funding: CAREER, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/01/2018,08/05/2022
* Paula Vasquez,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 476,480.00

This research will determine the mathematical properties of important biological
fluids which influence processes as diverse as clearance of mucus from airways
and the organization of DNA in the nucleus of cells during cell division. Many
of the fluids encountered in everyday life, such as water, gasoline, and honey,
are well-understood (Newtonian) fluids, but many of the fluids related to
industrial and biological applications are not. Common examples of non-Newtonian
fluids include paint, multi-grade engine oils, laundry detergent, pediatric
liquid medicines, pulmonary mucus, and cell membranes. A distinguishing feature
of non-Newtonian fluids is microscopic structures that can be rearranged
significantly during flow and consequently alter behavior over time and between
circumstances. The goal of this research is to establish mathematical
relationships between microstructural processes and flow properties in soft
biological matter. Current advances in microscopy, flow measurement, theory and
computation will lead to new models, allowing scientists to design and test
next-generation biomaterials and investigate biological flows. Undergraduate and
graduate students will not only be able to learn how to design and perform wet-
lab experiments, formulate mathematical models and perform high-performance
computational simulations, but also have opportunities to closely interact with
researchers from mathematics, biology, physics and biomedical sciences. STEM
students from the South Carolina Alliance for Minority Participation program
will be recruited as incoming freshmen to participate in a variety of research
and educational activities supported by this project. A second program, the SC
Women in Science Luncheon, will bring together female undergraduate and graduate
students for vertically-integrated research presentation, discussion and
mentoring. These educational efforts will have a broad impact on educating the
next generation of STEM scientists, preparing them for careers that span the
boundaries between different fields.

A distinguishing feature of many non-Newtonian fluids is that they have
microscopic or molecular-level structures that can be rearranged significantly
in flow and as a consequence alter the macroscopic behavior or performance of
the material. This project will focus on power-law rheology, which is ubiquitous
in many biological and industrial fields. New mathematical relationships will be
established by investigating soft matter both in equilibrium, where thermal
fluctuations dominate, and for far-from-equilibrium responses. These
relationships will be closely informed by experimental findings and are based on
the coupling of stochastic, integro-differential equations and deterministic,
fractional partial differential equations. The outcomes of these projects
include a new understanding of the relation between macro- and micro-scale
dynamics in power-law materials, new classes of linear and nonlinear
constitutive equations, analytical results describing non-local quantities using
fractional calculus, numerical simulations of fractional models under
physiological conditions, and new experimental insights into the microstructure
of soft matter.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
