
* 1752345
* CAREER: Littlewood-Offord Theory and Universality in Random Structures
* DMS,PROBABILITY, Combinatorics, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2018,06/27/2022
* Hoi H. Nguyen,OH,Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Random systems are often difficult to analyze, but in many cases there often
occurs a striking phenomenon known as universality, where many statistics of the
systems are independent of the distributions of the components. Famous examples
include the bell curve that appears in countless empirical histograms, or
Benford's law that governs the first digit of many real-life sets of numerical
data. While these universal laws are very well studied, there are numerous
mysterious laws that are frequently observed, but not at all understood,
especially those arising from random systems with complicated component
correlations. A major part of this research project provides rigorous
mathematical methods to discover and justify universality phenomena for various
complex systems, with a special focus on random matrices and random polynomials.
This study is expected to lead to a more complete and deeper understanding of
these systems, with considerable impact on related areas of science, including
mathematical physics, combinatorics, number theory, statistics, and theoretical
computer science. The principal investigator will also run a number of seminars
and workshops to help postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and
undergraduates in their professional career development, as well as to stimulate
interaction across fields including, but not limited to, combinatorics and
probability. In technical terms, the research project will develop novel methods
to characterize inhomogeneous random walks of large returning probability in
both discrete and continuous settings for non-abelian groups. This task also
includes finding optimal characterizations of random multilinear forms with
large concentration probability. These time-varying models of random walks are
highly challenging because of their inhomogenity, but they appear very
frequently in a number of probabilistic models; a systematic study of these
walks is expected to have substantial impact. With respect to the universality
phenomenon, the principal investigator will focus on random polynomials, random
eigenfunctions of smooth manifolds, and random matrices. More specifically, the
PI will study correlations of roots of random polynomials, nodal statistics of
the random wave model with Bernoulli coefficients, and important questions
involving the smallest singular values, the spectral repulsion, and the
logarithmic determinant and permanent of random matrices of different types of
symmetry and sparsity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
