
* 1843320
* CAREER: Front Propagations and Viscosity Solutions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2019,06/28/2022
* Hung Tran,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 341,823.00

This project concerns some nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) that
appear naturally in physics, economics, and engineering and that arise, for
example, in the study of crystal growth, composite materials, combustion, game
theory, and optimal control theory. The equations studied have deep connections
with a host of other areas of mathematics, including the calculus of variations,
differential games, dynamical systems, geometry, homogenization theory, and
inverse problems. The main goal of the project is to discover new underlying
principles and general methods to understand the properties of solutions of the
PDEs under investigation. A key object of the research is a crystal growth
model, in which the crystal grows in both horizontal direction by adatoms, and
in vertical direction by nucleation in a supersaturated media. To make practical
use of the model, it is extremely important to understand deeply the qualitative
and quantitative aspects of the growth speed of the crystal. An integral part of
the project is the educational component including bringing up the number of
graduate PDE students at University of Wisconsin-Madison through various
activities. The incoming graduate students interested in PDE are encouraged to
participate in the principal investigator's PDE reading seminar, and to interact
more with their peers and postdocs in the area. In term of undergraduate
training, the principal investigator plans to increase the interest of
University of Wisconsin-Madison undergraduate mathematics majors in the study of
Analysis and PDE through some individual mentoring plans, and two undergraduate
summer schools. Besides, the principal investigator plans to organize two
conferences in nonlinear PDE and related topics for early career researchers.

The proposed research involves two themes. The first is about a level-set mean
curvature equation with driving and source terms, and applications to a crystal
growth model, in which each level set of the unknown evolves in time by its mean
curvature with unit constant force. The second involves Eikonal equations, and
homogenization, where the zero-level set of the unknown moves in a periodic
environment with highly oscillatory normal velocity. The principal investigator
and his collaborators have recently developed some new approaches, which
provided solutions to several open problems in these two themes and related
areas. The new approaches are expected to be developed further in this project,
thereby bringing fresh perspectives on and insights into the field of nonlinear
PDE and viscosity solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
