
* 1846942
* CAREER: Geometric Potential Theory
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/01/2019,06/27/2022
* Tamas Darvas,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 335,783.00

This CAREER award will support a multifaceted program of research and education
aiming at significant progress in both areas. The research goals center around a
deeper understanding of shapes with uneven curvature. The distance between two
points in the plane is given by the length of the segment joining them. The
segment can be constructed with a ruler, however finding the distance between
two points on an arbitrary geometric shape is much more difficult, partly
because such shapes don't come with a ruler! Finding this "ruler", i.e., the
best possible way to measure distances on geometric shapes, is rooted in deep
problems of mathematical physics. In mathematics we measure distances using
metrics. When trying to find ideal metrics, one often has to find a smooth
function that solves a specific partial differential equation. This is an
optimization problem with an action functional whose minimizers are exactly the
solutions of the partial differential equation. It is possible to plug in non-
smooth functions into the action functional, called potentials, opening the door
to what is often referred to as the potential theory of the underlying equation.
This project deals with problems in complex geometry where the potentials
considered can be given a very specific metric geometry, leading to a much more
delicate understanding than usual. In addition to the proposed research, the
project will pursue a vertically integrated educational program that includes
various forms of public outreach popularizing STEM fields (such as creating
educational videos and posting them online), conducting undergraduate summer
research and the involvement of graduate students.

The research goals of the project can be split in three parts. The first part is
devoted to the geometric potential theory of the geodesic rays inside the space
of Kahler metrics, with a view toward various characterizations for existence of
canonical Kahler metrics in complex geometry. With the metric geometry of
geodesic rays sufficiently developed, one can look at these conjectures as
optimization problems on the space of geodesic rays, with various refinements on
the regularity of the rays considered. The second part is devoted to the
geometric potential theory of the space of singularity types, with a view toward
complex Monge-Ampere equations with prescribed singularity and variation of
multiplier ideal sheaves. The metric space of singularity types is expected to
be complete, and it will allow for a study of singular Kahler-Einstein metrics,
under variation of the singularity. In the last part we study interactions of
the investigations in Kahler geometry with other parts of geometric analysis,
including Hermitian geometry and convex analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
