
* 1847802
* CAREER: Multiscale Control of Mechanical Systems: Theory, Computation and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,07/03/2022
* Molei Tao,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 313,581.00

This project seeks to develop a new area termed multiscale control. Such a
development will increase our ability to control practical systems. Due to
physical and technological limitations, available ways of perturbing a
mechanical system are often constrained. For example, it is difficult to
individually force single atoms in order to control a molecular system. On the
other hand, partial intervention is often easier; for instance, an oscillatory
electromagnetic field can interact with charged atoms and induce perturbations
to the system, which are however in restricted forms. When the available
perturbations are restricted, they may be inadequate to induce immediate
favorable changes to the system. However, the key idea is that, if introduced at
a smaller scale, perturbations can accumulate and contribute in less restrictive
ways to the original scale. Based on this idea, the project develops a framework
for designing the perturbation so that its accumulated effect can alter the
system's macroscopic behavior in a desired fashion. Numerical computations and
the development of computational tools will also be seamlessly integrated with
the theoretical analysis. To illustrate the innovation of the proposed research,
note that traditional control theory is still important, albeit insufficient,
because the control is introduced at a microscopic level, yet one needs and only
needs to control the system's macroscopic behavior. Brute-force computational
search for the optimal control will also be practically infeasible due to the
wide breadth of scales presented in the system. The research is to use
theoretical analysis (based on tools from fields such as dynamical systems and
multiscale methods) to either directly design or accelerate the computational
search of control strategies. The study will also be complemented by
investigations in multiple interdisciplinary applications, such as DNA
deactivation, remote control of locomotion, temporal metamaterials, and recovery
of material defects. Research will be integrated with education across multiple
institutions and over the spectrum of academic levels. Specifics are planned for
broadening women and underrepresented groups' participation and disseminating
knowledge beyond PI's immediate institute or discipline.

More specifically, this project identifies (mostly-)oscillatory perturbations
for accomplishing various control tasks, such as to steer a system from a
macroscopic state to another, or to track a desired dynamic behavior at the
macroscopic level for all time. The main methodology is to design microscopic
perturbations that resonantly interact with the system, so that nontrivial
effects cascade to the macroscopic scale. The PI has already obtained several
preliminary results on this idea, and the proposed theory will be a
generalization. The strategy of investigation is to first quantify how small-
scale perturbations effectively accumulate at large-scale using dynamical
systems tools, asymptotic/multiscale methods, and numerical computations,
followed by the patching together of the local understandings for the global
objective of control design. An example of core tasks is to identify and then
track slowly-varying resonant frequencies in nonlinear systems. Integrable,
nearly-integrable, and stochastic systems will be considered, so that an
ambitious goal of controlling complicated dynamics can be gradually approached.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
