
* 1847865
* CAREER: Large-Scale Optimization Problems with Applications in Emerging Radiotherapy Modalities
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2019,07/05/2022
* David Papp,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 329,584.00

Radiotherapy is one of the most common forms of cancer treatment, given to
nearly one million patients each year in the United States. It is a form of
personalized medicine: everything from the orientation and modulation of the
treatment beams to the treatment schedule, altogether, thousands of parameters,
are tailored for each patient, using computational methods referred to as
numerical optimization. Several recent technological, mathematical, and
biological insights have motivated the departure from conventional forms of
treatment; these include spatiotemporally fractionated therapy; proton therapy;
combined photon, proton, and electron therapy; and arc therapy. However, the
design of optimal personalized treatments with these new treatment approaches
also present new mathematical challenges. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award funds research into the design and mathematical analysis of
numerical optimization methods which, besides other applications in science and
engineering, will enable the rigorous assessment and more widespread use of
novel radiotherapy treatment modalities.

The focus of the project is the development and analysis of numerical methods
for large-scale deterministic and stochastic optimization problems. The primary
research objectives of this proposal are (1) to develop efficient sampling
algorithms for large-scale stochastic constrained optimization, and (2) to
develop numerical methods for large-scale convex conic optimization problems in
which even a single Newton-step is too expensive. Both the mathematical and the
applied components of the proposal are being integrated into the computational
and modeling components of undergraduate and graduate courses developed by the
PI. The grant also supports the PI's recently established outreach collaboration
with artists and designers, which is aimed at broadening the public's
appreciation and understanding of current applied mathematics research, in
particular the importance of mathematical optimization in medicine, health care,
and beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
