
* 1847955
* CAREER: Mathematical Modeling, Physical Experiments, and Biological Data for Understanding Flow Interactions in Collective Locomotion
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 06/01/2019,06/23/2022
* Leif Ristroph,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2024
* USD 361,838.00

This project aims to understand how animals moving together, such as fish
schools and bird flocks, make use of the flows of water or air generated during
swimming or flying to achieve benefits as a group that are not possible as
individuals. These benefits occur through interactions of each individual with
the flows produced by others and may take the form of energy savings or speed
enhancement. Also to be explored are more subtle aspects of flow interactions
such as maintaining or holding together a group, preventing collisions,
establishing natural formations or patterns of individuals, and communication
through motions that spread across the group. The research work will combine
mathematical descriptions of the motions of individuals and the surrounding
fluid (water or air), laboratory experiments on "robotic flocks" of motorized
swimmers or flyers, and the analysis of video footage of birds flying in
formations. The different approaches will allow for a complete understanding of
the fluid-dynamical interactions in a group as well as insights into how animals
exploit or modify such mechanisms. The work thus stands to clarify the role of
flows in animal groups and in so doing also suggest how such effects can be
exploited in applications such as flow energy harvesting and efficient
propulsion. Additionally, education and outreach programs will train high school
students, university undergraduate and graduate students in STEM research and
especially the important role of mathematics in the natural and engineering
sciences.

Specifically, physical experiments on mechanical swimmers, flow-locomotor
interaction models and simulations, and crowd-sourced biological data will be
combined interactively and applied towards understanding formation swimming and
flying. Research will start with the detailed interrogation of few-body systems
in order to cross-validate all approaches and to understand fundamental
mechanisms. Experiments and simulations will inform models based on vortex-body
interactions, and comparison against biological measurements will inform
behavioral models in the context of formation flight of birds. Many-body systems
of in-line arrays will then be studied, with all methods used to understand
principles, for example through analogies to conventional states of matter, in
which aspects such as group cohesion, crystallization or other patterning,
dynamical instabilities, and information transfer will be explored.
Biologically-relevant issues including self-organization and collective
advantages will also be studied, and structural and dynamical metrics will be
established and tested. The educational effort will include a graduate course on
the constructive interaction of experiment with math modeling and a summer
research camp that will engage underprivileged NYC high school students in STEM
research. Students at all levels will be recruited from courses to become
directly involved in research, and the wider public will be engaged as citizen-
scientists through crowd-sourcing campaigns.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
