
* 1847192
* CAREER: Totally Geodesic Varieties in Moduli Space: Arithmetic and Classification
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2019,06/11/2019
* Ronen Mukamel,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 0.00

In the research funded by this CAREER award, the PI will seek to address
fundamental challenges in the study of dynamical systems in general, and
billiards in polygons in particular. Dynamical systems are mathematical objects
which evolve in time, and they are ubiquitous in the applications of
mathematics. Whenever math is used to predict the future, e.g. to predict the
weather, the stock market, or the behavior of particles in a solution, a
dynamical system is involved. The dynamical systems in the real world, like
those just mentioned, are often extraordinarily complex. The PI will study a
simple class of dynamical systems modeled on ideal billiards in polygons with a
view towards understanding the complicated dynamical systems that occur in
applications. The PI will work to uncover and categorize the range of dynamical
behaviors possible in billiard systems, and will continue his research exploring
connections between billiards and the theory of numbers. Using the resources
allotted by this grant, the PI will also create a graduate course on topics
relevant to his research. The course will culminate in a workshop hosted at Rice
University during which leaders in the field have a chance to interact with
students in the class. Finally, the PI will use funding from this grant to
create a curriculum in mathematical biology for the Say STEM Camp, a camp aimed
at engaging high school students in groups typically underrepresented in STEM
fields.

This project seeks to address fundamental challenges in the study of dynamics on
Riemann surfaces and their moduli spaces. These subjects have connections with
many areas of mathematics and important applications to the classification of
mapping classes, the dynamics of rational maps and billiards in polygons. Of
particular importance are the special subvarieties of moduli space which are
invariant under the geodesic flow. Such subvarieties are rare and their origins
are mysterious. The PI will pursue two lines of research in this proposal.
First, the PI will investigate connections between special subvarieties and
number theory, with the particular goal of understanding the arithmetic geometry
of these spaces. Second, the PI will seek to develop a theory for higher
dimensional special subvarieties with a view towards eventual classification.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
