
* 1848035
* CAREER: Statistical Inference of Tail Dependent Time Series
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2019,04/21/2021
* Ting Zhang,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Huixia Wang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 208,663.00

The project aims to develop a new theoretical framework and statistical
inference methods for the analysis of tail dependent time series, and to educate
future statisticians and data scientists on its theory and practice. Tail
dependent time series, as an emerging data type, has been observed and
recognized in various fields including actuarial science, climate science,
economics, finance, hydrology, and internet traffic engineering, among others.
The task of understanding and appropriately accommodating the phenomenon of tail
dependence can be of significant importance to the modeling of extreme events
such as earthquakes, hurricanes, and financial crises. The results from the
project will make significant impacts in scientific areas such as climate
science, economics, actuarial science, finance, hydrology and internet traffic
engineering. The proposal also involves an integrated education plan to expose
undergraduate and high school students to the topic, to equip graduate and
advanced undergraduate students with a desirable level of statistical reasoning
and analytical skills for analyzing tail dependent time series, and to mentor
doctoral students to become future leaders in the education and research of the
area.

Existing methods for studying tail dependent time series often rely on certain
parametric models for describing the underlying tail dependence structure. This
is particularly due to the lack of a convenient and rigorous framework that one
can use to obtain desired limit theorems for a general class of tail dependent
time series. The project aims to address this fundamental problem by proposing a
new framework based on the causal representation and the technique of
adversarial tail coupling. Using the newly proposed framework, the project will
develop meaningful results toward a tail m-dependent approximation scheme, which
can then be used as a powerful tool to obtain limit theorems for statistics of
tail dependent data. Compared with the conventional m-dependent approximation,
the current setting can be more challenging due to the double asymptotics where
the quantile index is allowed to approach either zero or one as the sample size
increases to reflect extreme risks. The project will study several statistical
inference problems for tail dependent time series, including high quantile
estimation and its associated confidence interval construction, tail dependence
visualization and testing, inference of extremely high quantiles using the
extreme value theory, extensions to high and extremely high quantile regression
models, and high-dimensional nonstationary settings. The results to be developed
are expected to be useful in identifying undiscovered features in certain
climate science and economic data, and applicable to other scientific problems
that involve the analysis of tail dependent time series.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
