
* 1943500
* CAREER: Flexible and Efficient Exploration of the Bayesian Framework for High Dimensional Modeling
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2020,06/27/2022
* Naveen Naidu Narisetty,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2025
* USD 234,005.00

The modern era of Big Data brings unique opportunities as well as challenges to
the statistician. While the Big Data revolution brings a great opportunity to
obtain valuable and profound insights from the richness of data and to enhance
data-driven decision making, it also brings challenging demands for innovation
and knowledge discovery in three crucial aspects from statisticians and data
scientists: (i) development of flexible models that can appropriately describe
the complexities of the data (ii) efficient and valid statistical estimation and
inferential procedures, and (iii) development of computational algorithms that
scale-up to large datasets. The purpose of this project is to make advances in
all the three aspects by fully exploring the Bayesian framework, which treats
the parameters of a model to be random and provides an efficient mechanism to
quantify the uncertainty of the model parameters. In particular, the techniques
developed will be useful for analyzing datasets containing a large number of
covariates, for learning the dependence structures between a large number of
outcome variables, and for obtaining a comprehensive description of the impact
of covariates on outcome variables by modeling their relationships at different
quantile levels. The research developed will have impact on statistical practice
in various disciplines including biology, economics, environmental sciences,
marketing, and medical sciences. The training component will integrate research
into teaching by offering special topics courses to graduate students based on
the proposed research and by developing undergraduate research projects that
incorporate research concepts at an accessible level. The PI will mentor high
school research projects and organize a K-12 outreach workshop to provide
exposure to modern statistics and its applications to high school students and
teachers.

Statistically rigorous and computationally efficient Bayesian methodologies and
inferential procedures will be developed which will be applicable for a variety
of complex high dimensional models including generalized linear models, quantile
regression models, and graphical models. General classes of Bayesian
regularization priors will be proposed, and their regularization properties will
be rigorously studied for a variety of commonly used likelihood functions. In
contrast to most of the existing Bayesian approaches that focus on high
dimensional estimation, a novel Bayesian framework for performing high
dimensional Bayesian inference having valid frequentist properties will be
developed. Scalable computational techniques that do not involve large matrix
operations for obtaining point estimators from the posteriors as well as for
sampling the full posterior distributions will be devised and their statistical
properties will be studied. An attractive feature of the computational
developments will be that they will be applicable to a diverse range of
statistical models commonly used in practice. The research developed will be
closely related to several highly active areas of modern statistics including
high dimensional modeling, Bayesian computation, nonconvex regularization, post-
selection inference, graphical models, and quantile regression, and will
contribute to the advancement of and interaction between these areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
