
* 1944574
* CAREER: How Diffusion, Dimension, Geometry, and Redundancy Affect Cellular Dynamics
* DMS,Cellular Dynamics and Function, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 07/01/2020,08/15/2022
* Sean Lawley,UT,University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2025
* USD 367,652.00

This project aims to use mathematical modeling to reveal principles underlying
(i) how the body defends against foreign invaders such as bacteria and viruses,
(ii) how cells cope with stressful environments, and (iii) how cellular
processes use random search to find hidden targets with remarkable speed. These
diverse problems are united as they all require extending our mathematical
understanding of randomness to cope with the complexity of data in modern cell
biology. Indeed, a broad goal of this project is to understand how cells
function reliably and efficiently despite the ubiquity of randomness at the
cellular level. In addition, this project will increase STEM participation and
train the next generation of scientists to continue the interdisciplinary
approach of this research. In particular, graduate students will be closely
involved in all aspects of the work and undergraduates who currently lack access
to a research mathematics department will be given a preview of research and
graduate school as they participate in summer programs.

Cell biology is requiring rapid advances in mathematics, as the data is
prompting questions far beyond the limits of existing stochastic processes
theory. In the case of T cells interacting with antigens, the PI will develop
and apply stochastic models to infer kinetics from raw binary data. In the case
of protein-protein interactions, the PI will formulate and analyze a new class
of stochastic partial differential equations aimed at uncovering features
relating two-dimensional and three-dimensional binding. These models are
expected to resolve discrepancies between certain in vivo and in vitro
measurements and to show how cells can exploit dimensional-dependent
interactions to regulate function. Further, the PI will answer foundational
questions in the emerging field of extreme first passage theory. First passage
theory has been used extensively to study timescales in biology, but the vast
majority of works have focused on the time it takes a given single searcher to
find a target. However, the more relevant timescale is often the first passage
time of the fastest searcher from a large collection of searchers, as many
events in cell biology are initiated by the arrival of the first molecule out of
many. The development of extreme first passage theory seeks to discover how
redundancy (many copies of proteins, molecules, etc.) affects cellular
activation rates and allow a wide range of previous applications of traditional
first passage theory to be revised.

This project is co-funded by the Cellular Dynamics and Function program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
