
* 1945669
* CAREER:Formation of Small Scales and Dissipation in Incompressible Fluids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,01/02/2020
* Tarek Elgindi,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2020
* USD 23,252.00

With applications ranging from the study of biological processes, aerodynamics,
and meteorology, fluid dynamics remains one of the most important fields of
classical and modern physics. Despite the importance of fluids to virtually all
life, little is known about how to predict fluid motion in general settings. The
goal of this project is to advance our knowledge of some of the fundamental
questions regarding fluid flow: are the laws of classical physics sufficient to
provide a complete picture of fluid flow in all scenarios? More precisely, are
there extreme events in which the classical laws governing fluid motion break
down? If so, is there a way to amend the classical laws to give effective models
of fluid motion in such circumstances? This award also supports the involvement
of a postdoctoral scholar and a graduate student in the research project.
Mathematically, these questions relate to the question of the global solvability
for the classical fluid equations: the Euler and Navier-Stokes equations. The
focus of this work will be on the problem of singularity formation for the Euler
equation. We will analyze the stability of recently constructed examples of
singularity formation and study the extent to which these examples can be
extended to give singularity formation for more regular solutions. In parallel,
we will consider the problem of enhanced dissipation and study the effects of
possible singular behavior in inviscid problems on rapid dissipation in viscous
problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
