
* 1945200
* CAREER: Algebraic Methods in Extremal Combinatorics
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/01/2020,06/04/2021
* Hao Huang,GA,Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2026
* USD 82,746.00

Extremal combinatorics studies how large or how small a collection of
combinatorial objects satisfying certain restrictions can be. This branch of
mathematics has witnessed spectacular development in the last few decades, and
grown into a rich field with a wide variety of its own approaches and
methodology. The main focus of this award is to develop new algebraic methods to
solve extremal combinatorial problems, and further our understanding of the
independence number and induced substructures of graphs and hypergraphs. This
project involves and aims to establish connections across numerous areas,
including algebra, combinatorics, probability, and discrete geometry. An
integral part of this project is its educational component, which includes
organizing junior research workshops and summer REU programs. The long-term
education goal of this award is to actively engage undergraduate students in
STEM research, provide opportunities for early-career researchers to publicize
their works, and enhance the research collaboration between the Mathematics and
Computer Science communities.

The PI will study several fundamental mathematical questions, including: (i) For
which results in extremal combinatorics one can expect a degree strenthening?
(ii) To what extent the spectrum of the (pseudo-)adjacency matrix of a graph or
hypergraph describes the independence number or induced substructures of a
graph? (iii) Is there a quantitative version of Cauchy's Interlace Theorem?
Techniques developed from these projects will open the possibility of attacking
some of the most important and challenging open problems in combinatorics:
Chvatal's Conjecture on intersecting subfamilies, Tomaszewski's Conjecture on
signed sums, and the Erdos hypergraph matching conjecture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
