
* 1945144
* CAREER: Hyperbolicity Properties of Hypersurfaces
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2020,09/02/2022
* Eric Riedl,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2025
* USD 244,679.00

High-degree curves in the plane have been shown to have many special properties
as compared to lines in the plane. For instance, high degree curves have only
finitely many rational points, while lines have infinitely many. These
properties of high degree curves are loosely referred to as hyperbolicity
properties. A huge amount of effort has been devoted to understanding what the
analogues of these hyperbolicity properties should be in higher dimension, and
proving which varieties are hyperbolic in which ways remains a fundamental
question in algebraic geometry. This project will shed further light on these
questions, focusing particularly on which hypersurfaces satisfy various types of
hyperbolicity properties. Furthermore, this project will help train the next
generation of scientists and mathematicians through a strong educational plan
aimed to K-12 students, that sees the involvement of undergraduate students and
faculty. The plan includes the expanding of a tutoring program that sends
undergraduate students to a South Bend school, the piloting of a program to help
South Bend students make projects for Notre Dame science fair, and the training
graduate students to run math circles. The PI will also train graduate students
in the area of research close to this project, through mentoring and the
organizing of workshops and summer schools.

More specifically, the research for this project will study how the canonical
bundle controls the hyperbolicity and other positivity properties of varieties
of varieties. This is a fundamental driving question in algebraic, arithmetic
and complex geometry. The research will focus on three principal problems.
First, the PI will study the hyperbolicity of general complete intersections in
projective space. This is timely given the flurry of recent activity on these
questions, including work on the Kobayashi Conjecture and Debarre's Conjecture
on the ampleness of the cotangent bundle of complete intersections. Second, the
PI will investigate positivity properties of the moduli spaces of rational
curves on very general Fano hypersurfaces in projective space, with an eye
toward finding the first examples of varieties that are rationally connected but
not unirational. Finally, the PI will investigate questions originating from
Manin's Conjecture, studying Geometric Manin's Conjecture for Fano threefolds
and classifying subvarieties of hypersurfaces with larger-than-expected a-value.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
