
* 1945179
* CAREER: New Mechanisms for Stability, Regularity and Long Time Dynamics of Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,05/14/2022
* Hao Jia,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2025
* USD 268,300.00

The project focuses on mathematical analysis of nonlinear partial differential
equations that are inspired by fluid dynamics and wave propagation.
Understanding the dynamics of incompressible fluids, such as water and air at
subsonic speed, is important for a variety of applications, ranging from the
design of airplanes, boats and motors, to the study of oceans and the
atmosphere. Coherent structures, such as vortices (eddies) and shear flows, are
prominent features in fluid dynamics. The formation, stability, and evolution of
coherent structures are critical fluid phenomena to understand in order to
reduce drag, oscillation, and instability in scientific and engineering
applications. The PI will develop new, innovative mathematical methods to
analyze the dynamic properties of physically important coherent structures,
which can resolve theoretical difficulties as well as provide powerful
mathematical tools for practical applications. The PI will also study the
interaction of radiation and particles in the context of wave maps, which have a
deep connection to the classical field theories from mathematical physics. The
proposed projects provide an ideal training ground for junior researchers in
applying cutting edge mathematical analysis to study sophisticated physical
phenomena in fluid dynamics and wave propagation. Graduate students will be
actively involved in these research projects. The PI and collaborators aim to
develop new methods that can effectively combine precise spectral and Fourier
analysis in the context of nonlinear asymptotic stability problems of fluid
dynamics. In many physical problems, the analysis of large coherent structures
requires precise spectral analysis for the linearized flow, while Fourier
analysis has proved indispensable in uncovering delicate nonlinear interactions.
Thus, the techniques developed in the project may have a wider range of
applications in other technically challenging perturbative problems. The PI will
also study simpler models of fluid equations in an effort to understand the
interaction and balance between vorticity stretching and vorticity
transportation effects, which play a fundamental role in the regularity theory
of three-dimensional Euler equations. For the wave maps equation, the main goal
is to extend the "channel of energy" argument for outgoing waves to this
technically challenging model to study the decoupling of radiation from solitons
in a non-perturbative regime. These projects provide a wide range of problems
for graduate students, who will learn to use tools from spectral analysis,
Fourier analysis, dynamical systems, and numerical simulation, in the study of
physically significant problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
