
* 2020013
* CAREER: Rigidity of Group Actions on Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2019,06/28/2022
* Aaron Brown,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 355,217.00

Dynamical systems theory describes systems changing over time such as the motion
of the planets in the solar system, the planetary weather, or the stock market;
the theory provides tools to describe the expected long-term behavior of a
system, quantify the complexity of a system, and provide notions of stability
and instability in a system. Group actions arise naturally in many areas of
mathematics. For instance, group actions describe the possible symmetries of a
regular polygon or, more generally, the ways to cut a polygon into pieces and
reassemble into the original polygon. The research project will apply tools from
the theory of dynamical systems in order to study more general group actions on
spaces. The goal of these projects is to establish certain rigidity results
showing that all actions or invariant objects are of a certain prototypical
form. During the project, the principal investigator will give summer courses on
dynamical systems to high-school students and complete a number of expository
writings on recent developments in rigidity of groups actions.

The specific research projects include a number of projects studying actions of
lattices in higher-rank Lie groups (including a number of conjectures in the
Zimmer program) as well as group actions arising from geometric constructions
such as actions on character varieties. In these projects, the principal
investigator intends to use a number of tools from the theory of smooth
dynamical systems including nonuniform hyperbolicity, entropy theory, and the
theory of normal forms to study more general group actions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
