
* 2042413
* CAREER: Mathematical Frameworks and Theory for Conceptual Models in Economics, Ecology and Criminology
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2021,05/27/2022
* Nancy Rodriguez,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2026
* USD 144,621.00

Recent advances in criminology, economics, and ecology have led to the
realization that to derive qualitative and quantitative understanding of very
complex systems and phenomena involved one needs to mathematize many conceptual
models developed in these sciences. The overarching objective of this project is
to develop mathematical frameworks for such conceptual models and contribute to
the qualitative and quantitative understanding of these complex systems. One
project will focus on the role that movement has in ecological systems or that
redistribution has in economic systems. The objectives are to understand what
movement strategies are optimal and why clustering of competing populations
work. With rapid shifts in the environment and in the economy, it is crucial to
investigate the relative success of different movement strategies to be able to
predict which populations will survive under competition. Another project will
develop and study models for rioting activity. This will enable us to tease out
the most important factors behind the dynamics of different riots. A final
project will draw from work in mathematical epidemiology to develop a multi-
scale model for crime from a public health perspective, which can help us to
test the effect of different policies on the dynamics of violent crimes. This
research will provide a quantitative framework and tools that non-technical
scientists can use to make significant advances in their work. The models
developed here will provide ways to test intervention and policy strategies
helping to quantify their effects. These projects will be integrated with an
educational plan focused on empowering the Latinx community through a series of
activities in collaboration with CU Boulder?s Science Discovery. First, the PI
will meet with teenagers to discuss her research through the Teen Science Cafe
program. Second, the PI will provide research experience opportunities for high
school students who are underrepresented minorities, with the aim of encouraging
them to attend college and major in a STEM field. Finally, the PI will develop
hands-on activities to help the Latinx community understand the models used to
inform the social distancing and stay-at-home policies implemented during the
COVID-19 pandemic in Colorado.

This research consists of three projects. The first project aims to use a local
and non-local reaction-advection-diffusion framework to understand the
optimality of different movement strategies, particularly, in the presence of an
Allee effect. The second project will focus on development and study of models
for rioting activity. In particular, the PI will study traveling wave solutions,
which have been observed in many real-life riots. The final project will draw
from work in mathematical epidemiology to develop a multi-scale model for crime
from a public health perspective using a kinetic equations framework. The
successful completion of these projects will also advance the qualitative
understanding of traveling wave solutions and generalized fronts for local and
non-local reaction-advection-diffusion equations in spatially heterogeneous
environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
