
* 2044828
* CAREER: Decoupling Theory, Oscillatory Integral Theory, and Their Applications in Analytic Number Theory and Combinatorics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Shaoming Guo,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2026
* USD 176,019.00

This project concerns research in harmonic analysis and analytic number theory.
Harmonic analysis studies how general functions can be represented by sums of
simpler functions, for instance, trigonometric functions. Analytic number theory
is a branch of number theory that uses tools from mathematical analysis to
answer questions concerning the integers. Recently, tools in harmonic analysis
have proven to be very efficient in answering questions originating from
analytic number theory. This project continues the investigation in the
intersection of these two fields, in the hope of creating a dictionary between
them that would allow researchers in one field to translate their tools to the
other. The project also provides undergraduate students access to the forefront
of current research. The PI plans to organize summer schools to attract more
undergraduate and early graduate students to carry out interdisciplinary
research in harmonic analysis and analytic number theory.

The project involves work in decoupling theory, oscillatory integral theory, and
their applications in analytic number theory and combinatorics. One goal in the
development of decoupling theory is to obtain sharp decoupling inequalities for
all polynomial surfaces that are translation-dilation invariant (TDI in short).
This would imply sharp bounds on the number of integral solutions to all TDI
systems of Diophantine equations. As a first step towards this goal, the PI will
study two particularly important systems: TDI systems of monomials and TDI
systems generated by one polynomial. In oscillatory integral theory, the PI also
will study two problems. The first problem asks for the optimal Sobolev
regularity estimates for an averaging operator along moment curves. The second
problem asks for sharp Lebesgue estimates for maximal averaging operators along
moment curves. It is expected that local smoothing estimates for linear wave
equations and related decoupling inequalities will play key roles in the study
of these two problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
