
* 2044564
* CAREER: Connections Between Tropical Geometry, Arithmetic Geometry, and Combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 07/01/2021,07/08/2022
* Farbod Shokrieh,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2026
* USD 151,819.00

This award is at the intersection of algebraic geometry, arithmetic geometry,
and combinatorics. In algebraic geometry, one studies the geometry of solutions
to a collection of polynomial equations. In arithmetic geometry, one is
concerned with the study of integers (whole numbers) and rational numbers
(fractions). Combinatorics is an area of mathematics concerned with the study of
finite structures. An example of such finite structures is the notion of graphs
or networks. The aim is to make substantial progress on various foundational
questions in these areas. The interplay between these disparate fields will
continue to have significant consequences and will create and stimulate entirely
new research problems.

The PI will study fundamental questions at the intersection of non-archimedean
and tropical geometry, arithmetic and Arakelov geometry, and combinatorics and
convex geometry. The three main aspects of the research are: further study of
the interplay between tropical methods and arithmetic geometry of abelian
varieties, the study of various combinatorial and convex geometric questions
arising from this interplay, and the study of invariants on degenerating
families of curves and abelian varieties. The educational and outreach
activities will complement the research. The centerpiece is a yearly extended
research experience for graduate students on projects at the intersection of
combinatorics, tropical geometry, and arithmetic and Arakelov geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
