
* 2044606
* CAREER: Analytic and Spectral Methods in Combinatorics
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2021,07/07/2022
* Yufei Zhao,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 154,746.00

This CAREER award supports research in combinatorics. The PI aims to develop and
apply novel analytic and spectral methods designed for a variety of extremal
problems in discrete mathematics. Such investigations ask, for example, how
large a set (of points, vectors, integers, etc.) satisfying certain
combinatorial properties can be. Results have applications in number theory,
computer science, and other fields. Analytic and spectral methods already play
central roles in the field; this project will lead to new techniques with
further applications in combinatorics and beyond. The project also will have an
educational component, including graduate student mentorship and course
development.

One of the directions of research concerns eigenvalue multiplicities and
applications to equiangular lines, spherical two-distance sets, and more
generally spherical codes in high dimensions. The PI recently solved a
longstanding problem on equiangular lines via new insights in spectral graph
theory, paving the way for further developments on high dimensional spherical
codes via more generalized spectral graph theoretic problems. A second direction
concerns extremal problems in graph theory and additive combinatorics, focusing
on techniques connecting the two areas. The PI will study sparse regularity
methods, graph homomorphism density inequalities (for example Sidorenko?s
conjecture), extremal problems in hypergraphs, and related topics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
