
* 2045328
* CAREER: Stochastic Games on Large Graphs in the Mean Field Regime and Beyond
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2021,06/20/2022
* Daniel Lacker,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2026
* USD 183,318.00

Diverse areas of science rely on mathematical models of large-scale systems of
interacting and competing agents. The agents may be investors, drivers, or
viruses, and the large systems may be financial markets, highways, or epidemics,
for example. The most widely used framework for modeling competition between
many interacting agents, known as "mean field game theory," is fundamentally
limited in scope to symmetric models, in which each agent interacts equally with
each of the others. Many important phenomena, on the other hand, are governed by
networks---such as those formed by social ties or financial obligations ? that
determine which agents interact with each other. Network structures have
important implications that the standard theory cannot capture. This project
tackles this limitation by developing new mathematical frameworks to handle
large-scale models of competition with heterogeneous interactions governed by
networks. Both graduate and undergraduate students are involved in the research
activities, and local K-12 outreach efforts are designed to foster an interest
in applied mathematics and continued education.

This project builds a rigorous foundation for a new era of network-based mean
field game theory and applications. The first goal is to identify the range of
network structures for which the standard mean field approximation is valid, in
order to substantially extend the scope of the mean field paradigm. For those
network structures for which the standard mean field approximation fails, the
second goal is to identify and analyze tractable alternatives. Certain important
features of mean field approximations, such as asymptotic independence, fail in
sparse (as opposed to dense) networks, and the third goal of the research is to
identify precise sparsity thresholds for this and other phenomena. This project
adapts and extends recent methodologies of graph limit theories and large
deviations, which have a strong track record of solving network-based problems
in statistical physics. New mathematical challenges arise in the game-theoretic
setting due to the long-range dependencies induced by competitive equilibrium,
and new techniques must be developed to address these challenges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
