
* 2046514
* CAREER: Liouville Quantum Gravity, Two-Dimensional Random Geometry, and Conformal Field Theory
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Xin Sun,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2026
* USD 170,594.00

Significant recent advances have been made in the probability theory of natural
two-dimensional (2D) mathematical structures, including metrics, measures,
functions, and curves on surfaces. A one-parameter family of random surfaces,
called Liouville quantum gravity (LQG) surfaces, has emerged as a fruitful
setting to study such structures. LQG originated from the study of 2D quantum
gravity and string theory in theoretical physics. Subsequently, LQG has become
an active and deep mathematical subject in probability. The research part of the
project funded by this award aims to address outstanding challenges in the
mathematical theory of LQG, thereby providing a firm foundation for several
assumptions in theoretical physics. The educational part of the project aims to
make high quality mathematical education and research more accessible, in
particular, to students from underrepresented groups, researchers from
geographically disadvantaged areas, and high school mathematics teachers.

Quantum gravity is the physics counterpart of random geometry. It is believed in
physics that 2D quantum gravity coupled with conformal matter is described by
LQG, governed by a conformal field theory (CFT) called Liouville CFT. The most
intuitive formulation of 2D quantum gravity is through its microscopic
description, namely random planar maps. The primary research goal of the project
is to show that certain classical random planar map models converge to LQG in
the scaling limit, laying a mathematical foundation for this physical picture.
The two most challenging cases are when the random geometry is non-uniform or
when the underlying surface is non-simply-connected. The project aims to address
open questions in both cases. Besides the geometric aspect, the correlation
functions of Liouville CFT possess deep algebraic structures, which are expected
to be computed by a schematic program called the conformal bootstrap. Another
major goal of the research is to rigorously establish the conformal bootstrap
program for Liouville CFT. To achieve these goals, the PI will rely on the rich
interplay between LQG and a family of random planar curves called the Schramm-
Loewner evolution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
