
* 2047638
* CAREER: Models of curves and non-archimedean geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2021,07/13/2022
* Andrew Obus,NY,CUNY Baruch College
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2026
* USD 259,213.00

The "characteristic p world" (for p some prime number) is one where, every time
you take p steps forward, you wind up back where you start. Far from being
esoteric, this world describes the procession of the days of the week (p = 7),
the fundamentals of computer architecture (p = 2), and is also the setting for
important cryptosystems. Characteristic p algebraic geometry is the study of
geometric objects ("varieties") given by solutions to polynomial equations in
this world (e.g., the elliptic curves fundamental to the aforementioned
cryptosystems), whereas mixed characteristic algebraic geometry is the study of
varieties in a "hybrid" world serving as a bridge from the characteristic p
world to our more familiar world where all directions go on forever. A
singularity is a place where a variety has crossings, corners, or otherwise
fails to be smooth. This project brings new algebraic techniques to bear on the
topic of singularities in mixed characteristic algebraic geometry, with one main
goal to explicitly analyze what processes are necessary to "resolve" them, i.e,
smooth them out. The educational plan for the project provides opportunities at
levels from high school to graduate school. Specifically, the PI's graduate
students will work directly with the PI on the main research project, the PI
will advise undergraduate research in related areas of number theory, the PI
will help plan events for Baruch College's chapter of the Association for Women
in Mathematics, and the PI will continue his commitment to mathematics education
in Liberia by running a mathematics competition for Liberian high school
students, as well as a series of remote workshops for their teachers.

The first part of the project is dedicated to applications and generalizations
of Mac Lane valuations, which give explicit, computationally useful descriptions
of normal models of the projective line over a valued field. Mac Lane valuations
date back over 80 years, but it is only this past decade that they have been
successfully used to attack problems involving models of curves, such as
computing resolutions of certain arithmetic surface singularities and verifying
conductor-discriminant inequalities. The PI will apply Mac Lane valuations to
(1) refine his previous results on conductor-discriminant inequalities for
hyperelliptic curves and extend them to superelliptic curves and (2) shed light
on the relationship between regular models, semistable models, and the
ramification theory of ``purely arithmetic'' covers of Berkovich spaces.
Furthermore, he will work to build a theory of Mac Lane valuations for higher
genus curves. The second part of the project is devoted to understanding when
branched Galois covers of curves lift from characteristic p to characteristic
zero and to obtaining information about the geometry of the space of lifts. The
PI will use moduli-theoretic techniques to attack the lifting problem in towers
for cyclic covers, and he will continue his long-term work toward a
classification of the so-called local Oort groups and the weak local Oort
groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
