
* 2052036
* CAREER: Randomness in Number Theory and Beyond
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 05/22/2020,07/15/2021
* Melanie Wood,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 271,246.00

This project will lead to a deeper understanding of the statistics of
fundamental behaviors of numbers, including how numbers factor and how many
solutions there are to given equations. The approach is to use random models to
study these seemingly deterministic questions. This research will investigate
how mysterious microlevel numerical structures aggregate into universal
macrolevel patterns. A fundamental example of this micro-to-macro phenomenon is
seen in the ubiquity of the bell curve, which describes many distributions seen
in nature, even when they come from different sources. The project will help
uncover the analog of the bell curve for fundamental behaviors of numbers.

Specifically, the distribution of class groups of number fields and function
fields will be studied using tools from probability, random groups, arithmetic
geometry, algebraic geometry, topology, and number theory. The project will
develop models of random groups that are good approximations for class groups
and their non-abelian analogs, and determine the basic probabilistic structure
of these models. Tools from algebraic geometry and topology will be used to
prove that distributions of class groups of function fields have behavior that
agrees with what is predicted by the models. This will exhibit new structure in
the class groups of number fields and their non-abelian analogs.
