
* 2142221
* CAREER: The Geometry of Fractals Meets Fourier Analysis
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
* 09/01/2022,12/14/2021
* Yumeng Ou,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2027
* USD 251,438.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The project aims to understand the deep connections
between the field of Fourier analysis and questions in geometric measure theory
concerning fractals. Fractals refer to a type of sets originating from natural
shapes such as coastlines, snowflakes, crystals, and DNA, which display a self-
similar structure across different scales. The study of fractals has numerous
applications in natural sciences and engineering. This project aims to advance
our understanding of fractals by exploring modern ideas in Fourier analysis, a
field in mathematics that studies properties of a function by decomposing it
into small pieces. One of the most famous open questions at the interface of
these two subjects is the Kakeya conjecture, asserting that a fractal set that
contains a unit line segment in every direction must not be too small (in terms
of dimension). This conjecture is known to be closely related to central
questions in analysis, partial differential equations, and number theory. In
recent years, tools and ideas from combinatorics also came into the picture,
which led to many breakthroughs in the field. The investigator plans to advance
the study of this type of problems by using and inventing an array of
interdisciplinary tools. This research will deepen the understanding of fractals
and Fourier analysis, shed light on important questions in other fields, and
potentially lead to discoveries in physics, biology, engineering, and computer
sciences. Moreover, the research is expected to be integrated into the
investigator's educational plan to nurture a new generation of researchers and
educators, and to bring the research to a broader audience. Specifically, the
investigator plans to run multiple study guide writing workshops, to organize an
online research platform dedicated to small working groups, and to create a
YouTube channel for the field of harmonic analysis. These activities are
designed to not only advance the research projects, but also provide one-of-a-
kind opportunities for students and early career mathematicians.

The broad aim of the project is to make progress towards open questions such as
the Kakeya conjecture and the Falconer distance conjecture (on the dimensional
threshold ensuring a fractal set to generate many distinct distances), to
develop novel tools unifying ideas from different fields, and to explore their
further applications in other related fields such as for the study of regularity
of solutions to Schr√∂dinger and wave equations in partial differential equations
and number of solutions to Diophantine equations in number theory. There are
three interconnected long-term goals: (A) understand the existence, amount, and
distribution of geometric configurations (generalizing distances) contained in
fractal sets; (B) investigate sparse domination for operators arising in
geometric measure theory and their applications in finite point configuration
problems; (C) study key operators in Fourier analysis related to the Kakeya
conjecture such as (weighted) Fourier restriction/extension operators, Bochner-
Riesz multipliers, and the Kakeya maximal function. The project is expected to
advance the understanding of these central problems, to open the door to the
systematic study of refined geometric structures of fractals, to develop novel
interdisciplinary techniques, to reveal deeper connections between continuous
and discrete questions, and to discover new connections among these fields and
beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
