
* 2142064
* CAREER: Regularity Theory of Measures and Dispersive Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
* 07/01/2022,01/12/2022
* Bobby Wilson,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2027
* USD 279,707.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project seeks to advance and promote the study of
mathematical analysis fundamental to the understanding of the physical world.
Specifically, the portions of this project related to evolution equations will
provide a greater understanding of essential mathematical models of the behavior
of Bose gases, nonlinear optical systems, and geophysical fluids. The portion of
the project related to geometric measure theory will enhance the mathematical
community's understanding of the tools and methods used to analyze mathematical
models of the type described above. Simultaneously, the project is designed to
take a focused approach towards the development of future analysts by running a
summer directed reading program for undergraduate students of color. The
project's activities include collaboration with not only researchers in pure
mathematics, but a continuation of the PI's work with those in engineering and
applied mathematics. The cross-collaboration will further bolster the strength
of the mathematical sciences at the same time that it affords early-career
researchers the ability to develop a wide variety of ways in which to pursue the
mathematical sciences.

The aim of this project is to further our knowledge of the foundational aspects
of geometric measure theory, as well as study classes of partial differential
equations very important to, among other things, the modeling of interacting
particles and fluids. These avenues of research will maintain crucial relevance
to the field of analysis for years to come and, for this reason, the project
includes educational activities that will introduce students of color to these
research pathways. The work of the project follows two research tracks: the
first track consists of the study of classical dispersive equations such as the
nonlinear Schrodinger equation and Fermi-Pasta-Tsingou-Ulam spring-mass
molecular system. A significant component of this track is the study of
semilinear dispersive evolution equations whose dispersion relations are
parametrized by a specific physical aspect of the system. The second track
consists of the study of geometric measure theory and, in particular, the
structure theory of Besicovitch, Marstrand and Preiss in Banach Spaces as well
as differentiability properties of functions. The goal of the project is to
determine the existence of solutions to the evolution equations described above
and characterize the behavior of such solutions as well as characterize the
structure of sets and measures that naturally occur in the study of mathematical
analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
