
* 2143739
* CAREER: Machine-Learning Construction of Energy-Stable Non-Newtonian Fluid Hydrodynamics with Molecular Fidelity
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
* 07/01/2022,01/03/2022
* Huan Lei,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2027
* USD 260,300.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

Accurate modeling of non-Newtonian fluids is a longstanding challenge in
computational mathematics, and plays a central role in the prediction and
control of the fundamental diffusion, transport, and synthesis processes in
fluid physics, chemical engineering, and materials science. Unlike simple
fluids, non-Newtonian fluids often exhibit complex flow behaviors arising from
the multiscale nature of the solute dynamics; canonical physical laws break down
in general. Conventional hydrodynamic models are often based on empirical
approximations of the microscale interactions, which require careful parameter
tuning and generally show limited capability to retain molecular-level fidelity.
This gap severely limits both the fundamental scientific understanding of
multiscale transport balance laws and the predictive control in relevant
engineering applications. This project aims to develop a new machine-learning
computational tool to construct accurate and energy-stable non-Newtonian
hydrodynamic models directly from the micro-scale descriptions. The models under
development will encode heterogeneous molecular-level interactions and enable
predictive modeling of multiscale fluids such as soft matter, polymeric liquids,
and vesicle suspensions, where empirical models show limitations. The
educational part of the project will provide a suite of interdisciplinary
training and outreach activities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students to promote data science education at the interface of computational
mathematics and natural sciences. The direct connection between machine learning
and computational mathematics is intended to provide truly interdisciplinary
training for the next generation of the STEM workforce in this fast-growing
field and to attract and retain a diverse population of students in the
mathematics community. The project will also leverage an existing joint program
with Spelman College to build a network of support for underrepresented students
with interest in this field.

The research project aims to deliver a novel approach for learning high-fidelity
and truly reliable computational models of multiscale fluid systems. The main
innovation will be the capability to seamlessly pass the microscale interactions
to the macroscale dynamics without empirical approximations. In contrast to the
results of some machine-learning-based modeling, the resulting model will retain
a clear physical interpretation embedded with a fundamental energy form rather
than a black-box fit of reduced dynamics and will be guaranteed to be energy
stable. Moreover, the learning algorithm will only require discrete rather than
time-series samples, and be well-suited for practical applications. The method
aims to provide a unique approach to fundamental scientific understanding of the
mesoscale transport balance law where the canonical Stokes-Einstein equation
breaks down.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
