
* 2143242
* CAREER: New Statistical Approaches for Studying Evolutionary Processes: Inference, Attribution and Computation
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
* 02/01/2022,01/10/2022
* Julia Palacios,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 01/31/2027
* USD 233,818.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Statistical inference from a sample of molecular
sequences such as DNA poses a series of fundamental challenges. These challenges
include complex modeling of the sample's ancestry and past evolutionary history,
large and noisy data. The ongoing large-scale increase of genetic data has led
to a situation in which current methods are not applicable to the amount of data
available and researchers are forced to down-sample available data or to infer
parameters from insufficient summary statistics. This research project will
address the need for optimally designed coalescent modeling for inference from
modern molecular data. The coalescent is a probability model on genealogies,
that is, the trees which represent the ancestry of the sample. Coalescent models
are used for inferring parameters of scientific relevance such as effective
population size, migration patterns and selection. The research goals of this
project are to expand the class of coalescent models and to design novel
efficient statistical algorithms, allowing us to address many practical problems
that advance science. Furthermore, the outcomes of the projects will foster the
development of new statistical theory and tractable methods that contribute to
biological solutions. This project also outlines an active plan for a broad
range of educational and outreach activities that will broaden participation in
statistical sciences and will enhance more inclusive atmosphere in science. The
undergraduate and graduate students involved into the project will be offered a
unique opportunity for interdisciplinary hands-on research training at the
interface of statistical sciences and biology, allowing them to contribute to
progress in evolutionary biology, molecular biology, population genetics,
phylogenetics, cancer genomics, probabilistic modeling, statistical inference,
and related fields. The PI will actively participate in multiple outreach
activities such as the Stanford undergraduate summer research program, which
will allow for recruiting more diverse pool of future data scientists and for
fostering more inclusive climate in science. The research findings of the
project will serve as foundation for new program in statistical genetics and
will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses.

Concretely, this project will expand the class of coalescent models and provide
a suite of new algorithmic and statistical approaches by exploiting a metric
notion of genealogies, lumpability of Markov chains and divide-and-conquer
strategies. The specific aims include (1) develop coalescent models to
incorporate various sampling schemes and biological processes such as dynamic
population structures, recombination and strong selection; (2) develop a metric
framework for coalescent theory and applications; (3) develop scalable
strategies for Bayesian inference of evolutionary parameters and (4) implement,
validate and analyze molecular sequences of infectious disease such as SARS-
CoV-2, ancient and modern human DNA samples and cancer single cell variation.
Furthermore, the project will actively contribute to broadening participation in
statistical sciences at multiple fronts, from team-based interdisciplinary
research training to community outreach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
