
* 2143369
* CAREER: Schrödinger Operators on Lattices
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2022,01/12/2022
* Rui Han,LA,Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2027
* USD 130,027.00

This project focuses on the study of electrons on a lattice material structure,
for example, graphene, under external magnetic fields. Important questions are:
As time evolves, will electrons escape, showing metal-like behavior of the
material, or will electrons stay confined near their original positions, showing
insulator-like behavior? Furthermore, are there mathematical ways to quantify
these behaviors? Understanding these features in different materials, including
multi-layer graphene, has important applications, including electricity
transmission, design of room-temperature superconductor, and quantum computing.
The educational part of this project includes leading undergraduate research
groups, mentoring graduate students, developing graduate courses on material
sciences and spectral theory, organizing conferences and workshops for junior
researchers to present and exchange ideas, and developing an online lecture
series on modern research topics for middle and high school students.

Of specific interest in this project is the analysis of the magnetic Laplacian,
which characterizes the motion of electrons under external magnetic fields and
is a central topic in quantum mechanics. For magnetic fluxes with irrational
magnitude, the spectra of the discrete magnetic Laplacians on the square lattice
form a beautiful self-similar fractal structure called Hofstadter?s butterfly.
This fractal structure, in particular the existence of spectral gaps, was a
cornerstone of the first derivation of the quantum Hall effect and the theory of
topological insulators. The planned focus lies on developing techniques to study
magnetic Laplacians on various discrete lattices, including the bilayer graphene
lattice. The topics of investigation include the magic-angle bilayer graphene,
metal-insulator transitions, spectral gaps and quantum Hall effect, Anderson
localization and eigenfunction asymptotics, and quantum dynamics. To tackle
these questions, deep results of harmonic analysis, dynamical system, number
theory, and other areas are to be combined.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
