
* 2143331
* CAREER: New Algorithms and Models for Turbulence in Incompressible Fluids
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2022,07/18/2022
* Nan Jiang,FL,University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 96,661.00

Turbulence is ubiquitous in nature, and decisions that affect our life are made
daily based on predictions of turbulent flows. Obtaining accurate predictions of
turbulent flows is a central challenge in global change estimation, weather
forecasting, freshwater supply, improving the energy efficiency of engines,
controlling dispersal of contaminants, and designing biomedical devices. A
turbulent flow is a highly irregular system, characterized by chaotic property
changes involving a wide range of scales in nonlinear interaction with each
other. These features yield a high computational complexity, which makes direct
numerical simulations of turbulent flows that aim at resolving all features down
to the smallest scales infeasible even with modern supercomputers. Instead,
turbulence models are used for practical turbulence simulations to bypass the
chaotic details and reduce the computational complexity. This project aims to
develop a new family of ensemble averaged turbulence models and novel numerical
methods for their solution, extending current applicability and computational
limitations of effective turbulence simulations, which may have a great impact
on numerous applications in aeronautics, hydraulics, chemical engineering,
oceanography, meteorology, astrophysics, and geophysics, considering
turbulence?s prominent influence in almost all geophysical and industrial flows.
A comprehensive educational program will be developed to provide students with
systematic training in computational fluid dynamics and bring them up to date on
current research topics in this field.

Turbulence modeling remains one of the most important scientific challenges. The
fundamental approach for turbulence modeling is to seek to approximate suitable
(ensemble, time, or spatial) averages of fluid velocity instead of pointwise
velocity itself. Ensemble averaging is the most intuitive approach from the
statistical theory for turbulence, but it is currently not in use for practical
turbulence simulations of industrial flows due to the extremely high
computational cost associated with ensemble simulations. This deadlock is
recently broken with newly developed ensemble algorithms that give access to the
full ensemble at every time step and thus open new and direct possibilities for
developing turbulence models for the ensemble averaged Navier-Stokes equations.
In this project the investigator will develop a new family of ensemble-based
variational multiscale method (VMS) turbulence models and novel numerical
methods under the new framework of ensemble averaging for practical turbulent
flow simulations. New unconditionally stable ensemble algorithms will be
developed for fast solution of the new ensemble-based VMS turbulence models and
to effectively overcome the backflow instability for turbulent flows with open
boundary conditions. This project will provide new avenues to turbulence
modeling and simulations and build a new rigorous numerical analysis addressing
how to make effective approximations in the face of Newtonian chaos.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
