
* 2143861
* CAREER: A new form of propagation of chaos and its applications to large population games and risk management
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
* 07/01/2022,12/13/2021
* Ludovic Tangpi,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2027
* USD 235,602.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Stochastic differential games are optimal decision
problems involving several players in interaction, acting in a random, uncertain
environment. In such games players try either individually or collectively to
optimize a given objective, while their decisions influence that of their peers.
This type of game is widespread around us. For instance, in financial economics
when considering the systemic risk of default by a large number of banks engaged
in inter-bank borrowing and lending, in urban planning when modeling commuters
trying to find the shortest path while avoiding congestions, or in epidemiology
when all members of a society come together to reduce the spread of a virus.
Several examples can also be found in biology, economics, and engineering. When
the size of the population becomes large, (stochastic) differential games become
notoriously intractable, and cause serious analytical and computational
challenges. A basic mathematical heuristic suggests that when the size of the
population is sufficiently large, it suffices to analyze the behavior of a
"typical" or average player that represents the entire population. The goal of
the proposed project is to develop mathematical techniques allowing one to make
this heuristic rigorous and to understand its scope and consequences as they
relate to computational issues and applications in the financial modeling of
bubble formation and investment among competitive agents. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in this work. An extensive outreach
program helping to increase the participation of minorities in engineering
graduate school will be established.

The present research project will lay down a rigorous and systematic framework
for understanding the mean field game limit in stochastic differential games by
purely probabilistic arguments, while explaining the physical (thermodynamic)
intuition at the root of the theory. As the main tool to achieve its objectives,
this project will introduce and analyze a new form of propagation of chaos for
interacting particle systems evolving backward in time, and functional
inequalities in this setting. This novel approach will have interesting
consequences as it will allow to provide both large deviation principles and
non-asymptotic convergence rates to the mean field limit for competitive as well
as cooperative games. We will also consider the consequences of these results as
they relate to numerical simulations and applications in quantitative financial
modeling. The proposed research endeavor will not only advance the currently
active area of mean field games but will be of great interest in the study of
interacting particle systems in general. We foresee that backward propagation of
chaos and the techniques used to analyze convergence of empirical processes will
find numerous applications. For instance, we will employ such techniques to
analyze (large scale) optimal transportation problems, and to the estimation of
financial risk measures. In fact, we will develop model?free, fully data-driven
approaches for the estimation of general convex risk measures based on empirical
process theory and propagation of chaos.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
