
* 2144232
* CAREER: Integro-differential and Transport Problems in Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
* 07/01/2022,12/22/2021
* Nestor Guillen,TX,Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2027
* USD 118,507.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award supports an integrated research program on
partial differential equations and an educational program promoting scientific
computing and applied mathematics at the undergraduate and graduate level. The
research component of the project is concerned with mathematical models from
physics and engineering, specifically models used to describe long-range forces
and mass transport/kinetic effects, and seeks to answer a number of fundamental
questions. Answers to these questions will aid in the creation of practical and
reliable algorithms for computer simulations of complex physical systems (such
as those found in plasma physics, aerodynamics, fluid mechanics, material
science) and in the creation of practical and reliable autonomous systems
(including but not limited to robotics and control theory). In mathematics,
long-range forces and heavy-tailed distribution are often modeled via a class of
equations known as integro-differential equations. The mathematical theory for
such equations is not as advanced as that of ordinary or partial differential
equations, but integro-differential equations are becoming increasingly common
in theory and applications. The mathematical analysis of mass-transport,
understood in the broadest sense, deals with dynamics of masses of "particles"
moving in reaction to both background forces and collisions between said
particles. Depending on the context, these "particles" may represent actual
physical particles or intelligent agents interacting with their environment and
with one another. As such, transport models cover many situations: from
dynamical formulations of models in statistical mechanics to the study of
optimal or stable matchings in economics, and the mathematical results of this
project may be of use to such disciplines. The project explores interconnected
questions in these two fields (many of which are relevant to the modeling of
plasmas) and in particular will explore the use of transport methods to analyze
problems involving long-range forces. The activities in this project also
provide substantial support for the recruitment, training, and mentorship of
mathematically talented undergraduate and graduate students at Texas State
University. These activities include campus-wide events with guest speakers from
academia and industry, specialized advanced courses at the undergraduate and
graduate levels, and research mentorship of graduate students and advanced
undergraduate students. A prime objective of this project's educational efforts
is increasing the numbers of graduates entering careers in industry and/or
academia that require state of the art mathematical and computational training.

The research activities in this project fall, thematically speaking, in one or
more of the following areas: high dimensional Hamilton-Jacobi equations, kinetic
equations with nonlocal terms, integro-differential methods for interface
problems, and Jacobian equations/transport problems. A common thread connecting
these diverse topics is the search for pointwise estimates and regularity
estimates for solutions of elliptic and parabolic partial differential
equations, and as such questions about estimates makes for a considerable
portion of this project's research efforts. While a few of the problems
considered in this project lie squarely within one of the categories above, they
are motivated by a potential application in a different category - such as the
Nonlocal Jacobian equation, which is motivated by the question of obtaining
Aleksandrov-type estimates adapted to integro-differential equations. Positive
outcomes in the various lines of inquiry could potentially lead to a mesh-free
algorithm for viscosity solutions of Hamilton-Jacobi equations, an optimal
transport formulation of solutions for nonlinear kinetic equations, new
regularity results for two-phase free boundary problems, and new Harnack
inequalities for nonlocal equations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
