
* 2144680
* CAREER: Designing a Multi-Scale Framework for Trait Variation in Epidemiological Dynamics
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/01/2022,01/31/2022
* Lauren Childs,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2027
* USD 100,930.00

The COVID-19 pandemic demonstrates the devastation that infectious diseases can
leave on modern society. Deciphering the dynamics of disease is essential to
earlier and more effective interventions to mitigate disease spread. To fully
understand these dynamics, information across systems that operate on multiple
spatial and time scales, as well as evolving via feedback, must be combined.
This research project aims to develop a mathematical framework to combine and
analyze such information to further the understanding of infectious disease
spread, providing insight for ongoing and future disease outbreaks. The results
are also intended to be applicable to multi-scale questions in ecology and
immunology more generally. The educational component will serve to train a
diverse generation of interdisciplinary scientists, building the capacity of the
STEM workforce. Through focused short courses aimed at providing specific,
relevant skills in quantitative techniques and cross-disciplinary communication,
graduate students in the mathematical and life sciences will learn to
collaborate and communicate effectively. Training and mentoring of undergraduate
and graduate students will take place through focused research projects and
opportunities to garner translational skills, for example developing and
implementing project-based work and participating in outreach activities.
Additionally, interactive presentations will engage middle school students
through exposure to cutting-edge mathematical biology research. The current
COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the importance of interpretable, quantitative
models that link mechanisms with data while accounting for variability. However,
infectious disease dynamics remain incompletely understood, in part due to the
lack of heterogeneity considered in models of immunological, ecological, and
epidemiological aspects. Complex, non-linear feedbacks arise from
heterogeneities; thus, novel quantitative frameworks are needed to better
understand and control infectious disease. This project builds on work in
ecology involving integral projection models to develop a framework
incorporating trait-based variation. This framework aims to describe development
of immunity in a population and, thus, determine disease risk over time. Results
will be useful for monitoring infectious disease, selecting interventions, and
informing public policy. The educational component aims to strengthen
quantitative literacy to help produce a more interdisciplinary workforce. A
group of graduate students, across applied, mathematical, and computational
disciplines, will be introduced to fundamental quantitative skills such as
statistical analyses, model building, parameter estimation, data visualization,
and coding. Participants will connect with this material using a project-based
approach with examples related to infectious disease dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
