
* 2144363
* CAREER: Symplectic and Holomorphic Convexity in 4-dimensions
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/15/2022,03/03/2022
* Bulent Tosun,AL,University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2027
* USD 100,260.00

Topology is the study of the shape of different spaces, examples of which
include a strand of DNA, a large data set, or even the universe. Particularly
natural spaces to study in topology are the so called smooth manifolds. An
example of a smooth manifold is the universe we live in, which we think of as
3-dimensional, but if we include time is actually 4-dimensional. A fundamental
question is: what manifold is our universe? A goal of a geometric topologist is
to list possibilities and most importantly to develop tools to understand the
structure and distinguish the overall topology of manifolds. Low dimensional
topology mainly refers to the study of 3-and 4-dimensional manifolds, where the
theory of such spaces, in particular in 4-dimension, is significantly more
complicated and exhibits many unique phenomena that are not seen in any other
dimension. A particularly successful and rich way to understand the topology of
manifolds is to introduce certain complex analytic structures on them, such as
Stein structures and/or geometric structures, such as symplectic and contact
geometries. The PI will study questions and conjectures that sit at the
intersection of symplectic/contact topology and smooth manifold topology in low
dimensions, and complex geometry. Alongside the research component, this project
also includes activities that integrate the PI?s research program with education
and training initiatives for student research, at both graduate and
undergraduate levels. To that end, the PI will maintain an active topology group
at the University of Alabama by organizing seminars, workshops, REUs and
conferences. More broadly, the PI will use funds from this award to organize a
week-long research and professional development summer workshop for talented
undergraduate students from underrepresented colleges in the state of Alabama.
He will also initiate a collaborative, multi-dimensional, long-term educational
and research program for geometry-topology graduate students and faculty in the
Southeastern Conference (SEC) schools, initially including the University of
Alabama, Louisiana State University, the University of Mississippi, and the
University of Arkansas. This project involves studying interactions between
complex geometry, symplectic geometry and contact geometry, and low dimensional
topology with a focus on various notions of convexity. The first long-term
research objective will be to consider constraints on the topology of closed
3-manifolds embedded in 4-space from the perspectives of symplectic topology
(e.g. contact type hypersurfaces) and complex geometry (e.g. the boundaries of
holomorphically/rationally/polynomially convex Stein domains). Specifically, the
PI will work towards a complete resolution of Gompf?s conjecture that predicts
no Brieskorn sphere bounds a holomorphically convex domain in complex 2-space,
determining the topology of contact type hypersurfaces in 4-space and in complex
projective space, and exploring their implications for the exotic nature of
smooth 4-manifold topology. The second long-term research objective concerns two
outstanding problems dealing with the existence and classification of tight and
fillable contact structures on closed, oriented 3-manifolds. The PI?s various
joint works provide a framework and new constructions to study the existence
question of tight and fillable contact structures from the point of view of
Heegaard Floer homology. The PI and his collaborators will investigate to what
extent invariants coming from Heegaard Floer homology detect tightness
completely. The PI will also work to complete the classification problem for
tight structures on small Seifert fibered spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
