
* 2145225
* CAREER: Variational Analysis of Elastic Patterns and Mechanical Metamaterials
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
* 06/01/2022,12/22/2021
* Ian Tobasco,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2027
* USD 177,175.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Non-convex and singularly perturbed optimization
methods are ubiquitous in the mathematical modeling of complex mechanical
systems, and the questions addressed in this project - on stress focusing in
confined membranes, and shape change in mechanical metamaterials - are at the
cutting edge of nonlinear mechanics and the calculus of variations. The work is
interdisciplinary, and success will come from blending techniques from
engineering and physics with pure mathematical analysis. Rigorous optimization
questions are considered to identify the most extreme examples, with the aim of
deriving a general theory for predicting the motifs of wrinkles and folds in
packed elastic sheets, as well as general techniques for the design of load-
bearing morphable materials. Outreach activities to high school students are
planned, involving university students and researchers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. With the goal of training the next generation of
effective mathematical researchers working at the intersection of variational
analysis and the mechanics of materials, this project supports undergraduate
research infrastructure, and provide support and mentoring opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students.

The research concentrates on two sets of questions from mechanics: on stress
focusing in confined elastic shells and related one-dimensional systems, and on
the aggregate properties of many body interacting elastic systems known as
mechanical metamaterials. On stress focusing: the aim is to develop a
variational model of the wrinkle-fold state, which has recently been observed in
confined shells but has yet to receive a systematic mathematical treatment.
Based on prior successes with predicting the wrinkling patterns of shallow
shells, the investigator seeks an asymptotic characterization of the more
general wrinkle-fold state starting from fully nonlinear elasticity. On
mechanical metamaterials: motivated by the question of predicting the overall
behaviors of kirigami elastic systems in response to applied loads, the
investigator aims to characterize the effective deformations and emergent
stress-strain laws of these and other related many body elastic systems. The
goal is to start from fully nonlinear elasticity and derive the relevant weak
limits and stored energy in the limit of infinitely many bodies. Students are
involved in the project at all levels, including through a high school outreach
event in the Chicago area, as well as in a mathematical computing laboratory for
undergraduate research co-directed by the investigator.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
