
* 2145900
* CAREER: Optimal Transport and Dynamics in Machine Learning
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
* 07/01/2022,01/28/2022
* Katy Craig,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2027
* USD 287,406.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

The goal of machine learning is to develop algorithms that find meaningful
patterns in data. Initially, such algorithms led to breakthroughs in our digital
lives, from automated language translation to improved online search.
Increasingly, they impact every aspect of life, from medical image analysis to
fraud detection. Machine learning has also risen to paramount importance in the
sciences, as researchers use the same algorithms to analyze datasets, test
hypotheses, and make predictions, accelerating the pace of scientific discovery.
However, despite its success, many foundational questions of machine learning
remain poorly understood: What is behind the surprising success of neural
networks and when might they fail? How can algorithms be tailored to individual
scientific experiments, to leverage centuries of domain specific knowledge as
they extend the reach of an analysis? To answer these questions, the
investigator will study the mathematical foundations of machine learning, using
tools from optimal transport and partial differential equations. This research
will be integrated with educational opportunities for both undergraduate and
graduate students. The investigator will hold undergraduate research symposia to
improve awareness of campus research opportunities, with the goal of increasing
the number of diverse students conducting research projects in applied
mathematics. The investigator will also develop a new graduate course on optimal
transport and machine learning, the lectures from which will be made publicly
available, and organize an early-career researcher workshop geared to graduate
students in the western United States, which will provide students in applied
mathematics with an opportunity to learn from a diverse cadre of well-
established researchers, as well as to present their own work.

At the heart of this research program are three main projects. In the first
project, the investigator will study the role of nonlocal interactions in the
training dynamics of two-layer neural networks, analyzing how the interplay
between model selection, data distribution, and regularity affects robustness
and rate of convergence to optimum. In the second project, the investigator will
develop particle methods for sampling and control theory based on nonlinear
diffusions. In the third project, the investigator will use new optimal
transport metrics to develop interpretable machine learning methods for
analyzing data from multiple components of a scientific experiment. These
methods will then be applied to machine learning tasks in particle physics,
including classification of events at the Large Hadron Collider.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
