
* 2145364
* CAREER: Randomized Multiscale Methods for Heterogeneous Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
* 06/01/2022,01/12/2022
* Kathrin Smetana,NJ,Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 05/31/2027
* USD 267,650.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

Heterogeneous systems with salient features at multiple scales are ubiquitous in
science and engineering. A direct numerical simulation that aims at capturing
relevant phenomena at all scales requires an often prohibitively large amount of
computation time. To simulate such systems, multiscale methods include the local
behavior of a numerical solution in the approximation process, thus taking into
account the various scales. For example, in modeling a wind turbine made from
composites, deformations during operation can be simulated for portions of the
wind turbine blade. The multiscale approximation for the deformation of the
whole wind turbine is then built from these local solutions. Multiscale methods
that can guarantee that the error between the multiscale approximation and the
global solution is below a given tolerance are of particular interest. The goal
of this project is to design and analyze such multiscale methods for the
numerical solution of nonlinear partial differential equations that are used in
simulating deformations in (realistic) wind turbines. It is anticipated that the
new methods will be crucial in building digital twins, that is, mathematical
models of physical objects that can be employed in real time to assess, for
example, the structural health of a system. Application of the results in
digital twins for wind turbines will support the generation of renewable energy
for society. The project includes a closely integrated educational plan to
increase participation and retention of students from groups underrepresented in
STEM by (i) designing and leading courses for high school students, helping them
discover via creative and project-based learning techniques how the concepts of
mathematics they are learning have important applications; and (ii) establishing
a mentoring program for undergraduate mathematics students from underrepresented
groups.

To develop the desired multiscale methods, in this project, the local ansatz
functions will be constructed to (quasi-)optimally approximate the nonlinear set
of local solutions of the partial differential equation (PDE). To approximate
the latter, randomized versions of model order reduction methods will be
developed. While deterministic model reduction algorithms construct provably the
optimal space to approximate a set of solutions of a PDE dependent on a
parameter (here arbitrary Dirichlet boundary data), they suffer from the curse
of dimensionality for high-dimensional parameter sets. Randomizing these methods
is expected to break the curse of dimensionality and allow analysis of the error
in novel ways suitable for nonlinear systems. The three research objectives of
the project are: development and analysis of randomized multiscale methods for
(i) elliptic and (ii) parabolic nonlinear PDEs, where the local ansatz functions
can be constructed parallel in time, and (iii) application to the simulation of
the deformation of wind turbines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
