
* 2145270
* CAREER: Exceptional Points on Modular Curves
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
* 05/01/2022,01/20/2022
* Abbey Bourdon,NC,Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2027
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Elliptic curves are among the most ubiquitous objects
in modern number theory. They have far-reaching applications, both in
theoretical mathematics ? such as in the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem ? and in
information security where they form the basis of a cryptosystem commonly used
to provide secure web browsing. The research in this project focuses on elliptic
curves with unexpected arithmetic properties revealed by viewing these curves as
distinguished points on a geometric object called a modular curve. In this
context, the project will develop new tools for identifying these unusual
elliptic curves, exploiting both the geometry of the modular curve and
associated algebraic structures. In addition, the project includes several
educational components, such as a training program in which master's degree
students will serve as project leaders for undergraduates enrolled in a research
exploration course. A central aim of the project is to broaden participation in
the mathematical sciences, both at the undergraduate and graduate level.

The main goal of this research is to explain isolated or sporadic points on
modular curves, especially in the case where such points correspond to elliptic
curves with a point (or a rational cyclic isogeny) of high order defined over a
number field of unusually low degree. This is motivated by a desire to control
the existence of such points in infinite families of modular curves, which lies
at the heart of open questions raised by Mazur and Serre. A combination of tools
will be employed, including geometric approaches stemming from Arakelov
intersection theory and explicit computational techniques relating to Galois
representations of elliptic curves. For certain modular curves, the project
pursues an analogy between isolated points corresponding to elliptic curves with
complex multiplication and those whose existence fails to be explained by any
known geometric or modular phenomenon.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
