
* 2146392
* CAREER: Cohomology, classification, and constructions of tensor categories
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2022,03/30/2022
* Julia Plavnik,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2027
* USD 81,353.00

The concept of symmetry has been fundamental in physics since the ancient
Greeks. Mathematically, we make the notion of symmetry precise via group theory.
Fundamental objects in quantum physics include abstract things like von Neumann
algebras and quantum field theories. In the past several decades, it has become
clear that fundamental objects in quantum physics have symmetries that are best
described by certain generalizations of groups, called tensor categories. This
project will provide mathematicians, physicists, and other scientists invested
in quantum science with a deeper understanding of how tensor categories are
structured, new examples of tensor categories, and their concrete data related
to these examples. The PI will look for interesting examples via classification
and constructions, which would be useful not only to the theory of tensor
categories itself but also to related areas of mathematics, such as topological
quantum field theory and the study of vertex algebras. The educational component
of this project will establish networks of diverse voices in quantum symmetries
research and in the mathematical community more broadly. The PI will organize
collaborative research workshops at Indiana University (IU) for junior
mathematicians start a 4-week long summer program at IU for underrepresented
incoming graduate students. In more detail, the PI will study the cohomology of
tensor categories, classify modular categories, and find new tensor categories
via constructions, which would be useful not only to the theory of tensor
categories itself but also to related areas of math, such as topological quantum
field theory and the study of vertex operator algebras. In the non-semisimple
setting, the PI will incorporate geometric techniques in the study of the
cohomology, via support varieties, to learn about the structure of these
categories. The PI will utilize Lie theoretic techniques to construct Hopf
algebras and Nichols algebras in some symmetric tensor categories in positive
characteristic with the aim of advancing their classification. To deepen the
understanding of the structure of fusion and modular categories, the PI will
focus on perfect fusion categories and on the classification program for "small"
fusion categories. Studying perfect fusion categories will enable mathematicians
to understand weakly integral fusion categories and would yield, for example,
insights into the detection of universal anyons by experimental physicists. In
addition, the PI will investigate the effect of some constructions such as
gauging and zesting in different settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
