
* 2201136
* CAREER: Stable and Scalable Estimation of the Intrinsic Geometry of Multiway Data
* DMS,STATISTICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 10/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Eric Chi,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 185,456.00

Two important challenges of the proposed work are in high-throughput
bioinformatics studies and neuroscience studies, which generate data typical of
research aligned with two recent White House Initiatives, namely the Precision
Medicine and BRAIN Initiatives respectively. Both initiatives are investing
heavily in generating high-resolution data, which once analyzed properly, can
yield insights that will pave the foundations of advanced treatments for genetic
and nervous system disorders. To fully maximize the potential impact of
collecting such data, this proposal develops a new framework for identifying
complicated underlying patterns in multiway arrays. Specifically, the project
fills a gap in nonparametric estimation of low-dimensional structure and
geometry in big and noisy data arrays. The PI plans to develop a training
program based on applications of the proposed research to recruit and retain
talented high school, undergraduate, and graduate students from underrepresented
minority (URM) groups for potential careers as innovative data scientists.

Modern data matrices present two challenges to their analyses: (1) they are
transposable in the sense that both their rows and columns are often of interest
and may contain non-trivial dependencies among them, and (2) they may be very
large. The first challenge has only partially been addressed by existing
biclustering or co-clustering methods. These methods can identify only very
simple coupled structures that organize the rows and columns. In order to
flexibly model and extract more complicated patterns in large data matrices, in
which both rows and columns are high-dimensional, one requires a new co-manifold
learning framework that can discover a wider range of intrinsic geometries of
the rows and columns. To meet the first challenge, this project develops a
framework for performing joint nonlinear dimension reduction on the rows and
columns. The proposed methods construct multiscale distances that are invariant
to row and column permutations, equipping practitioners with a means to estimate
the intrinsic organization of the rows and columns of a data matrix without
prior information on any row or column orderings. To meet the second challenge,
this project formulates the key computations as optimization problems that admit
distributed parallel algorithms with nearly linear speed-up. The framework also
generalizes naturally to the higher-order generalization of matrices, multiway
arrays or tensors. Finally, the estimated intrinsic geometries possess stability
guarantees, namely small perturbations in the data due to noise or adjustments
to input parameters cannot lead to disproportionately large variations in the
estimated intrinsic geometry. The proposed procedures have the potential to
enable practitioners to extract complicated patterns stably from massive data
tensors with non-trivial dependencies along their modes or axes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
