
* 2203741
* CAREER: Inference for High-Dimensional Structures via Subspace Learning: Statistics, Computation, and Beyond
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 10/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Anru Zhang,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 148,727.00

High-dimensional arrays commonly arise from modern scientific and technological
research and have been a central topic in modern statistics and data science.
Some areas such as genetics, microbiome studies, brain imaging, hyperspectral
imaging, etc., yield a large amount of high-dimensional array data; while in
some other areas, data can be recast into high-dimensional array form to
facilitate analysis. In these situations, the target parameter is often high-
dimensional/high-order, but the important information may lie in dimension-
reduced subspaces induced by various structural conditions. How to efficiently
exploit these subspaces poses significant statistical and computational
challenges. This project aims to address these challenges from a perspective of
subspace learning. By taking into account dimension-reduced and low-order
subspaces, the PI aims to address a series of statistical and machine learning
questions by developing new methodologies and theories with statistical and
computational advantages.

This project will progress along three major directions: (i) fast estimation and
inference for high-dimensional arrays via important subspace sketching; (ii)
high-order clustering with theoretical guarantees; (iii) ultrahigh-order tensor
singular value decomposition via a tensor-train parameterization. The research
will be applicable to a variety of topics involving high-dimensional matrix and
tensor data, such as genetics and genomes, reinforcement learning, neuroimaging
analysis, material science, recommender design, etc. The PI will also develop
user-friendly software packages for the new algorithms and make them available
for public use. The PI is committed to training students, especially those from
groups underrepresented in STEM, through involvement in the research project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
