
* 2235233
* CAREER: New Frontiers in the Dynamics of Topological Solitons
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2023,01/24/2023
* Jonas Luhrmann,TX,Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2028
* USD 87,682.00

Nonlinear waves are ubiquitous in nature, ranging from the dynamics of quantum
particles to the propagation of electromagnetic radiation and gravitational
waves. Mathematically, many such wave propagation phenomena can be described in
terms of nonlinear dispersive equations. While waves typically spread out and
decay, a striking feature of these nonlinear evolution equations is that they
may admit particle-like solutions, often called solitons, whose shapes persist
as time goes by. The mathematical understanding of their dynamics is still far
from complete. The main research goal of this project is to investigate, in the
context of classical topological field theories that arise in mathematical
physics, how nonlinear waves can form particle-like structures and how these
structures interact with each other. The educational component of the project
seeks to enhance the training of graduate students and postdocs by organizing
minicourses and workshops related to the research of the project and by
providing professional development opportunities with an emphasis on
presentation skills.

This project focuses on soliton dynamics for several well-known classical
topological field theories in mathematical physics. Three prime examples of
topological solitons are at the center of the investigation: kinks, vortices,
and skyrmions in one, two, and three space dimensions, respectively.
Heuristically, these solitons owe their stability to their topological
underpinnings. However, the mathematical justification of this intuition is
still rather poorly understood and mostly open. The overarching goal of the
project is to establish asymptotic stability results for these classical
topological solitons, and thus to rigorously justify the heuristics for their
stability. Over the course of the project the investigator also plans to move
towards studying multi-soliton configurations in these and related settings.
Beyond the intrinsic interest in the fundamental problems at the center of this
project, their resolution will have significant impact on the analysis of strong
nonlinear interactions between solitons and radiation in the context of many
other nonlinear dispersive equations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
