
* 2237360
* CAREER: Chaotic Dynamics of Systems with Noise
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2023,01/30/2023
* Alex Blumenthal,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 08/31/2028
* USD 198,055.00

Dynamical systems are experimental configurations that evolve in time. This
versatile framework includes a vast array of models in the natural sciences, for
example, the dynamics of populations of animals and plants in an ecological
system, and the shape and form of a turbulent wake behind a passing ship. The
work in this proposal concerns chaotic behavior of dynamical systems, signified,
for instance, by sensitive dependence on initial conditions ? a phenomenon also
known as ?the butterfly effect,? in which tiny changes to the initial
preparation of an experiment lead to drastically different outcomes as time
progresses. Chaos is nearly ubiquitous in systems of practical interest. An
example from everyday life is weather prediction: sensitive dependence explains,
for instance, why the predicted path of a hurricane widens as one forecasts
further into the future, as small imprecisions in our measurements of the
present weather system are ?amplified? as time progresses. This CAREER grant
will integrate the PI?s research work into educational programs, including
directed reading programs and research opportunities for undergraduate students;
the introduction of new undergraduate and graduate courses on the treatment of
chaotic dynamical systems using tools from probability theory; and a summer
school for graduate students in mathematics helping to bring them to the
research front of this compelling and rapidly evolving field.

Chaos is a nearly ubiquitous feature of dynamical systems of practical interest,
from low-dimensional toy models to high-dimensional systems, including a wide
variety of infinite-dimensional dynamics proscribed by evolutionary PDE such as
the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations governing the motion of a viscous
fluid. The tools of smooth ergodic theory provide an abstract framework for
understanding chaotic behavior in dynamical systems through the study of their
statistical properties, such as the decay of correlations. However, it remains a
major challenge to apply this collection of abstract tools to many systems of
practical interest. For instance, despite considerable supporting numerical
evidence, it remains an open problem to prove that the Chirikov standard map has
a positive Lyapunov exponent on a positive-volume subset of phase space. Recent
work of the PI and others has uncovered that a small amount of nondegenerate
noise is ?amplified? by the presence of stretching in phase space, rendering
tractable the problem of determining whether the dynamics is chaotic. This
principle has been applied by the PI to a variety of dynamical systems relevant
to practical applications, such as fluid dynamics. For instance, it was shown by
the PI and collaborators that passive tracer (Lagrangian) flow in an
incompressible fluid ? such as the motion traced out by a mote of dust suspended
in a fluid ? is chaotic in the above sense. This led to a mathematical proof of
Batchelor?s law, a quantitative prediction of the formation of small-scale
structures in the concentration profile of a solute, such as the billowing
patterns formed by drops of milk poured into a cup of coffee. This project seeks
to build off these successes by applying smooth ergodic theory to more
complicated dynamical systems, e.g., the evolution of an incompressible velocity
field by the Navier-Stokes equations in the presence of noise (the so-called
Eulerian dynamics of a fluid). A long-term goal along these lines is a detailed,
mathematically rigorous investigation into the transition from laminar and
ordered behavior to chaotic and unpredictable dynamics seen in many fluid
systems as Reynolds? number is increased.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
