
* 2238103
* CAREER: Low dimensional topology via Floer theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2023,01/24/2023
* Akram Alishahi,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2028
* USD 130,327.00

The focus of this project is investigating a variety of questions in low
dimensional topology, which is the study of shapes of spaces with dimension at
most four. Central in this subject is the study of knotting and linking of
circles in three-dimensional spaces, called knot theory. For instance, knots and
links can be used to construct three- and four-dimensional spaces. Low
dimensional topology and knot theory have various connections to cosmology and
physics (the shape of the universe and string theory), and biochemistry (the
knotting behavior of DNA molecules). Unintuitively, many classification
questions in topology are harder in dimensions three and four, and over the past
three decades, topologists have developed modern tools (with roots in physics)
for studying these questions. Two examples of such tools are Heegaard Floer
invariants, which grew out of gauge theory, and Khovanov homology, which has
roots in representation theory. This project will further develop these
invariants and investigate their similarities and relations. Moreover, it will
harness their power to study symmetries of surfaces (two-dimensional spaces), in
connection with hyperbolic geometry and dynamics, and will investigate several
fundamental questions in low-dimensional topology such as finding the minimum
number of times a knot must cross itself to become unknotted. In parallel, this
project aims to make mathematics and in particular topology accessible to a
broad audience, through educational activities at all levels with an emphasis on
diversity and inclusion. These activities include, establishing a Math Circle
program in the Athens-Clarke County public library and organizing summer Math
Camps for high school and middle school students, running a summer research
experience project for undergraduate students and a topology summer school for
graduate students and postdocs.



The major goals of this research program are organized around four areas. First,
developing new invariants for studying spatial graphs and graph concordance. The
main tool will be a generalization of (minus) Heegaard Floer homology called,
tangle Floer homology. Studying spatial graphs up to concordance has
applications in studying equivariant concordance between knots, and strong
concordance between links. Second, studying mapping class group and extensions
of surface diffeomorphisms over handlebodies using another generalization of
Heegaard Floer homology, called bordered Heegaard Floer homology. Third, further
developing the bordered Heegaard Floer homology tools by generalizing and
refining the contact invariant defined by the PI and her co-authors and use it
to address open questions in contact topology. Lastly, the PI focuses on
connections and similarities between Khovanov homology and Heegaard Floer
invariants, with the three major goals of defining new concordance invariants to
study smooth 4D Poincare conjecture, finding new lower bounds for the unknotting
number and developing new invariants for transverse knots.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
