
* 2238219
* CAREER: Nonlocal partial differential equations in collective dynamics and fluid flow
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2023,02/09/2023
* Changhui Tan,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2028
* USD 150,193.00

The collective behaviors of large groups of similar animals, e.g., birds,
insects, or fishes, are ubiquitous in nature. In recent times, the mathematical
study of collective dynamics has become an active and fast-growing field of
research. Many mathematical models of collective behavior rely on partial
differential equations with nonlocal interactions to describe the resulting
emergent behavior. It turns out that these models are intimately connected to
other models traditionally used in fluid dynamics. The goal of this project is
to study several models of nonlocal partial differential equations to model
collective behavior or fluid flows, and to develop novel and robust analytical
techniques to understand the collective behaviors driven by nonlocal structures.
The training and professional development of graduate students and young
researchers is an integral part of the project. This project studies three
families of partial differential equations with shared nonlocal structures that
can affect the solutions of the equations: existence, uniqueness, regularity,
and long-time asymptotic behaviors. The first problem is on the compressible
Euler system with nonlinear velocity alignment, which describes the remarkable
flocking phenomenon in animal swarms. Global phenomena and asymptotic behaviors
of the system will be investigated, with a focus on the nonlinearity in the
velocity alignment. The second problem is on the pressureless Euler system,
aiming at the long-standing question of the uniqueness of weak solutions. The
plan is to approximate the system by the relatively well-studied Euler-alignment
system in collective dynamics. The third problem is on the Euler-Monge-Ampère
system which is closely related to the incompressible Euler equations in fluid
dynamics. The embedded nonlocal geometric structure of the system will be
explored, with interesting applications in optimal transport and mean-field
games.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
