
* 2239047
* CAREER: Adaptive experiments towards learning treatment effect heterogeneity
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2023,12/20/2022
* Jingshen Wang,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2028
* USD 85,290.00

Understanding and characterizing differential and heterogeneous causal effects
have become increasingly important in many scientific fields. For example, in
precision health, identifying differential treatment effects serves as an
essential step towards materializing the benefits of precision health, because
it provides evidence regarding how individuals with specific characteristics
respond to a given treatment either in efficacy or in adverse effects. In social
science research, evaluations of the effectiveness of government programs or
public policies across different individuals inform more effective policy-
making. As reliably designed randomized experiments often provide evidence of
the highest grade for verifying the effectiveness of a treatment or an
intervention, this research project aims to develop three randomized
experimental design strategies for better learning causal effect heterogeneity.
These design strategies are broad and will be applicable in clinical trials,
social experiments in biomedical sciences, public health sectors, and online
controlled experiments in technological enterprises. Since the project will
develop modern experimental design strategies and new statistical methods with
many applications, this research project will provide opportunities for
integrating research with teaching and training students across different
stages. The project will impact STEM education through the training of
undergraduate and graduate students and the recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups into (bio)statistical fields. Activities to achieve
these education-related goals include introductory reading groups, course
developments, university undergraduate research programs, and outreach
activities to underrepresented minorities.

This research project will develop three novel response adaptive experimental
design strategies and theoretical insights toward learning treatment effect
heterogeneity from a frequentist viewpoint. The first strategy will focus on
designing randomized experiments to sequentially allocate experimental efforts
so that subpopulations mostly harmed or benefited from a particular treatment
can be efficiently identified. The second strategy will focus on learning
treatment effect heterogeneity measured by the variability of the conditional
causal effect variability. The learned heterogeneity allows the development of a
new efficient covariate-adjusted response adaptive framework whose estimator may
attain the best achievable efficiency. The third strategy aims to further
materialize the benefit of treatment effect heterogeneity by designing
randomized experiments to maximize participants' overall welfare. The research
project is thus expected to open a new research connection between adaptive
experiments and social welfare improvement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
