
* 2240136
* CAREER: Algebraic, Analytic, and Dynamical Properties of Group Actions on 1-Manifolds and Related Spaces
* DMS,EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 06/01/2023,01/27/2023
* Yash Lodha,HI,University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2028
* USD 276,493.00

A group is a mathematical abstraction of symmetries of a physical object or a
theoretical space. Groups are fundamental objects in mathematics that also
emerge in various applications such as in computer science and physics. The
algebraic notion of a group associates to a set a binary operation, like
multiplication, which satisfies a list of axioms. Groups emerge naturally as
symmetries of various types of concrete or abstract spaces in mathematics. There
is an intricate relationship between the geometric properties of these spaces
and the algebraic properties of their groups of symmetries. The PI will continue
his investigation of the landscape of infinite groups that emerge as symmetries
of the most natural spaces in mathematics, the circle and the real line. The PI
will organize two research workshops aimed at graduate students, and two
research experiences programs for undergraduates. These shall be aimed at
training a diverse body of students to become future leaders in mathematics.
These activities will incorporate computational methods into the students'
mathematical exploration of the landscape of infinite groups.

This project is jointly funded by Topology and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The PI will investigate the
relationship between the algebraic structure of left orderable groups and the
topological and dynamical properties of their actions on 1-manifolds and the
cantor space. One goal is to investigate the class of finitely presented,
infinite, simple groups, and exhibit new conceptual phenomena. This involves
investigating notions such as uniform simplicity, and whether there is a
finitely presented infinite simple group that acts on the real line by
homeomorphisms. Finally, the PI will investigate a family of closely
interconnected open problems emerging in combinatorial group theory. This
includes a systematic study of normal generation in the class of finitely
generated perfect groups, the conjectured existence of non-abelian free
subgroups in non-indicable finitely generated left orderable groups, and
fundamental groups of subcomplexes of aspherical 2-dimensional CW complexes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
