
* 9501980
* Career Development in Mathematical Biology
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1995,07/06/1995
* Daniel Bentil,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9501980 Bentil This work is supported by a National Science Foundation Faculty
Early Career Development Award. The research component will focus on a
mechanical approach to biological pattern formation. This interdisciplinary
modeling project will focus on studying and constructing realistic model
mechanisms that capture key biological processes that may be involved in spatial
patterning and showing how they are orchestrated. Model applications will
include mechanisms for the generation of embryonic fingerprints. Particular
emphasis will be placed on (i) development of analytical and numerical
techniques for the solution of model equations, such as perturbation theory and
the use of the level set approach for the solution of Hamilton-Jacobi-type
equations coupled with parabolic equations, (ii) biological interpretation of
the results in terms of insights and predictions, (iii) model comparisons based
on currently known biology, and (iv) model refinements as they apply to specific
biological patterning problems such as the development of fingerprints. It is
expected that this work will result in a much better understanding, both
mathematically and biologically, of the mechanical effects of cell traction on
cell motion and cell aggregation within embryonic tissues, and should,
therefore, provide significant insight into how this relatively new mechanical
approach to modeling biological patterns could be used to address pattern
formation problems in developmental biology. The education component will focus
on an interdisciplinary mathematical modeling curriculum for undergraduate and
beginning graduate students. It is proposed to design, develop, and implement a
coordinated biomathematical modeling curriculum for life science students that
will initially be adopted at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst and,
therefore, available to the other four colleges (Amherst, Hampshire, Mount
Holyoke, and Smith) in the Five Colleges Consor tium through the established
student and faculty exchange. The curriculum will consist of two parts: the
first part will be a bridge between calculus and its applications and it will
involve technology in the classroom. It is expected that this course will
provide the textual material necessary to support a substantial modeling course.
The second part will be a sequence that will introduce students to contemporary
biomathematical modeling. It is expected that this course will cover
quantitative topics that will help life science students deal with the numerical
and technical information they will encounter. Regular meetings with
undergraduate course directors and other interdisciplinary faculty members will
be an important part of this mission. The National Science Foundation strongly
encourages the early development of academic faculty as both educators and
researchers. The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a
Foundation- wide program that provides for the support of junior faculty within
the context of their overall career development. It combines in a single program
the support of quality research and education in the broadest sense and the full
participation of those traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering. This program enhances and emphasizes the importance the Foundation
places on the development of full, balanced academic careers which include both
research and education.
