
* 9623884
* Mathematical Sciences: Bayesian and Nonparametric Methods for Time Series Analysis with Environmental & Economic Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/1996,05/08/1996
* Bonnie Ray,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 201,533.00

9623884 This project develops and implements new statistical methods for
modeling complicated features of time series using computationally
computationally intensive techniques. First the Principal Investigator developes
applications of Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods to analyze multiple time series
in a Bayesian framework. She shows how to incorporate features such as seasonal
variation, random interventions, endogenous variable relationships, and long-
range dependence in a Bayesian linear model for multivariate time series. The
Bayesian framework allows for incorporation of prior information, such as
knowledge about the covariance structure between series, and results in
computationally feasible likelihood evaluations. The Bayesian model proposed can
be used to describe some of the time series features observed in practice, but
is restricted by its linear structure. The second area of research focuses on
methods for modeling complicated nonlinear time series relationships in a non-
Bayesian setup. The theoretical framework is based on recent advances in
nonparametric function and density estimation in the regression setting. First,
a test is developed for nonlinear periodic behavior and show how to model that
behavior. Next simplified linear relationships among multiple nonlinear series
using a nonparametric test applied to linear combinations of nonlinear series
are explored. The simplified relationships can be used to improve forecasts of
the individual series. Finally, full multivariate nonlinear models are developed
using multivariate kernel density methods and local fitting of vector
autoregressions. To help promote use of the new methods in practice, part of the
effort is devoted to developing algorithms that are computationally feasible.
The third project area focuses on educational innovations to improve statistical
training and communication skills among engineers and applied statisticians.
Improvement of these skills will help foster interactions with investigators in
other discip lines. The overall goal of the research is to develop methods that
can be used to better understand complex relationships among real-world
processes. Statistical tools are developed that can be used, for example, to
investigate long-range dependent relationships between environmental series in
order to assess global changes in the earth's atmosphere, or to analyze
important nonlinear relationships among economic series. To help insure that
future statistics practitioners have sufficient training to use such methods,
educational innovations are developed, in parallel, aimed at improving data
analysis, computing, and communication skills at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels. By better educating students in the application of statistics
to real-world problems, they will be better equipped to use statistical methods
for understanding complex real-world dynamics and making intelligent policy
decisions.
