
* 9624471
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems Theory Motivated by Bubbles, Accelerators and Split-Operator Numerical Schemes".
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1996,04/19/1996
* Tasso Kaper,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

9624471 Kaper This work is supported by a National Science Foundation Faculty
Early Career Development Award. The research component will focus on the
development and application of dynamical systems theory to physical problems in
bubble dynamics and accelerators, as well as the study of split- operator
numerical schemes. In the area of bubble dynamics, the research will focus on
the strongly nonlinear differential equations modeling one- and two-bubble
systems. In particular, a Hamiltonian formulation of two- bubble systems is
proposed that reveals the salient features of their interaction and facilitates
a quantitative global analysis of these systems. An improved criterion for the
cavitation of isolated bubbles is also sought. In the area of accelerators, the
work comprises a broad array of analytical and numerical questions that involve
the rates of nonlinear growth of shear layers, the magnitudes of their
saturation amplitudes, the development of Melnikov theory for integro-
differential equations, and the dynamics of amplitude-modulated beams in a Radio
Frequency Quadrapole. The work on split-operator schemes will involve
identifying the explicit structure of Nth order partitioned split-operator
schemes. The education plan aims to incorporate into the classroom several
aspects of the principal investigator's experience in applied dynamical systems
theory. On the graduate level, a multi-tiered effort is underway through which
current graduate students in mathematics are trained to conduct applied
dynamical systems research, and students from other disciplines (mechanical
engineering, cognitive and neural science, and economics) acquire tools from
dynamical systems for their research. The effort also includes the development
of a new course in nonlinear dynamics of bubble oscillations, research group
activity in singular perturbation theory, and a complete revision of an advanced
undergraduate course in the methods of applied mathematics. The National Science
Foundation strongly encourages the early development of academic faculty as both
educators and researchers. The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
is a Foundation- wide program that provides for the support of junior faculty
within the context of their overall career development. It combines in a single
program the support of quality research and education in the broadest sense and
the full participation of those traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering. This program enhances and emphasizes the importance the Foundation
places on the development of full, balanced academic careers which include both
research and education.
