
* 9701942
* Mathematical Fluid Dynamics and Education Turbulent Transport, Combustion, and Compressible Convection
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1997,05/10/1997
* Richard McLaughlin,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 03/03/1999
* USD 200,000.00

9701942 McLaughlin This work is supported by a National Science Foundation
Faculty Early Career Development Award. The research component will focus on the
theoretical understanding of fluid phenomena. Specifically, these research
efforts outline the study of turbulent transport and scalar intermittency, the
numerical calculation of enhanced burning speeds in premixed combustion, and
theoretical and computational studies of weakly compressible transport
phenomena. An underlying theme in this effort is the isolation of how fluid flow
properties affect transport phenomena, which may include enhanced mixing rates,
enhanced rare event probability, enhanced burning speeds, and enhanced anelastic
heat transport. These studies involve a sophisticated integration of modern
asymptotic, numerical, and probabilistic techniques. Additionally, this award
will support the continued curriculum development of an advanced undergraduate/
graduate level Mathematical Fluid Dynamics course. Such a course is designed to
present the student with the essential mathematical tools necessary to
understand fluid mechanics and to quickly equip the student with essential
techniques for attacking research problems in Applied Mathematics. Additionally,
a small demonstration fluids laboratory will be developed to offer visualization
of many fluid phenomena. This Faculty Early Career Development Award will
provide the principal investigator the opportunity to pursue his research
efforts in the understanding of many fluid transport phenomena while
additionally developing new educational curricula. Developing sound theories for
fluid transport is fundamental in many ways. The experimental understanding of
fluid turbulence typically involves the tracking of passive dye, and,
consequently, the quantification of how fluid flow properties affect the mixing
of such dye is critical. Further, the development of sound transport theories
naturally will yield insight into a va riety of mixing applications such as the
tracking of atmospheric pollutants. Perhaps most importantly is the potential
information such theories may offer to large-scale computational fluids,
combustion and climate models in which a common difficulty regards how to treat
unresolvable length and time scales. It is an accepted fact in computational
fluid dynamics that important, non- negligible, complex fluid phenomena exist
which are simply not resolvable on even the largest supercomputers. These sub-
grid effects play a dramatic role in many fluids applications such as weather
prediction. They cannot be ignored, and a standard approach is to replace them
by something simpler-- an effective mixing coefficient. In many applications,
the transport theories developed here offer sound justification and
quantification of these coefficients, and potentially may offer improvements to
existing computational models. Finally, the curriculum effort will involve the
development of a small fluids laboratory including a demonstration water tunnel.
Through this lab, a student studying the theory of fluids will find exciting
visual contact with real fluids phenomena typically unavailable in mathematics
coursework, and this visualization will lead to greater excitement and
appreciation for the usefulness of mathematical theory in the understanding of
observable phenomena. The National Science Foundation strongly encourages the
early development of academic faculty as both educators and researchers. The
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a Foundation- wide program
that provides for the support of junior faculty within the context of their
overall career development. It combines in a single program the support of
quality research and education in the broadest sense and the full participation
of those traditionally underrepresented in science and engineering. This program
enhances and emphasizes the importance the Foundation places on the development
of full, balanced academic careers which include both research and education.
