
* 9818531
* San Diego Symposium on Asymptotics and Applied Analysis to be held January 10-14, 2000 in San Diego, California
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 11/01/1999,10/20/1999
* Timothy Dunster,CA,San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 10/31/2000
* USD 20,000.00

Re: DMS-9818531 Title: San Diego Symposium on Asymptotics and Applied Analysis.



T. M. Dunster and D. A. Lutz are the organizers of the "San Diego Symposium on
Asymptotics and Applied Analysis" from January 10 - 14, 2000 at San Diego State
University, California. The proposed conference will have talks falling under
the following three categories in asymptotics and applied analysis: difference
equations, ordinary differential equations, and functions defined by integrals.
The first of these would emphasize asymptotic methods involving special
functions. Included in the second and third categories would be new results
related to exponentially-improved asymptotics and hyperasymptotics, summation of
divergent solutions, connection problems, error analysis, and applications to
special functions. The following eleven leading experts in the above fields have
indicated a willingness to participate as principal speakers in the proposed
symposium: F. W. J. Olver (Maryland), R. Askey (Wisconsin), W. Balser (Ulm,
Germany), C. Bender (St. Louis), M. Berry (Bristol, UK), B. Braaksma
(Netherlands), P. Pham (Nice, France), R. Schaefke (Strasbourg, France), Y.
Sibuya (Minneapolis), N. Temme (Netherlands), and R. Wong (Hong Kong). Post-
doctoral and graduate students, and especially those from under-represented
groups in mathematics, are strongly encouraged to attend.

The broad area of this conference is asymptotics of special functions.
Asymptotics is defined to mean, for example, the approximation of a given
function in terms of a function whose properties are better understood, or which
can be more readily computed. Special functions are solutions of certain
equations which appear in many areas of physics, engineering and mathematics.
This is a very classical branch of mathematics that has already contributed much
to our understanding of the physical world. However, during the past decade
there have been a series of new and exciting ideas leading to significant
improvements in the accuracy of asymptotic methods, with the main contributors
coming from the US, Europe, and the Fareast. But since 1989 (Winnipeg, Canada)
and there have been no major conferences in North America on the theme of this
symposium, even though there have been many conferences on similar themes in
Europe and Asia. This symposium will bring experts and younger researchers
together to disseminate these new ideas to a wider audience and lay the
groundwork for future studies and collaboration, new applications, and insight
into more complex problems to be yet solved.
