
* 9874947
* PECASE: Topics in Number Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 12/01/1998,08/18/2000
* Ken Ono,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph P. Brennan
* 07/31/2001
* USD 500,000.00

This award funds programs for research and education with special emphasis in
combinatorics and number theory. The investigator plans to study the
combinatorics of partition functions, the structure of elliptic curves, the
Fourier coefficients of modular forms, and special values of automorphic
L-functions. The investigator hopes to shed further light on the behavior of
Mordell-Weil groups of elliptic curves, class groups of number fields, and
Selmer groups. In addition to his research, the investigator proposes a number
of broadly based activities which constitute an ambitious and sustained effort
for the promotion of education at all levels. This includes the mentoring of
talented high school students locally within the State College School District,
and nationally in the form of an annual workshop run in collaboration with the
National Youth Science Foundation. Moreover, the investigator intends to enhance
opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows working in
combinatorics and number theory at Penn State.

The National Science Foundation strongly encourages the early development of
academic faculty as both educators and researchers. The Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Program is a Foundation-wide program that provides for the
support of junior faculty within the context of their overall career
development. It combines in a single program the support of quality research and
education in the broadest sense and the full participation of those
traditionally underrepresented in sciences and engineering. This program
enhances and emphasizes the importance the Foundation places on the development
of full, balanced academic careers.
