
* 9985572
* CAREER: Time-Frequency Analysis of Multilinear Operators and More General Nonlinear Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2000,05/19/2005
* Christoph Thiele,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2006
* USD 199,999.00

Research Abstract

Time-Frequency Analysis of Multilinear Operators and More General Nonlinear
Operators

This proposal focusses on the study of multilinear singular integrals. Singular
integrals have played an important role in harmonic analysis over the past fifty
years and are very useful in other mathematical disciplines such as for example
partial differential equations. The main tool in the subject is Littlewood Paley
theory, whose main message is that functions on Euclidean space should be
decomposed into pieces whose frequency content lie in concentric shells around
the origin. Passing to multilinear singular integrals one encounters the new
phenomenon that these multilinear singular integrals have translation symmetries
in frequency space. Therefore it doesnt suffice to study concentric shells
around the origin, but one has to study shells around any point in frequency
space.

Techniques have been develloped recently to control the interaction of shells
around different points in frequency space, and the purpose of this project is
to exploit and further devellope these techniques and therefore better
understand multilinear singular integrals. Multilinear singular integrals appear
for example in formal Taylor series of nonlinear operators, or as explicit
correction terms in an iterative scheme. A particular emphasis of the project
will be to investigate possible applications of this theory to partial
differential equations and other fields in mathematics.




