* 9400978
* Mathematical Sciences: Linear and Nonlinear Partial         Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Daniel Tataru, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1996
* USD 40,000.00

9400978 Tataru This award supports mathematical research on problems arising in
the theory of partial differential equations. Several projects are to be
considered. The first is a continuation of work on viscosity solutions for fully
nonlinear first and second order Hamilton-Jacobi equations with unbounded
Hamiltonian in infinite dimensions. The goal is to build upon the earlier work
to consider issues such as the existence of discontinuous solutions, equations
arising in dynamic programming corresponding to optimal control or differential
games and second order problems in infinite dimensions. Other work will focus on
the study of unique continuation problems for solutions to linear partial
differential equations and the problem of determining the minimal regularity of
the coefficients for which such results can be obtained. A final goal is that of
obtaining a complete characterization of the essential spectrum for semigroups
generated by hyperbolic boundary value problems with applications in
stabilization. Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical
modeling of the physical world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much
to create the equations as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative
information about the solutions. This may include answers to questions about
uniqueness, smoothness and growth. In addition, analysis often develops methods
for approximation of solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these
approximations. ***