* 9400553
* Magnetic - Resonance Studies of Layered Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Matlub Ahmad, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/1998
* USD 259,500.00

9400553 Dunifer Technical abstract: Magnetic Resonance techniques will be used
to investigate the electrical and magnetic properties of multilayered films
consisting of alternating magnetic and nonmagnetic metals. The spin polarization
of the conduction electrons in the nonmagnetic metal, induced by the adjacent
ferromagnetic neighbors will be studied by microwave transmission spectroscopy
(MTS), ferromagnetic resonance (FMR), and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) of
the nuclei of the nonmagnetic metal. The influence of the induced spin
polarization of the spacer metal on the magneto- optical Kerr effect (MOKE) of
the films will also be studied. A comparison of the optical characteristics with
those determined by magnetic resonance will assist in understanding the basic
physical processes underlying the enhancement of the MOKE and in fabricating new
materials with improved characteristics for data storage and magnetic sensors.
Non-technical abstract: This project is a multidisciplinary investigation of the
properties of materials used in devices such as read-write optical data storage
disks, sensors, and magnetic memory. This technology has a major impact on the
scientific advancement of computer technology and communication. A clear
understanding of the mechanisms involved in enhancing the properties of data
storage materials and devices is needed for US industries to remain competitive
in this vital area. The project will investigate the fundamental mechanisms
underlying the enhancement of magneto-optical storage and sensor devices. The
materials to be investigated are multilayered films consisting of alternate
layers of magnetic and non-magnetic metals. This investigation could enhance the
ability to fabricate new materials with improved characteristics for the
critical technological area of data storage devices. ***