* 9400254
* Nd, Sr and Pb Isotope, Major Cation, and Rare Earth         Element Geochemistry of the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1997
* Karin Barovich, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 04/30/1997
* USD 301,815.00

9400254 Clark Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of the
Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is jointly
sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs.
The research will be centered around a unique and intensive, multidisciplinary
research expedition to parts of the Arctic Ocean that have never been
extensively studied. The 1994 U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section is a
collaborative effort with Canada that will involve approximately 60 scientists
on a Canadian and a U.S. icebreaker during summer 1994. NSF-funded projects will
focus on hydrography, biology, paleo-, and sea-ice studies. Data collected will
be amongst the first ever from several regions of the Arctic Ocean and will be
highly relevant to improving our understanding of how the Arctic is an indicator
of changing global climate conditions and how it affects the physical, chemical,
and biological features of the more temperate oceans and regions. This specific
research effort involves the study of rare-earth element (REE) and Nd isotope
systematics in order to gain insights on the interplay of ocean chemistry,
biology, and physics. REE, and Nd isotope measurements will be obtained from
sediment and water samples collected during the cruise and will be used to
determine the origin of different water masses comprising the Arctic Ocean.
Information will also be derived on the origin and maintenance of the seawater
stratification, mixing processes, circulation, and biogeochemical processes. In
addition, these data will allow the Arctic Ocean to be placed in context with
other existing REE and Nd isotope data from the sub-Arctic oceans and to be
integrated into existing global, inter-oceanic circulation models. Analysis of
ice-borne and seabed sediments for Pb, REE, and Nd-Pb-Sr isotopes will allow
integration of Late Cenozoic Arctic Ocean sediment geochemistry to the current
understanding of sediment sources and dispersal in the Arctic Ocean. ***