* 9400772
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis on Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Steven Krantz, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 07/31/1995
* USD 28,500.00

9400772 Krantz This award supports mathematical research on problems arising in
two related areas. The first concerns the study of Hodge theory for the de Rham
complex using different inner products that the usual quadratic one. The work
should provide new insights into the regularity theory for elliptic problems as
well as insight into the structure of the harmonic space. The Hodge theory for
the de Rham complex has important geometric interpretations. A second project
involves the development of special function spaces adapted to specific boundary
value problems on specific domains. Along with recent advances in operator
theory, the idea of designing functions for particular applications should have
far-reaching applications. In another direction, work will be don on basic
elements of harmonic analysis and function theory on domains in complex
Euclidean space. This includes the theory of hardy spaces, functions of bounded
mean oscillation, the corona problem, and Lipschitz spaces. An important theme
in the work focuses on the geometry of the boundary of the domain and how it
determines the function theory on the interior. In particular questions of
boundary uniqueness and rigidity for holomorphic functions and mappings will be
taken up. Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematicalmodeling
of the physical world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much to
create the equations as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative
information about the solutions. This may include answers to questions about
uniqueness, smoothness and growth. In addition, analysis often develops methods
for approximation of solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these
approximations. When the equations are defined over domains in several complex
variables, as they are in this project, the scope of the work increases
considerably to take into account the large body of existing work available in
the study of holomorphic functions of seve ral complex variables and the
corresponding domains. ***