* 9400545
* Epigeous and Hypogeous Pezizales of Western North America
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1999
* Nancy Weber, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 06/30/1999
* USD 170,000.00

9400545 Weber In western North America the Pezizales Fungi, Ascomycotina) are
represented by approximately 120 genera an perhaps as many as 450 species which
include the morels and related cup-fungi (epigeous taxa) and truffles (hypogeous
taxa). The order includes important mycorrhizal and saprophytic fungi; several
are esculents of considerable economic value; a few are occasional serious plant
pathogens. The western United States encompasses great geologic, topographic,
climatic, and floristic diversity which is reflected in the apparent diversity
of the Pezizales Therein occurring. This project is the first to attempt to
survey and inventory the diversity of Pezizalean fungi for the region. Because
no modern taxonomic treatment of this order is available for the Western united
States (or any other region of North America) aids to identifying taxa
(dichotomous and synoptic keys) and descriptions of known and newly discovered
taxa will be prepared. Goals for field work include prospecting for additional
diversity, new records, and clarifying distribution patterns of known taxa. An
accession-based database is being compiled from the major sets of Pezizalean
collections deposited in regional and national herbaria in the United States;
additional records are being culled from published references. The existing
collections provide the raw material for determining distributions, assessing
diversity, and helping to identify areas were further field work is needed.
Because of floristic ties with Europe, Asia, and other parts of North America, a
treatment of western North America taxa will be useful throughout much of the
Northern Hemisphere.