* 9400155
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  An Ethnographic Study of   Technology, Culture, and Development at the Guiana Space    Center
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Paul Rabinow, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1994
* USD 10,000.00

9400155 Rabinow Under the direction of Dr. Paul Rabinow, Mr. Peter Redfield is
exploring local effects of a global technological system, examining the primary
launch facilities of the French and European space programs at Kourou, French
Guiana. The focus of this project is on the social and cultural aspects of the
location of this large center of high technology outside of the industrialized
world,a nd its relation to the small multiethnic society surrounding it on the
edge of the South American rainforest. Two interrelated questions guide the
investigation: First, what is the significance of geographic and social location
within a technical system, and the relationship of technology to issues of
development? Second, what are the symbolic roles of technology in the cultural
evaluation of development. Through an ethnographic and historical examination of
interactions between international technology and a particular place, the
project seeks to compliment recent exchanges between anthropology and social
studies of science and technology by presenting within a local frame a specific
case study of one extension of modern technology beyond the West. This grant
provides support for ethnographic fieldwork in French Guiana as well as archival
research in France. ***