* 9400184
* REU Site:  Summer Intern Program in the Geosciences
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Glenn Shaw, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* C. Robert Clauer
* 06/30/1997
* USD 90,000.00

Site grant support is requested for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program for the next three years at the Geophyical Institute. This program
will give research opportunities to undergraduates majoring in physics and
closely related disciplines. The program objective is to acquaint undergraduates
with life and wwork at a research institute. This is done by providing summer
educational work in which undergraduates become interns participating in the
research activities of the Geophysical Institute. Research topics available in
this program concentrate on space physics, aeronomy and global change
(atmospheric science), but also include, ice and solid Earth topics within the
Geophysical Institute, and solid state physics and laser physics at the Physics
Department. The aim is to encourage \the undergraduates to continue their
education in graduate school and become research scientists. In this program,
the interns are assigned to conduct research with principal investigators who
direct their work and serve as mentors through their internship. There is a
common program of weekly lectures and field trips designed to expose interns to
fields of research beyond the scope of their own projects. Through their close
relationship with their mentors, contacts with graduate students, attending
seminars, lectures and thesis defenses, and participating in field trips, the
interns gain a first hand perspective on life and work as a research scientist.