* 9400209
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Predictions of Ion        Solvation and Mobilities in Hydrated Polyamides from        Molecular Simulation
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1999
* Michael Paulaitis, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 33,490.00

9400209 Wagner This three-year award supports U.S.-Italy cooperative research
Between Norman Wagner and Michael Paulaitis of the University of Delaware and
Dr. Bruno D'Aguanno at the Center for Advanced Studies, in Sardinia, Italy. Drs.
Wagner and Paulaitis, in the Department of Chemical Engineering, and Dr.
D'Aguanno of the Department of Computational Biophysics, propose to develop
massively parallel simulation algorithms for calculating ion solubilities and
mobilities in hydrated polymers with the goal of applying these computational
tools to design selective reverse osmosis membranes based on the chemical
composition and "local" structural properties of the polymer. A severe
limitation in applying current science and technology to predict ion
solubilities and mobilities is the inability to characterize quantitatively the
unique restructuring of waters of hydration. The international collaboration
will merge US expertise in thermodynamics and massively parallel simulation with
the Italian expertise in large-scale simulations of water and ionic solutions.
This collaboration will contribute to a program recently established at the
Center for Molecular and Engineering Thermodynamics at the University of
Delaware to simulate water structures around hydrated ionic species to predict
their solubilities and mobilities in hydrated polymers. This new collaboration
will also foster closer interactions between the Delaware Center and the
Sardinian Center. * * *