* 9400649
* International Postdoctoral Fellows:  Origin of the          Structural Stability of the Molten Globule State in Protein Folding
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1995
* Donald Haynie, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 04/30/1995
* USD 37,900.00

9400649 Haynie This award is under the International Junior Investigator and
Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Donald T. Haynie of Johns Hopkins University to work with Dr.
Christopher M. Dobson at the University of Oxford. Their research concerns the
origin of the structural stability of the molten globule state in protein
folding. Understanding how proteins fold is a major objective of biophysical and
medical research throughout the world today. Many commercial opportunities
depend on knowing how information is transferred from an extended polypeptide
chain to the corresponding equilibrium three-dimensional structure. Much
contemporary protein folding research concerns molten globules, partly folded
states of proteins stable at equilibrium. Molten globules are generally
considered to represent conformations on the protein folding pathway. The
research plan is divided into three separate stages, the first, which is being
funded under this program, is to create mutant forms of hen egg white lysozyme
(HEWL) and characterize their biochemical and cell biological properties.
Structural and energetic studies of the mutants are to be conducted during the
second and third phases which will be funded elsewhere. ***