* 9400286
* Laser Deposition  and Characterization of Cubic CdS Films
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Xingwu Wang, Alfred University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/1996
* USD 48,660.00

9360638 Wang Brimrose proposes to research and demonstrate novel integrated
photorefractive waveguide-based photonic devices including optical amplifiers
and homodyne detectors. They have advantages of significantly increased
sensitivity, integrated waveguide format, rigid, stable and self-alignment. The
sensitivity of these devices are several order of magnitudes higher than their
convention bulk counterparts. The mechanism of the high sensitivity is two fold:
(1)The optical signals are confirmed in films on the order of a few microns
thick in photorefractive waveguides. Thus even with low signal energy, the
energy density can still be very high; and (2)The interaction length of the
underlying mechanism response for amplification and homodyning are much longer
than in the bulk case where the interaction length is limited by the beam width.
The index change An for 1.0uj/cm3 absorbed energy will be increased from
0.51x10-6 in the bulk format to greater than 500x10-6 in the integrated guided-
wave format. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that homodyne detection using
photorefractive two-beam coupling can increase the signal-to-noise ratio by 3
dB. These devices will be fabricated from photorefractive II-VI semiconductor
materials, CdTe:V and ZnTe:V, which have been extensive worked on for over five
years and Brimrose is the only manufacturer in the world. They have
photorefractive sensitivity between 0.6 um to 1.5 um which is perfectly matched
with laser diodes and optical communication wavelengths. ***