* 9400919
* Photochemical and Photophysical Mechanisms of Transition    Metal Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Peter Ford, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 12/31/1998
* USD 498,000.00

9400919 Ford U. of Calif. - Santa Barbara Dr. Peter Ford, Chemistry Department,
University of California - Santa Barbara, is supported by the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for studies of the
photoreaction and photophysical mechanisms of transition metal coordination and
organometallic complexes. A series of strongly luminescing mononuclear and
cluster compounds containing Cu(I) will be synthesized and spectroscopically
characterized using both CW and pulse laser excitations, and the uni- and
bimolecular ES dynamics will be determined by emission and transient absorption
detection. The spectroscopic and bonding properties of the complexes will be
evaluated with the aid of theoretical calculations. The photochemistry of
several nitric oxide complexes will be examined both in order to understand the
fundamental properties of coordinated NO and to prepare dual chromophore systems
which might serve as sensors for solution NO. When light is absorbed by a
molecule, the energy which the molecule acquires is sometime re-emitted as light
of a different wave length (this is called luminescence) and sometimes by
initiating a chemical reaction within the molecule. This project is designed to
probe both possibilities. By using a specially designed series of copper
compounds the details of how luminescence occurs. This has great importance to,
for example, the design of light emitting electronic devices. In another
portions the reactions of metal complexes of nitric oxide (NO) will be examined
as the complexes are exposed to intense light. This has relevance to the design
of sensors which can detect NO, which has important biochemical roles, in
solution.