* 9400059
* Physics Research Experience for Undergraduates at the       University of Rochester, P-REU-R
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1997
* Arie Bodek, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Rolf M. Sinclair
* 10/31/1997
* USD 184,563.00

9400059 Auchincloss This program will enable sophomore and juniors from
Rochester area institutions to undertake supervised projects in experimental
particle physics and quantum optics at University of Rochester. Upon acceptance
to the program, students gain familiarity with their respective research groups
and laboratories through part-time work during the spring semester. The central
experience takes place during the summer 2.5-month full-time work period. Each
student will then continue part-time involvement during the following fall and
spring semesters, with the aim of completing a scientific publication or report
for presentation at the spring Rochester Symposium for Physics Students, hosted
annually by the Department of Physics and Astronomy. The program has been
designed to integrate well with other University initiatives toward increasing
and enhancing the participation of underrepresented groups in science. Five of
the 10 student positions will be reserved for women and minority students. As
the ethics component of this program, a series of seminars is planned in which
University and outside scholars will speak on historical and current issues at
the intersections science, gender, race and ethics. The scope of this series and
the broad interpretation of "ethics" is intended have relevance to a diverse
group of student researchers, and to promote discussion of the tensions, in
social as well as scientific values, that confront scientists in the present
era. ***