* 9400534
* Reef plants of the Caribbean
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Diane Littler, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joaquin Martinez Martinez
* 06/30/1997
* USD 143,068.00

9400534 Littler The central goal of the research is to inventory and produce a
scholarly, but user-friendly, treatment of the macroscopic marine plants of the
Caribbean and adjacent seas, thereby providing a baseline of botanical
biodiversity that will serve as a model for subsequent studies. Collectively,
marine plants comprise a taxonomically broad assemblage of very different
evolutionary groups that have evolved an astounding variety of life histories,
external morphologies, internal anatomical features, biochemical constituents,
and metabolic activities. The taxonomic breadth of the treatment will be
synoptic, dealing with six unrelated phyla, including Chlorophyta (the ancestors
of land plants), Rhodophyta (the most species-rich of marine plant groups),
Phaeophyta (brown rockweeds), Magnoliophytae (flowering Plants), Cyanophyta (the
longest evolving group of organisms), and Chrysophyta (diatoms). Every species
will be illustrated with one to two in situ color photographs accompanied by
detailed line illustrations of anatomical characters so that species con be
"picture keyed". The critical technical descriptions also will be adjacent for
confirmation of identifications. Easily followed keys to orders, families,
genera, and species will be produced as an initial means of arriving at accurate
identifications. The project will focus on large macrophytes (many are
commercially valuable), which are not easily dispersed (particularly the
rhizophytic forms attached in sedimentary substrata), and, hence, questions
regarding isolation and speciation also can be addressed. By increasing the
known sample size and micro habitat information on a large scale, the study will
reveal patterns of natural selection and speciation of value in addressing
larger theoretical questions on biogeography and dispersal.