* 9400644
* Mathematical Sciences:  Studies in Interacting Particle     Systems and Brownian Motion
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Thomas Liggett, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1998
* USD 296,000.00

9400644 Liggett Professors Liggett, Mountford and Schonmann will work on several
projects related to two areas of Probability Theory: Interacting Particle
Systems and Brownian Motion. The first of these is the study of probabilistic
models for the evolution of large physical systems which undergo phase
transitions, while the second is a more classical model which has played a
central role in Probability for much of this century. Among the problems to be
considered in the first area are: obtaining good bounds on the critical values
which separate the single phase from the multiphase parameter region, and
determining rates of convergence to equilibrium in several models, including the
stochastic Ising model and nearest particle systems. In the second area,
detailed properties of the level sets of the Brownian sheet will be
investigated. A relatively new and very active area of Probability Theory is
known as Interacting Particle Systems. It is devoted to the analysis of
probabilistic models for the evolution of physical systems which can be in two
or more phases - pieces of metal (magnetized or not) or water (ice, water,
steam) for example. Some results of investigations in this area also have
applications in other areas, such as the study of queues and transmission of
disease. Professors Liggett, Mountford and Schonmann will continue their work on
some of the basic problems in this field. One of them is the determination of
the regions of physical parameters (temperature, pressure, etc.) in which
various phases occur, and the behavior of the systems near points at which the
phase description changes. Another is a study of the speed with which systems
approach equilibrium.