* 9400770
* An Interactive Expert Systems Key and Database for the      Euphausiids of the World Ocean
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Edward Brinton, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Joaquin Martinez Martinez
* 08/31/1997
* USD 95,235.00

9400770 Brinton An interactive, microcomputer-based expert system will be
developed for the euphausiid crustaceans, an ecologically important taxon
throughout the world ocean. The expert system will include several pathways to
arrive at identifications and the information base for all of the known species.
These pathways will include: (1) a visually oriented, interactive pictorial key,
(2) a structured database pathway, permitting rapid searches based on selected
character states, and (3) searches by taxon name. There will be separated
modules to differentiate Euphausiids from higher taxa and to identify species of
adult Euphausiids. The expert system will include worldwide biogeographic
distribution maps for each species; electron and light micrographs, including
original color micrographs wherever possible; line drawings; and behavioral
sequences in the form of QuickTime movies. It will include an illustrated
glossary and a bibliography indexed by species. It will be made available on CD-
ROM for all major microcomputer operating systems, hence usable in the field or
at remote field stations. The expert system will be an original synthesis of
information both unpublished and published. It will include euphausiid
morphology, taxonomy, and biogeography, as well as aspects of euphausiid
behavior including swimming, feeding, and bioluminescent displays. It will be
immediately useful in studies of marine biodiversity. It will be important for
GLOBEC ( Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics) studies, where multiple investigators
must ensure that they are using common (and current) sources for
identifications. It will be useful to researchers who do not have comprehensive
libraries. It will incorporate unpublished information gleaned over 3 decades by
3 euphausiid experts. The expert system will draw on the specimens and resources
of Scripps Institutes Planktonic Invertebrates Collection. Production of CD-
ROM's will be done in cooperation with Expert Center for Taxonomic
Identification (ETI ), University of Amsterdam.