* 9400230
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Nonlinear Harmonic Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Stephen Semmes, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1997
* USD 132,483.00

9400230 Semmes The proposed research involves a combination of harmonic analysis
and geometric measure theory that is somewhat complicated. Conventionally one
likes to ask questions about the relationship between the geometry of a set in a
Euclidean space and the analysis of functions and linear operators associated to
this set. One can also consider the geometry and complexity of sets in Euclidean
spaces for their own sake, and look for methods to detect when a set has some
nice interesting structure, e.g., when it can be parametrized in a nice way with
estimates. For this latter endeavor harmonic analysis has a slightly indirect
relevance, by providing guidance for what "interesting structure" might mean, as
well as useful techniques. However, many of the traditional tools of harmonic
analysis do not apply in this inherently nonlinear setting, and in fact there
are results in the geometric setting whose counterparts in classical analysis
are false. The work of Semmes involves the interplay between measure theory,
geometry and analysis. Given a set of points in space, one can ask whether it
can be measured. In the case of a one dimensional set, this is the question of
whether it has finite length. This can be a very subtle question in analysis.
Classical answers to this question often involve boundedness of certain
operations on spaces of functions on the set. In this project answers to the
question of "measurability" will be sought where the classical approaches cannot
work. This will involve replacing the classical operations by more complicated
nonlinear operations. ***