* 9400632
* The Caddisflies (Trichoptera) of Costa Rica.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Ralph Holzenthal, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 05/31/1998
* USD 194,908.00

9400632 Holzenthal This request seeks funding, primarily in the form of graduate
student research assistantships and summer faculty salary, to complete
systematics research and education on the Trichoptera, or caddisfly, fauna of
Costa Rica and the Neotropics. An important new component of the project will be
emphasis on the graduate training of a Costa Rican in systematic entomology.
Information and data generated through the project, specifically the English-
language text of the manual and specimen level locality and taxonomic
information, will be entered on a database and made available over the Internet
through Gopher. Caddisflies are closely related to butterflies and moths and are
best known, especially by those interested in fly fishing, for the cases and
capture nets constructed by their aquatic larvae. Caddisfly larvae are
ubiquitous in fresh waters worldwide, but are especially diverse in unpolluted
rivers and steams. Larvae are important in aquatic food chains and are used as
biological indicators of the well-being of freshwater habitats. The objectives
of this research are to determine the full diversity and distribution of the
caddisfly fauna of Costa Rica and to publish a species-level, Spanish-language
manual of the fauna. When completed, this manual will be the first of its kind
in Latin America. Since the manual will be based on revisionary taxonomic and
phylogenetic research of monophyletic taxa, its production will extend benefits
beyond Costa Rica to trichopterology and the study of Neotropical insects in
general. The human resources, manual, and database developed under this project
will serve important roles for future research on the taxonomy, biology, and
conservation of Trichoptera and their habitats in the New World tropics.