* 9400811
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Determinant of Construal   Formations and Influences on Verdict and Sentencing:  An    Affect Control Model
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1995
* Lynn Smith-Lovin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/1995
* USD 2,100.00

9400811 Smith-Lovin This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral
Dissertation Research program. It is a study of how emotional displays affect
how individuals construe ambiguous information in order to assess a social
situation. Social psychological experiments will be conducted in which observers
will view actors on videotape portraying alleged criminals and victims of their
crimes. By varying the emotional tone of the statements of the actors,
differences in how experimental subjects assess the nature of the criminal
situation and recommend verdicts and sentences will be assessed. Previous
attempts to verify affect control theory in experimental situations have been
relatively unsuccessful. This project will subject predictions of that theory to
more rigorous tests. In addition, this research should answer important
questions about how members of juries resolve ambiguities and reach decisions in
criminal trials. In addition to the scientific gains to be achieved by the
research, this award will materially assist a highly promising student in
completing research for the Ph. D. dissertation. Thus it contributes to the
future scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough training of the next
generation of social scientists. ***