* 9400354
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Curtis Frank, Stanford University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carmen I. Huber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 10,044,600.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) known as the
Center on Polymer Interfaces and Macromolecular Assemblies (CPIMA) at Stanford
University is a partnership among research groups at Stanford University, IBM-
Almaden, and the University of California Davis. The center supports interactive
research through three interdisciplinary research groups. The group
investigating macromolecular design for enhanced film properties aims to design
and synthesize novel polymers which have unique optical and electronic
properties, and then characterize their equilibrium and dynamical behavior when
they are constrained by interfaces. Researchers in the group focused on
ultrathin films aim to design and synthesize substrate-bound ultrathin organic
films that mediate the chemical and physical interactions between the substrate
and an adjacent overlayer. Investigators in the group investigating the dynamics
of interfacial processing seek to understand the interfacial transport processes
that occur during the fabrication of ultrathin films of polymers and polymer-
based nanoncomposite materials. The center also supports the development,
operation and maintenance of shared experimental facilities for materials
research. It provides seed funding for exploratory research, and fosters
research participation by undergraduates. The center has educational programs
from high school to the graduate level and carries out collaborative research
with industry. The center currently supports about 16 senior investigators, 12
postdoctoral research associates, 2 technical staff members, 18 graduate
students, and 6 undergraduates. This MRSEC is directed by Professor Curtis W.
Frank.