* 9400725
* Low Temperature Cascade Arc Torch Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Hirotsugu Yasuda, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1998
* USD 180,000.00

LOW TEMPERATURE CASCADE ARC TORCH POLYMERIZATION Abstract Proposal Number:
CTS-9400725 P.I.: Yasuda Institution: University of Missouri, Columbia Low
temperature plasma polymerization can be utilized in interface engineering to
create an optimum transition between two different materials. An excellent
protection of steel has been achieved by applying a cathodic electrocoating
(E-coat) primer on an interface-engineered steel panel (plasma polymerization of
trimethylsilane by means of DC discharge with a pair of anode magnetrons),
outperforming a zinc phosphated galvanized steel with the same E-coat in a
corrosion test. This research is an extension of such an approach to a larger
scale operation by means of low temperature cascade arc torch (LTCAT)
polymerization, that delineates many technical limitations of (conventional)
plasma polymerization processes which hamper applications in large scale
operations. The proposed fundamental research is a preparatory step to the
robotic spray coating of plasma polymers by LTCAT polymerization, which would
enable engineers to coat large size, complex shape substrates with high
uniformity and reproducibility. The advantages of this approach are that (1) the
process is capable of coating a large surface area without scaling-up problems;
i.e., the laboratory scale operation is essentially the same as that in a large
scale operation, (2) the method can be applied regardless of nature and shape of
substrate; i.e., it can be used in the surface treatment of plastics such as
bumpers, and also in interface engineering of steel automobile bodies, etc., (3)
the application of interface engineering can eliminate many conventional
(pollution-prone) wet chemical processes such as galvanizing and phosphating
processes, (4) the interface engineering process does not create non-recyclable
materials and maintain high recyclability of final products. Fundamentals of
cascade arc torch polymerization and the transitional interface structure which
provides the maximum benefits of composite materials will be investigated at the
level of a laboratory pilot scale reactor which employs moving (rotating)
substrates. This is an Industry/University Cooperative Research Project in which
the Marshall Research Laboratory (Automotive Products) of the E.I. duPont
Company is collaborating with the principal investigator at the University of
Missouri, Columbia. REU Supplement Proposal Number: CTS-9442632 Institution:
University of Notre Dame Support in the amount of $5,000 is requested in order
to support a female undergraduate student, Ms. Allison A. Barbeau, who has
completed her sophomore year in chemical engineering at the University of Notre
Dame with a 3.75/4.00 cumulative grade point average. She is interested in
obtaining research experience with Professor Joan F. Brennecke since she is
considering going to graduate school. this supplement is in line with the
objectives of the REU program and ,hence, is recommended by the program officer.