* 9400562
* Development of Recombinant RNA Technology
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Kevin Jarrell, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jack Horowitz
* 01/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

Jarrell 9400562 Restriction enzymes typically recognize and cleave specific DNA
sequences that are 4 to 6 basepairs (bp) in length. However, only a small subset
of the 4096 possible bp sequences present in DNA are recognized by restriction
enzymes. In addition, commercially available restriction enzymes are often of
poor quality; the preparations are impure and the enzyme concentration is low.
This proposal seeks to develop recombinant RNA technology making use of
ribozymes that can cut and join RNA molecules to serve the functions currently
served by restriction enzymes and ligase. Potentially, 4096 different ribozymes,
each with a particular 6 nucleotide (nt) sequence specifically, can be
generated. All of the ribozymes will be generated and purified by the same
method and each will function in the same reaction buffer. Thus, it should be
possible produce inexpensive ribozymes of consistently high quality. This
technology will significantly improve our ability to generate recombinant DNA
molecules. The recombinant molecules will be generated at the RNA level using in
vitro trans splicing catalyzed by self splicing group II intron sequences. These
recombinant RNA molecules will be copied into DNA by reverse transcriptase and
amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to yield the recombinant DNA
molecules. This research will determine the feasibility of recombinant RNA
technology as a practical tool for nucleic acid manipulation. Group II introns
are capable of splicing together exons in vitro (Peebles et al 1986). This
reaction is autocatalytic. As shown in Figure 1, the intron catalyzes its own
removal from a precursor RNA. The two sequences to be joined (exons 1 and 2) are
represented by rectangles. The intron consists of six conserved structural
domains that are numbered sequentially. %%% Molecular Biology relies upon
recombinant DNA technology to manipulate and clone DNA molecules. Restriction
enzymes and ligase are used to specifically cleave and join DNA molecules. This
technology is so widely used that we seldom consider its limitations.
Restriction enzymes typically recognize and cleave specific DNA sequences that
are 4 to 6 basepairs (bp) in length. However, only a small subset of the 4096
possible 6 bp sequences present in DNA are recognized by restriction enzymes. In
addition, commercially available restriction enzymes are often of poor quality;
the preparations are impure and the enzyme concentration is low. This proposal
seeks to develop recombinant RNA technology making use of ribozymes (RNA
catalysts) that can cut and join RNA molecules to serve the functions currently
served by restriction enzymes and ligase the enzyme that joins nucleic acid
fragments. Potentially, 4096 different ribozymes, each with a particular 6
nucleotide (nt) sequence specificity, can be generated. All of the ribozymes
will be generated and purified by the same method and each will function in the
same reaction buffer. Thus, it should be possible to produce inexpensive
ribozymes of consistently high quality. This technology will significantly
improve our ability to generate recombinant DNA molecules. The recombinant
molecules will be generated at the RNA level in vitro and then copied into DNA
by the enzyme reverse transcriptase that can copy RNA molecules into DNA and
amplified by the polymerase chain reaction to yield the recombinant DNA
molecules. This research will determine the feasibility of recombinant RNA
technology as a potential tool for nucleic acid manipulation. Group II introns
are capable of splicing together exons in vitro (Peebles al. 1986). This
reaction is autocatalytic. As shown in Figure 1, the intron catalyzes its own
removal from a precursor RNA. The two sequences to be joined (exons 1 and 2) are
represented by rectangles. The intron consists of six conserved structural
domains that are numbered sequentially.