* 9400399
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* William Doyle, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ulrich Strom
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,942,000.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University
of Alabama features a multidisciplinary research program built on a solid
foundation provided by the existing Center for Materials for Information
Technology (MINT). The MRSEC supports interactive research through two
interdisciplinary research groups. The group which focuses on the relationship
of microstructure and magnetic properties carries out fundamental measurements
on materials systems which have potential applications in future magnetic
recording systems. Of particular interest are nitrogenated iron based alloys,
high magnetization iron nitride films and giant magnetoresistance thin films.
The group which concentrates on the preparation and dispersion of magnetic
nanoparticles is directed to develop new synthetic methods for the preparation
of magnetic particles and to gain a fundamental understanding of magnetic
dispersions. The MRSEC is housed in the same research building where the MINT
Center is located and shares a number of central facilities with the existing
center. Collaboration with industry is extensive and well established by the
MINT Center. The MRSEC provides seed funding for exploratory research and
emphasizes minority recruitment and interdisciplinary training. A major
component of the educational goals is to attract, retain and train more students
in a technologically important area where, as demonstrated by the success of
graduates, excellent jobs are available. The close association with the
Historically Back Colleges and Universities (HBCU) in the South is utilized to
enhance current outreach programs that support minority students and faculty.
The center currently supports 7 faculty, 5 post-doctoral assistants, and 5
graduate students. The MRSEC is directed by Professor William D oyle.