* 9400213
* Integration of Materials Design and Manufacturing via Free  Form Fabrication Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Amod Ogale, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9400213 Ogale The goal of this research is the development of methodologies for
the integration of materials design with free form manufacturing. Design will be
based on the assumption that the product can be built by decomposing it into
layers, and then creating each layer by a free form manufacturing technique.
Knowledge of the designed material and stress and strain contours in the product
will be used to plan the prototyping process. Surface contour and form error
desired, as well as structural analysis results will determine the layer
thickness, layout of fibers in each layer, beam diameter, traverse speed and
polymerization. The design methodologies will be validated by processing parts
in an automated photolithography unit. A continuous fiber dispensing device will
provide automatic fiber placement and laser beam motion in the required
patterns. In situ addition of fibers will provide an opportunity for the
investigation of two fundamental issues, wetting of the fiber surfaces by
photoresins and the hindered cure kinetics of photoresins due to the presence of
reinforcing fibers. This research will provide information about the movement of
liquid fronts along fiber surfaces and give insight into the "slip" phenomenon
at the gas-liquid-solid interface, and it will help in developing an
understanding of the cure mechanisms in multifunctional photoresins that are
used in free form manufacturing techniques.