* 9400842
* Survey and Inventory of the Fishes of the Gulf of Mexico
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* John McEachran, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 06/30/1998
* USD 102,855.00

9400842 McEachran The objectives of the proposed research are to survey and
inventory the fish species that occur in the Gulf of Mexico, and to summarize
these data in the form of a book on the fishes of the Gulf and as a computer
data base. The proposed audience of the book is the scientists, students and
fishers with interests in the fishes of this region, and the scientists and
students studying biogeography of the Gulf and more inclusive areas. The
computer data base will summarize the distributions of fishes from the Gulf
residing in 10 major natural history collections. Specifically we propose to: 1)
list, fully describe and distinguish from other species all of the species that
occur in the Gulf; 2) provide pen and ink, pencil shaded illustrations of all
species; 3) provided keys to all ordinal, familial and specific taxa that occur
in the Gulf; 4) briefly summarize life history and distributional information of
all species; 5) combine all of the information into a book on the fishes of the
Gulf of Mexico; and 6) build a computer data base for all verified species
records of the Gulf of Mexico. These objectives will be accomplished by
surveying museums with specimens and the literature with references to fishes
from the Gulf of Mexico. To data the project slightly over one-half complete.
Approximately 1,150 pages of text describing 670 species in 130 families and 38
orders have been prepared. A total of 650 species of fishes have been
illustrated, and separate illustrations have been prepared for representatives
of six families to define photophore patterns used in identification of species
and for specialized structures mentioned in the keys to species. It is
anticipated that the remaining 600 to 700 species and 68 family descriptions,
600 to 700 species illustrations, and the surveys of ten natural history
collections can be completed within three years. Benefits of the proposed study
include: 1) an up-to-date synopsis of the systematics, life history and
distribution of t he fishes that occur in the Gulf of Mexico, the ninth largest
body of water in the World, 2) a single source for the identification of fishes
in the Gulf and 3) an initiation of a computer data base of distributional
records for the fishes that occur in the Gulf. It is anticipated that the sixth
objective and third benefit will not be completed at the end of the three year
period of the proposed study.