* 9400070
* U.S.-Denmark Cooperative Research on Dosimetric Applicationsof Optically Stimulated Luminescence
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1995
* Stephen W.S. McKeever, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1995
* USD 7,965.00

9400070 McKeever This award supports Professor Stephen McKeever of Oklahoma
State University to initiate collaborative research with Dr. Lars Boetter-Jensen
of the Nuclear Safety Research Department of Riso National Laboratory, Roskilde,
Denmark. The ultimate objective of their research is to develop techniques for
the application of Optically Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) in retrospective
radiation dosimetry. Their current research is investigating the mechanisms of
OSL sensitivity variations in natural materials such as quartz and feldspar.
Recent developments pioneered at Riso during studies at Chernobyl in the Ukraine
suggest that the silicate minerals found in common house bricks could
potentially be employed as local dosimeters. Collaboration with Dr. McKeever
brings expertise in computer modeling of materials physics to the unique
experimental facilities of the Danish group. A better understanding of the
sensitivity variations which occur among samples as a result of thermal history,
or other factors, will enable them to develop techniques to enhance the
sensitivity of these measurements. Further enhancements seem likely as a result
of the collaboration with Dr. McKeever. This is an unusual fundamental study in
radiation physics which could have very valuable practical applications in the
measurement of radiation exposures. The development of a better local dosimeter
is important to both the U.S. and the world at large since the measurement of
radiation exposure history to local environments is of major concern. If
successful, the simplicity of methods using natural local materials would allow
rapid radial mapping of the extent and degree of radioactive contamination. ***