* 9400766
* Mathematical Science: Cohomology, Multivariable Operator    Theory and Perturbation of Differential Operator
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Daoxing Xia, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/30/1997
* USD 66,000.00

9400766 Xia The project involves work in three directions. First work is
proposed on finding complete unitary invariants for operator tuples. The
operators in these tuples commute and are chosen from classes of non-normal
operators with trace class self-commutators. The goal is to derive trace
formulae for products of commutators and to establish some K-theory related to
the cyclic cohomology associated with almost commuting operators. The second
problem is to study the operators of the form P+Q where P is a partial
differential operator. The project here is to derive results on the cyclic
cohomology associated with a product of twisted commutators for this type of
perturbation and to study the related spectral analysis. The final project is to
study the Gelfand-Fuks cohomology of a Poisson algebra and its quantized
version. This is a project on operator theory. The roots of this project can be
traced back to mathematical physics and the study of the electron. The behavior
of the electron was modeled by a pair of mathematical objects called operators.
The states of the electron are determined by the "spectra" of the operators.
Here the project involves a study of tuples of operators that are similar to the
pair studied in quantum mechanics. The results will have applications to quantum
mechanics and the mathematical areas of pseudo-differential operators and
algebraic geometry. ***