* 9400060
* International Postdoctoral Fellows:  Characterization       of the Mitochondrial Outer Membrane Import Machinery
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Carla Koehler, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/1996
* USD 30,400.00

9400060 Koehler This award is under the International Junior Investigator and
Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr.Carla M. Koehler of Iowa State University to work with Dr. Gottfried
Schatz at the University of Basel in Basel, Switzerland. This research proposal
concerns fundamental questions of cell biology related to biogenesis and protein
exchanges. In particular, it intends to characterize the mitochondrial outer
membrane import machinery in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Dr. Koehler will use
genetic techniques to clone suppressors of one mitochondrial import receptor.
Specifically, the goal is to see how Mas20p and Mas70p, two import receptors,
function as receptors. Use of the two hybrid system and biochemical techniques
will reveal whether they interact with each other and imported precursors. Other
proteins located at the import site and in the cytosol will be identified by
screening a cDNA library using the two-hybrid system, and the interaction
between cytosolic factors and the receptors will be examined further using
biochemical and biophysical methods. This research is likely to advance current
understanding of events at the cell membrane. ***