* 9400250
* Geochemical Analysis of Ostracodes from the Arctic Ocean:   Last Glacial Maximum to Present
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1996
* Paul Baker, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 04/30/1996
* USD 64,847.00

9400250 Baker Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of the
Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is jointly
sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs.
The research will be centered around a unique and intensive, multidisciplinary
research expedition to parts of the Arctic Ocean that have never been
extensively studied. The 1994 U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section is a
collaborative effort with Canada that will involve approximately 60 scientists
on a Canadian and a U.S. icebreaker during summer 1994. NSF-funded projects will
focus on hydrography, biology, paleo-, and sea-ice studies. Data collected will
be amongst the first ever from several regions of the Arctic Ocean and will be
highly relevant to improving our understanding of how the Arctic is an indicator
of changing global climate conditions and how it affects the physical, chemical,
and biological features of the more temperate oceans and regions. This work is a
component of the collaborative paleooceanographic program. A climatic history of
the Arctic Basin will be reconstructed by measuring the distribution within the
sediments and certain chemical characteristics of the exoskeleton of an abundant
zooplankton animal. Ostracodes secrete shells rapidly, thereby recording
instantaneous physical and chemical properties of the surrounding water. This
combined with frequent molts, definable magnesium-calcite compositions, and
sensitive analytical methods make them a prime candidate for recording
paleoceanography in cored sediments. Ostracode valves from sediments in piston
and box cores will be separated by washing over a sieve, identified, and
subjected to elemental and stable isotopic analysis. Calcium will be measured
using flame atomic absorption spectrophotometry while strontium and magnesium
will be quantified by graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrophotometry.
Approximately 1,000 such measurements will be made in an effort to reconstruct
deep Arctic Ocean paleocirculation and bottom water paleotemperatures, and to
relate these factors to paleoproductivity, dissolved oxygen, sea ice coverage,
and other parameters of the period from the last glacial maximum to the present.
***