* 9400566
* Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Research on Operators in        Hilbert Space
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Lawrence Fialkow, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1997
* USD 75,054.00

9400566 Fialkow The project involves work on several projects concerning
operators on Hilbert spaces. These problems involve the following topics: joint
hyponormality, especially k-hyponormality and weak k-hyponormality for weighted
shifts; related problems in the theory of moments, including the complex
truncated moment problem; majorization, factorization and invertible factor
theorems in the theory of C*-algebras. One aspect of this research concerns
structural and computational models for subnormal, k-hyponormal, and weakly
k-hyponormal operators, with emphasis on unilateral shifts. This study also
concerns multidimensional power moment problems, including the truncated complex
moment problem and the extension problem for positive moment matrices. Another
facet of this research concerns the description of the spectral picture of an
elementary operator acting on a prime C*-algebra. This research also concerns
solubility of the equation a = bx in a C*-algebra, including the case of
solubility with x invertible. Operator theory is an infinite dimensional version
of linear algebra and matrix theory. One of the important applications of linear
algebra is in solving a system of a finite number of linear equations. The
problem of solving operator equations can be considered as an attempt to solve a
system involving a very large or infinite number of equations. Part of this
project involves solving operator equations. Other portions of the project
involves using operator theory to solve classical moment problems. The basic
problem here is to determine a measure or mass distribution from various moments
of mass. It is important to note that this research will be conducted at an
undergraduate institution and will have significant impact in mathematics
education. ***