* 9400857
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Cultural Representations   of Paternity Among Poor, Unmarried Parents
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1995
* Michele Lamont, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 10/31/1995
* USD 7,500.00

9400857 Lamont This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral
Dissertation Research Program. The research will examine cultural
representations of paternity among poor, unmarried parents. Drawing on 60
interviews in New Jersey with never- married mothers and fathers (black and
white) with incomes at or below 125% of the poverty line, the study investigates
the categories into which they interpret the rights and responsibilities of
fatherhood. It also explores whether different representations of paternity can
be explained by the socio-demographic characteristics and cultural or structural
environments of respondents. This analysis will speak to such sociological
questions as: 1) What is the significance of paternity for the poor in
contemporary society? 2) Do never- married parents perceive legal fatherhood to
be culturally normative, or do they accept the mother-child dyad or the
matrifocal, extended family as equally viable cultural alternatives? 3) For
unmarried parents, does the recent increase in nonmarital childbearing symbolize
a cultural response to improving social conditions for women or the reproduction
of gender inequality within new family arrangement? %%% This research will
contribute to the sociology of the family, of gender roles, and of contemporary
urban culture. Given that about a quarter of all births in the United States now
occur outside of marriage, the research will also contribute to the knowledge
base upon which policy makers will decide the public response to changing social
conditions and problems. In addition to the scientific gains to be achieved by
the research, this award will materially assist a highly promising student in
completing research for the Ph.D. dissertation. Thus it contributes to the
future scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough training of the next
generation of social scientists. ***