* 9400710
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Immigrants and the New     York City Garment Industry
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1994,05/31/1996
* Herbert Gans, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/1996
* USD 7,420.00

9400710 Gans This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral
Dissertation Research Program. It is a study of women immigrants and the New
York City garment industry, employing comparative research on two types of
sewing shops: those of the Chinese who hire co-ethnics and those of the Koreans
who hire Latinos. This will make possible generalizations about the broader
categories of race, ethnicity, and gender, and how these categories relate to
the larger economic structure of the New York City economy. Participant
observation and interviews will be conducted to understand how different
immigrants gain jobs, why particular groups have access to certain jobs, and how
ethnicity may or may not be used as a resource. %%% This research will
contribute to the sociology of immigration, of ethnic groups, and of urban
careers. It addresses sociological theories of racial-economic adaptation, that
are based on concepts of economic restructuring, social networks, and ethnic
succession. In addition to the scientific gains to be achieved by the research,
this award will materially assist a highly promising student in completing
research for the Ph.D. dissertation. Thus it contributes to the future
scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough training of the next
generation of social scientists. ***