* 9400379
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,04/30/1999
* Steven Sibener, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ulrich Strom
* 04/30/1999
* USD 6,833,000.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University
of Chicago supports interactive research in four major groups covering a broad
area of condensed matter and materials science. Researchers in the group
concerned with surface dynamics seek to develop an improved molecular-level
understanding of interfacial phenomena over a range from relatively simple
atomic adsorbates to complex molecular systems. Investigators in the group
focused on disordered materials attempt to elucidate the means by which
macroscopic order can emerge from microscopic disorder. The group investigating
mesoscale structure and response addresses a broad class of technologically
important materials whose fundamental behavior is dominated by the physics and
chemistry of constituents at the mesoscopic length scale. The group of
researchers involved with the investigation of the macroscopic dynamics of
materials combines experiment, theory and computer simulation to explore
macroscopic motion within materials and moving phase boundaries. These problems
bear on such critical and diverse technological issues as processing of powders,
oil recovery, electrodeposition procedures, and oxidation of alloys. The MRSEC
also supports the development, operation and maintenance of shared experimental
facilities for materials research. It provides seed funding for exploratory
research and fosters research participation by undergraduates. The MRSEC is
associated with an educational outreach program with special emphasis on
attracting and keeping women and underrepresented minorities in science. The
MRSEC has an industrial visitors program and a newly formed industrial liaison
committee. There is an active research collaboration with Argonne National
Laboratory. The MRSEC currently involves 25 senior personnel, 10 postdoctoral
research associates, 8 technical staff members, 21 graduate students, and 10
undergraduates. The Chicago MRSEC is directed by Professor Leo Kad anoff.