* 9400239
* Dissertation Research:  Hohokam Ceramic Production,         Distribution and Consumption
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1996
* Paul Fish, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1996
* USD 11,997.00

9400239 Fish Under the direction of Dr. Paul Fish, Ms. Karen Harry will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She will employ both neutron activation
analysis and petrographic techniques to analyze potsherds collected at two
Hohokam archaeological sites located in Arizona. She will use field surveys to
locate clay sources and determine the trace element compositions of these as
well. On this basis it will be possible to relate ceramic product back to raw
material source. It will also be possible to examine the distribution of ceramic
types within each of the two sites and between them. Ms. Harry can then use
these data to reconstruct intra and intersettlement production, distribution and
consumption patterns and thus gain insight into economic and social
organization. The Marana and Los Robles settlement communities which form the
basis for this study were occupied by Hohokam peoples during the early Classic
period and date to between A.D. 1050-1300. The Hohokam are well known
archaeologically for the large irrigation systems they constructed which
permitted agriculture in low rainfall areas of the Arizona desert. They also
occupied large sites with impressive platform mounds. These attest to the
aggregation of large numbers of people and some form of centralized hierarchical
control. Archaeologists wish to understand how such centralized societies
develop and postulate that control and organization of trade may play a central
role. Ms. Harry will examine this question. Because ceramics played a vital role
in both subsistence and ritual, they provide an excellent insight into the
social and economic lives of these communities. This research is important for
several reasons. It will provide information of interest to many archaeologists.
It will shed new light on U.S. prehistory and assist in the training of a
promising young scientist. ***