* 9400069
* Chemical and Isotopic Tracers on the U.S/Canada             Arctic Ocean Section
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Jacqueline Grebmeier, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 05/31/1997
* USD 97,483.00

9400069 Cooper Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of the
Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is jointly
sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs.
The research will be centered around a unique and intensive, multidisciplinary
research expedition to parts of the Arctic Ocean that have never been
extensively studied. The 1994 U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section is a
collaborative effort with Canada that will involve approximately 60 scientists
on a Canadian and a U.S. icebreaker during summer 1994. NSF-funded projects will
focus on hydrography, biology, paleo-, and sea-ice studies. Data collected will
be amongst the first ever from several regions of the Arctic Ocean and will be
highly relevant to improving our understanding of how the Arctic is an indicator
of changing global climate conditions and how it affects the physical, chemical,
and biological features of the more temperate oceans and regions. This work will
identify trends in elemental and isotopic ratios of artificial radioactive
contaminants particularly iodine-129, technetium, and several transuranics.
Sources of these contaminants may be river-borne and associated with accidental
releases or fuel re-processing activities, or marine in origin and associated
with breached reactors, weapons, and/or disposed wastes. Although this work will
contribute to on-going assessments of radionuclide contamination of the Arctic
Ocean, the distributions of the radioisotopes chosen for study will also improve
understanding of Arctic Ocean circulation and its hydrologic cycle, particularly
the role of the major Siberian rivers in influencing physical, biological, and
chemical mixing processes. The chemical behavior of the radioisotopes selected
for study will permit a "fingerprint" identification of the provenance of
contaminants due to the variability in isotope or elemental ratios in each
potential source. The parallel use of other radioisotope, conservati ve tracer
(delta^18O and delta D), and biologically modified tracer distributions
(nutrients, dissolved oxygen, and by extension, NO and PO), will contribute to
defining particle transport and water mixing mechanisms, in addition to
describing the propagation patterns of contaminants. ***