* 9400263
* Controlling the Chaotic State in Ferromagnetic Response
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Philip Wigen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/1998
* USD 274,500.00

9400263 Wigen Technical abstract: Chaos is a complicated and often undesirable
behavior. The ability to control chaotic behavior is a special attribute that
may be beneficial to many applications. The chaotic attractor includes an
infinite number of unstable orbits. By applying a well defined perturbation to a
system variable it is possible to control the behavior of a chaotic system by
stabilizing one of these unstable orbits. By modifying the perturbation the
selected orbit may be varied permitting a variety of orbits that are not readily
available in a conventional linear system. It is proposed to utilize
perturbation of the magnetic field to control the chaotic behavior observed in
the ferromagnetic resonance signal. Non-technical abstract: The complex behavior
of a chaotic system is commonly known and widely recognized in many systems from
bridges and the weather to heart fibrillation and brain signals. In many systems
significant effort is made to eliminate the conditions that lead to this chaotic
behavior. However, with the recent evolution of "controlling chaos" it is
possible to put the system into one of a number of unstable behavioral patterns
that are present in a chaotic system. By applying an appropriate control signal
it is possible to stabilize these desired patterns. This behavior leads to an
increased flexibility in many systems giving rise to new applications and
environments. ***