* 9400145
* Social, Demographic and Health Consequences of Pastoral     Sedentarization in Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Elliot Fratkin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/1996
* USD 120,573.00

9400145 Fratkin This project is a multidisciplinary approach studying both the
human causes and consequences of changing land use patterns and food production
in arid northeastern Africa. Due to prolonged drought, population growth, and
political insecurity, formerly nomadic populations are settling in or near
growing towns, transforming traditional land use practices from low density
nomadic pastoralism to high density dry land and irrigation agriculture,
commercial ranching, or urban migration. It is not clear, however, what
consequences this sedentarization process is having on human well-being and the
ability of these marginal lands to sustain these populations. Land resources in
these regions are marginal with low rainfall and patchy productivity, while
human populations are rapidly expanding at rates of 3% annually. Similar
situations to that of northern Kenya is found in the semi-arid lands of the
Sahel, Mid East, and Central Asia. This study involves a cultural
anthropologist, demographer, and medical doctor, each of whom has extensive
experience in N. Kenya. They will compare six closely related but economically
distinct Rendille communities (pastoral, agro-pastoral, and irrigation
agricultural communities), to determine through empirical observation levels of
"well-being", defined in terms of nutritional and health indices of women and
children, demographic change (fertility, mortality, and morbidity), and socio-
economic status (levels of market integration, employment, land tenure, and
political security). The research is important because it is one of the few
projects that attempts to measure social and health consequences of changing
land use patterns in arid lands, and hopefully can act as a model for related
studies in other regions of the world.