* 9400304
* Dynamic Analysis and Control of Nonlinear Processes via     Nonlinear Transfer Functions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1998
* Ahmet Palazoglu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 04/30/1998
* USD 142,703.00

Abstract - Palazoglu - 9400304 The majority of chemical processes are inherently
nonlinear and the lack of analytical tools for nonlinear systems hampers efforts
to establish a comprehensive control paradigm, as has been done with the linear
systems. The lack of information regarding the behavior of nonlinear processes
results in unnecessarily limiting the region of safe operation; to overdesign in
an attempt to soften nonlinearities; or to design conservative control systems
such that an acceptable operation is maintained. Such engineering solutions may
yield suboptimal plant operations, and more economically favorable regimes may
be unnecessarily deemed unsafe or unreliable. The PI is developing a technique
for the representation of nonlinear dynamics, a parametrization of the solution
of nonlinear dynamic equations, and an analytical solution for the nonlinear
feedback control problem. The method is based on a particular operation for
nonlinearities that yields nonlinear transfer functions via Laplace-like
transformations. This permits the algebraic solution of nonlinear ODEs in the
transform domain and subsequent realization in the time domain, quite analogous
to linear systems analysis. Such a procedure yields an analytical solution for
the nonlinear ODEs. It also provides tools for manipulating nonlinear transfer
functions to construct and analyze nonlinear closed-loop control systems. This
analytical environment, supported by symbolic computations, has potential in
altering previous perceptions about nonlinear systems analysis and paves the way
for a new approach for nonlinear control and education.