* 9400600
* Certain C*-Algebras of Toeplitz Operators and Singular      Integral Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Jingbo Xia, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1997
* USD 40,000.00

9400600 Xia The investigation will examine the structure of C*-algebras
generated by Toeplitz operators and singular integral operators associated
within-dimensional flows. This class of C*-algebras includes many classical
examples. The investigation is particularly directed to the case where n is
greater than 1. In this case each algebra contains a chain of ideals that will
be analyzed carefully. These ideals will be used to compute K- groups, which are
important invariants for the classification of C*-algebras. The k-groups will
also be used to study the invertibility of systems of Toeplitz operators. In
this connection an attempt will be made to determine the stable rank of certain
commutator ideals. An analysis will be made of certain automorphisms of the
Toeplitz algebra on the unit circle which are induced by homeomorphisms of the
circle. This project investigates certain algebras generated by classical
operators that arise from the study of singular integral equations. These
equations can be traced back to applications in engineering and manufacturing
such as the equation of the airfoil and the stamping of metal plates. The
abstract problem here is the classification of these algebras using invariants.
The contributions will be to many fields of pure mathematics including ergodic
theory, analysis and geometry. ***