* 9400775
* Optimal Control of the Czochralski Crystallization Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Warren Seider, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/1998
* USD 290,000.00

9400775 Seider The award is for better control of the Czochralski
crystallization process so that larger diameter wafers of silicon and other
compound semiconductors can be grown with fewer defects. The effort will
concentrate on development of better reduced-order models which take into
account resistances across boundary layers. Sensors will also be developed to
measure temperatures at the crucible wall and to measure atomic oxygen
concentrations in the crystal. Finally, model-predictive controllers will be
developed to achieve better control of the crystal growth process. Experiments
will be conducted at the site of the industrial partner to validate the
researched refinements in modeling, sensor development, and controller
development. Improved control of the Czochralski crystallization process is
expected to lead to the ability to grow larger diameter crystals of silicon and
other compound semiconductor materials with fewer defects, which would be of
value to the semiconductor industry. Furthermore, the sensor developments are
expected to result in better understanding of the crystal growth process. The
reduced order model development work is expected to be of value in modeling a
variety of materials processing applications involving melt processing for
purposes of control.