* 9400780
* Nanofabricated Surfaces: Atomic Force Microscopy and Surface-Enhanced Laser Spectroscopy at Ultrahigh Vacuum and        Electrochemical Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1994,04/30/1997
* Richard Van Duyne, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* R. Kenneth Marcus
* 04/30/1997
* USD 283,000.00

This research project involves a systematic study of the microscopic mechanisms
of surface enhanced laser spectroscopies, including surface enhanced Raman,
hyper-Raman, second harmonic generation, and sum frequency generation
spectroscopy. Several methods of nanostructure preparation, combined with
scanning probe microscopic characterization of these structured surfaces, will
be used to probe the electromagnetic and chemical mechanisms of surface enhanced
laser spectroscopies. This work, supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program, will directly test present models of the surface enhancement
mechanism by fashioning surfaces which match the structures modeled in leading
theoretical descriptions of the effect. Contributions to the understanding of
the surface enhanced spectroscopy, as well as to the development and
characterization of nanostructured surfaces should result from this work. Impact
well beyond the use of this method for studies of roughened surfaces is
expected. Further development of the analytical methods of surface enhanced
laser spectroscopy relies on the development of a quantitative, predictive
explanation of the enhancement process. This research program will develop the
theoretical underpinning for this technique by a careful set of experiments
which rationally prepare surface structures which can be accurately
theoretically modeled. The insights gained from the comparison of measurements
on modelable surfaces should allow development of a quantitative theory. It is
expected that useful methods for the fabrication of materials with
nanostructured surfaces will also result.