* 9400782
* Mathematical Sciences: Singular Integrals and Parabolic     Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Steven Hofmann, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9400782 Hofmann This award supports mathematical research on problems in
singular integral theory and partial differential equations which arise in
connection with boundary value problems for parabolic equations on non-smooth
domains, whose boundaries are allowed to vary with time. The problems are
motivated in part by physical considerations, such as the expansion and
contraction or otherwise changing of shape of materials over time, and in part
by mathematical considerations. The time-varying domains which one would like to
ultimately treat are in a natural sense theparabolic analogues of the Lipschitz
domains which have played a prominent role in the elliptic theory in recent
years. The main goal of the project is to solve initial boundary values problems
in this context by means of layer potentials. Among the tools which are likely
to be employed or studied are the Rellich identities, perturbation techniques,
caloric measure estimates, analysis of multilinear and nonlinear singular
integrals and the circle of ideas connected with theory of rough singular
integrals. Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematicalmodeling
of the physical world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much to
create the equations as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative
information about the solutions. This may include answers to questions about
uniqueness, smoothness and growth. In addition, analysis often develops methods
for approximation of solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these
approximations. Among the modern approaches to the study of these equations is
the application of singular integrals and the associated powerful techniques of
harmonic analysis. ***