* 9400865
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:                             Streetwise versus Schoolwise:  The Attitudes of Urban and   Inner City Males Towards Schooling
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Aage Sorensen, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/1995
* USD 5,100.00

9400865 Sorensen This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral
Dissertation Research program. It is a study of the conflict between school
values and street values experienced by young black inner-city males. A
combination of intensive interviews and participant observation will be carried
out among young black males in Cambridge, MA, with the student researcher
assisted by research assistants drawn from high school students in the community
being studied. These qualitative methods will be used to assess the nature and
extent of the conflict between values necessary for survival in inner-city
streets and values needed to succeed in school. Much previous research on the
academic achievement problems of inner city and minority youths has utilized
quantitative data. Such data do not help us understand the values that get
attached to schooling in the minds of such youths and how those values are
formed. By focusing directly on the conflicting values experienced by young
black males in one large city, this project will help us understand the cultural
barriers to academic achievement by such youths and may help yield clues about
how such barriers can be overcome. In addition to the scientific gains to be
achieved by the research, this award will materially assist a highly promising
student in completing research for the Ph. D. dissertation. Thus it contributes
to the future scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough training of the
next generation of social scientists. ***