* 9400128
* Dissertation Research:  A Survey of Maritime Cultural       Landscape in South Argyll
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Bernard Wailes, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1996
* USD 12,000.00

Wailes Under the direction of Dr. Bernard Wailes, Ms. Elizabeth Ragan will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She and numerous volunteer
assistants will conduct an archaeological survey of the South Argyll coastline
of Scotland to search for prehistoric seaports. Because the area is extremely
large, she will limit her work by focussing on areas with the greatest natural
potential to serve this function. These will then be walked over and all
cultural remains, both structural and artifactural, will be recorded.
Collections will be made of cultural material exposed on the surface and limited
excavation will be conducted where concentrations of materials are located.
These materials will then be analyzed to determine both cultural affiliation and
age. Archaeologists wish to understand how state level societies arise, and on
the basis of work done to date, it is known that the State of Scotland appeared
ca. the 9th century AD. It was then that groups from the South Argyll region
extended their control over the region coincident with Scotland today and
archaeologists wish to understand what underlying factors led to this process.
The hope is that the conclusions drawn here can be applied to other temperate
regions in Europe. It has been hypothesized that trade played a major role in
the consolidation of power and, given the extreme difficulty in overland travel
in this region, water travel was likely the primary mode of transport. Although
an elegant model has been developed, it is difficult to test because very little
is known about coastal settlement at this time. Through her survey, Ms. Ragan
wishes to collect the data necessary to address this issue. This research is
important for several reasons. It will shed new light on the development of
state level societies. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists
and assist in the training of a promising young scientist.