* 9400218
* Roles of Heterotrophic Bacteria and Protists in the Arctic  Ocean Carbon Cycle
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Barry Sherr, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 10/31/1996
* USD 252,346.00

9400218 Sherr Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of the
Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is jointly
sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs.
The research will be centered around a unique and intensive, multidisciplinary
research expedition to parts of the Arctic Ocean that have never been
extensively studied. The 1994 U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section is a
collaborative effort with Canada that will involve approximately 60 scientists
on a Canadian and a U.S. icebreaker during summer 1994. NSF-funded projects will
focus on hydrography, biology, paleo-, and sea-ice studies. Data collected will
be amongst the first ever from several regions of the Arctic Ocean and will be
highly relevant to improving our understanding of how the Arctic is an indicator
of changing global climate conditions and how it affects the physical, chemical,
and biological features of the more temperate oceans and regions. This
collaborative research effort between investigators at Oregon State University
and the University of Delaware represents a critical component of the AOS
biology program. Research will measure microzooplankton abundances, biomass, and
size distributions, together with estimates of their grazing on phytoplankton
and other zooplankton. Work will focus on heterotrophic bacteria and protists in
the water column and sea ice of the Arctic Ocean. Present information is sparse
on the abundance and activity of these microbes and about their influence on
primary production. The investigators will quantify the distribution of numbers,
biomass, and productivity of bacteria and compare these parameters to the in
situ concentrations of labile organic substrates (dissolved free + combined
amino acids and sugars); quantify the abundance, size frequency distribution,
and biomass of phagotrophic protists in the nano- and microplankton size
classes; and measure the grazing impact of protists on bacteria and on algal
cells . Incubation experiments will also be performed where substrate
concentrations and temperatures are varied to ascertain the effect on
heterotrophic bacterial growth. Understanding these processes will help resolve
role heterotrophic and autotrophic microbes' influence on the Arctic carbon
cycle. ***