* 9400023
* Mathematical Sciences: Computing Science and Statistics; Symposium on the Interface Theme; Research Triangle Park, N.C.; June 15-18, 1994
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1995
* John Sall, Interface Foundation of North America Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sallie Keller-McNulty
* 05/31/1995
* USD 15,000.00

9400023 Sall The Interface Conference was designed to bring together
professionals from different fields that share a need for better statistical
computing methods. Originally focused on the interface with numerical analysis
and computer science, in more recent years it has been involved with a broad
range of scientific and technical areas, particularly hot areas such as
biotechnology and quality engineering. Computing is currently a very active area
in the statistics profession as desktop computing power has made a huge advance
in the last 5 years. For example, Bayesian statistics used to be mostly theory
and little practice, because it was saddled with difficult numerical integration
issues. Today, the emergence of Monte Carlo methods coupled with fast machines
has made the techniques suddenly practical. Researchers are asking for the
distribution of estimates, rather than just approximate standard errors, and a
number of resampling-based methods have emerged to provide those answers. Exact
significance levels are replacing approximate ones. Smooth curves are replacing
straight line fits. Statistical graphics is helping researchers make
discoveries. The Interface Conference will have the specialized sessions on the
state-of-the-art, and also a number of tutorial sessions and short courses to
help bring the new technology to a general technical audience. The Interface
conference is the one annual conference dedicated to statistical computing
issues. Statistical computing has emerged as a particularly important field in
the last few years because the arrival of cheap and fast desktop computers has
opened up a lot of new opportunities that were only dreamed of a few years ago.
A generation ago, the best statisticians could do with limited computing
resources was to get a statistic if the data was organized a certain way, and
look that statistic up in a table. Then computing and numerical techniques
improved enough to handle more general models and get significance levels. Now
we have progressed to where we can analyze very general models that require
fewer assumptions, have a more flexible functional form, provide details on the
distribution of the estimates in the model, use interactive exploratory
techniques to make new discoveries, and present the results with graphical
visualization techniques. With further refinements in statistical computing
tools, the statistical community has a chance to really serve the scientific and
technical world much better at a time when the Quality Movement, the
Biotechnology Revolution, and the Environmental mandate has made statistics and
experimentation more critically important. The Interface conference provides the
forum for presentation and discussion of the latest breakthroughs in statisical
computing.