* 9400477
* Isolation and Characterization of Arabidopsis thaliana GenesEncoding Protein Serine/Threonine Phosphatase Regulatory    Subunits.
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/1993,04/30/1995
* Sabine Rundle, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 04/30/1995
* USD 40,000.00

9499477 Rundle In the last decade serine/threonine protein phosphatases (PP)
have emerged as important regulators of eukaryotic cell metabolism and
development. PP control essential cellular functions such as the completion of
mitosis and the regulation of enzyme activity in pathways as diverse as glycogen
metabolism (in animal cells) and sucrose biosynthesis (in photosynthetic plant
cells). PP activity is controlled by different regulatory subunits (RS). These
subunits alter both the specificity and activity of the enzyme. This research
proposal outlines strategies for detecting RS of PP of plants. To date only one
study on this subject has been reported. The goal of this research is to use a
molecular cloning approach to detect the presence of plant PP RS. Three
different strategies will be used to isolate cDNA sequences encoding RS from
animal systems to detect and isolate RS genes of plants. Second, the polymerase
chain reaction will be used to amplify RS DNA sequences from A. thaliana genomic
DNA. Third, interaction cloning will be used to detect proteins that interact
with the catalytic subunit of PP. Characterization of the PP RS isolated by
these methods will provide important first hints concerning factors that control
plant PP. This work will also have a significant impact on the emerging field of
study concerning protein phosphorylation- controlled events in plant cells. %%%
Dr. Sabine Rundle has been the holder of an NSF Post-doctoral Research
Fellowship in Plant Biology for the past two years. She has recently accepted
her first tenure-track faculty position at Western Carolina University where she
will pursue research on the role of certain enzymes, serine/threonine protein
phosphatases in regulating cellular functions in higher plants. This award will
provide a starter grant for support of her research program. The initial goals
of this research are to detect and isolate genes for the components of this type
of enzyme from the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. The results of this line
of research ultimately will contribute to our understanding of fundamental
regulatory events in plant cellular function. ***