* 9400888
* Flora of Mount Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1999
* John Beaman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 07/31/1999
* USD 193,075.00

9400888 Beaman Taxonomic databases accessible by international networks are
being developed for all vascular plants in the flora of Mount Kinabalu in the
Malaysian state of Sabah in northern Borneo. The specimen database now includes
more than 20,000 specimens that have been examined by the PI. Kinabalu has been
said to have the richest flora in the world. This contention is supported by a
database that includes some 4,500 species. Much of the flora is threatened with
imminent destruction, but only about 30% of it has thus far been documented in
enumerations by the PI and collaborators. An enumeration will be produced of the
remaining 70% of the flora, about 3,150 species. The enumeration will cite type
specimens and synonyms, characterize the habit, habitat and elevational
distribution of each species, and list specimens examined. An index will be
provided to collections cited. The databases will contribute to international
efforts to preserve endangered species and exceptionally rich ad unique plant
communities. A geographical information system (GIS) will be used to produce a
map of Mount Kinabalu that documents locations where all specimens have been
collected and shows the names of streams, rivers, other landforms, and
settlements. Satellite imagery and global positioning system (GPS) data will
make it possible to show the locations of major and minor roads. The imagery
will also be used to interpret the occurrence of ultramafic substrates,
vegetation types, primary and secondary forests and vegetation associated with
human activites. Surface modeling techniques will be used to predict where taxa
occur in unexplored areas, based on the topographic and edaphic characteristics
of where they are known to occur. Biogeographic relationships among ultramafic
areas on Mount Kinabalu and other ultramafic outcrops in Boreno will be analyzed
in the context of phylogenetic relationships among ultramafic and non-ultramafic
taxa. The GIS will also facilitate integrating taxonomic, ethno botanical and
phytochemical databases into Kinabalu Park activities and monitoring aspects
such as ecotourism development and illegal harvesting activities. Mount Kinabalu
is one of the youngest mountains in the world, and its flora includes large
numbers of closely related species that appear to be neo-endemics. A major
reason for the species-rich flora appears related to special edaphic conditions
(ultramafic substrates), frequently occurring droughts that result in selection
of well-adapted genotypes, and small plant populations with limited gene flow
because of the precipitous topography. Three genera (Dendrochilum, Orchidaceae;
Elatostema, Urticacea; Polyosma, Grossulariaceae) will be analyzed by cladistic
and GIS techniques in an effort to trace evolutionary lineages in groups of
closely related species that may have undergone recent speciation, which may be
correlated with local edaphic and topographic features. The Dendrochilum data
set will be obtained from sequence analysis of the nuclear 18-26S rDNA ITS
region. An ethnobotanical survey, closely linked to the floristic inventory, is
being made to determine how the local Dusun people classify and use the flora.
Dusun collaborators are making extensive collections of useful plants in their
communities and are entering ethnobotanical information in a computerized
database housed at Kinabalu Park headquarters. This project is helping
researchers and Park personnel to identify culturally significant plant
resources and to detect which useful species are most vulnerable to over-
harvesting or habitat destruction. In addition, the survey is strengthening the
link between the Park and local communities, enriching interpretive programs
that serve the 200,000 annual visitors to the Park, and facilitating assessment
of the subsistence and commercial value of native plants. The project will serve
as a basis for Ph.D. dissertations by two Malaysian graduate students, one
botanical and concerning the floristics and ecology of a presently une xplored
region of Mount Kinabalu, the other applying GIS approaches to a study of the
small mammal fauna of the mountain. Two American graduate students will prepare
Ph.D. dissertation concerning biogeography, evolution, and speciation in the
flora. Another American student will base his masters thesis in geography on the
use of a Landsat image for determining occurrence of ultramafic substrates that
appear to have great biological significance.