* 9400488
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,04/30/1999
* Thomas Russell, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ulrich Strom
* 04/30/1999
* USD 5,603,000.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University
of Massachusetts at Amherst supports interactive research in three major groups
with emphasis on polymeric and bimolecular materials. Researchers in the group
investigating polymers in restricted geometries seek to understand the behavior
of polymers at interfaces and in porous media. This work is motivated by the
critical role of interfacial phenomena in determining the performance of
advanced materials. The group focusing on biomolecular materials aims to develop
and analyze well-defined artificial proteins and biodegradable bacterial storage
polyesters. The group investigating advanced polyolefins and blends proposes to
develop new synthesis and processing routes to high performance materials based
on simple olefins such as ethylene and propylene. This particular work is
motivated by the availability of a new generation of catalysts that enables
petroleum feedstocks to be converted directly into high performance materials.
The MRSEC supports the development, operation and maintenance of shared
experimental facilities for materials research. It provides seed funding for
exploratory research and fosters research participation by undergraduates. The
MRSEC is associated with an educational outreach program with special emphasis
on attracting and keeping women and underrepresented minorities in science. The
Center for UMass-Industry Research on Polymers (CUMIRP) provides industrial
liaison. The MRSEC currently involves 24 senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral
research associates, 3 technical staff members, 21 graduate students, and 12
undergraduates. The MRSEC at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst is
directed by Professor David A. Tirrell.