* 9400718
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Emergence of           Cooperation in Exchange Networks
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Barry Markovsky, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/1995
* USD 7,437.00

9400718 Markovsky This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral
Dissertation Research Program. It is an experimental laboratory study of the
emergence of cooperation in exchange networks. Previous research has focused on
positional power, and on how those actors in high power positions can gain
resource advantages despite the actions of other actors in the network. However,
power advantages in some networks require a degree of coordination between
actors in different network positions in order to be realized. Some network
structures induce this coordination; other inhibit it. The present research
will: 1) test a new theoretical extension of network exchange theory based on
this idea of interactive power; 2) investigate the effects of structural
variations and levels of communication on the emergence of cooperation between
self interested actors in exchange networks, and 3) test a measure of relational
power that shows the temporary effects on power of the pattern of use of
different relations in a network. %%% This experiment contributes to structural
social psychology, developing and testing additions to a widely-accepted
theoretical approach. Although the research is abstract, the theoretical
principles are believed to apply to work groups, families, and decision-making
bureaucracies, so scientific advances may contribute indirectly to improvements
in administrative and management techniques. In addition to the scientific gains
to be achieved by the research, this award will materially assist a highly
promising student in completing research for the Ph.D. dissertation. Thus it
contributes to the future scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough
training of the next generation of social scientists. ***