* 9400895
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Multiplying Identities:    Consolidation and Fragmentation in San Francisco, 1950-1993
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1995
* Ann Swidler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/1995
* USD 5,474.00

9400895 Swidler This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral
Dissertation Research program. It is a study of organizational change and
differentiation. Detailed information will be collected on every known
organization that has arisen in the gay and lesbian community of San Francisco
between 1950 and 1993, with the total number of organizations studied expected
to approach 2000. The changing ways in which these organizations have expressed
their identities over this period will be studied qualitatively. In addition,
quantitative tests will be carried out on predictions drawn from competing
theories of organization, particularly ones concerning trends toward
organizational homogenization versus diversification over time. This project
will contribute to several different fields within sociology. Through its focus
on organizational identity formation, this research will enlighten prevailing
work within cultural sociology and the study of social movements, fields which
deal with the processes by which low status or deviant groups struggle to gain
acceptance and power. It will also speak to important issues in organizational
sociology, since the increasing diversity of organizations over time appears to
contradict prevailing expectations that trends toward organizational
homogenization should dominate. In addition to the scientific gains to be
achieved by the research, this award will materially assist a highly promising
student in completing research for the Ph. D. dissertation. Thus it contributes
to the future scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough training of the
next generation of social scientists. ***