* 9400091
* Probability and Statistics for Secondary Schools--A ComputerLearning Environment and Curriculum
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* William Finzer, Key Curriculum Press
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1996
* USD 298,257.00

9400091 Finzer This project aims to develop a computer learning environment and
curriculum materials for use in teaching data analysis and statistics at the
high school level. The proposed curriculum materials will be usable in a
semester-long course, as substantial units within other mathematics and science
courses, and as skill-focused components of other courses. This project will
bring learning experiences to secondary school classrooms that intimately
involve students with concepts and technologies they need to become informed and
productive participants in the information age. The software, provisionally
named StochasticsLab, is a conceptually unified platform for data gathering and
exploration, simulation, and statistical analysis. The innovative design
supports the latest understanding about how children learn stochastic ideas,
including the importance of user-constructed measures, the problems and
potentials associated with categorical variables, and the need to feed
simulation data into data analysis tools. It is based from the ground up on net-
worked collaboration, access to large datasets, and visual explanation of how
things work. While the software is expected to enhance existing courses, the
curriculum materials will require the presence of computers and software. In
this project, the software is the major innovation. ***