* 9400570
* Compound Semiconductor Electrodeposition by Electrochemical Atomic Layer Epitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* John Stickney, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/1997
* USD 234,596.00

9400570 Stickney Fundamental research studies to investigate thin-layer
electrochemical atomic layer epitaxy(ECALE) of compound semiconductor materials
will be conducted. In ECALE the substrate's electrochemical potential is used to
control the deposition process. The phenomenon of underpotential deposition,
whereby an atomic layer of an element forms at an electrochemical potential
lower than that needed to deposit the element on itself, is exploited and used
to deposit compound semiconductor materials atomic layer by layer. Each
deposition cycle consists of a sequence involving solution introduction,
potential changes, and rinsing. The current research effort involves detailed
studies to determine and assess the mechanism of the process through studies of
the dependence of deposit composition and structure on the individual steps in
the cycle. Sophisticated surface science tools are used to follow surface
coverages, composition and stoichiometry. Crystallographic structure,
orientation, and quality of electrodeposited films as well as luminescent
properties of the films are also routinely characterized. %%% Electrodeposition
methodologies offer new pathways to the synthesis and processing of compound
semiconductors used in applications such as solar cells, telecommunications, and
computing, and provide several potential advantages over existing technologies
such as lower temperature deposition, and lower cost processing because of the
known capabilities to scale electrochemical processes to large areas once the
underlying fundamental parameters have been identified and understood. ***