* 9400424
* Characterization of the Repertoire of Nuclear Protein       Phosphatases
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1995
* Brian Wadzinski, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 05/31/1995
* USD 35,000.00

9400424 Wadzinski Normal signal transduction from the cell surface traversing
the cytoplasm and to the nucleus in response to an external stimulus requires
pathways which are acutely regulated by the phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation of specific proteins. Activation of most cell-surface
receptors initially results in the generation of second messenger or stimulation
of a protein tyrosine kinase. This signal, however, is rapidly converted via a
protein kinase network into activated protein serine/threonine kinases. Many of
these kinases have been studied extensively, but much less attention has been
given to the reverse reaction catalyzed by specific serine/threonine (ser/thr)
protein phosphatases (PP). Furthermore, the majority of studies of these signal
transduction pathways studies have focused on cytoplasmic events even though the
concentration of phospho-proteins in the nucleus is thought to be much higher
than in the cytosol. The importance of protein phosphatases, especially nuclear
protein phosphatases, in the control of cell phenotype, growth and
differentiation is just now being appreciated. The long term goals of this
research are to define the subcellular distribution of phosphatases,
characterize specific nuclear phosphatases, identify specific nuclear
phosphatase substrates, define the regulation of protein phosphatases, and to
define regulatory and effector sites of protein phosphatase catalytic subunits
using a mutagenesis approach. %%% This is a starter grant to help set up the
laboratory and launch the independent career of a promising new investigator
who, for the past two years, has been supported by an NSF Post-Doctoral
Fellowship. The overall goal of his research is to study the function and
regulation of certain enzymes, called protein phosphatases, in signal
transduction pathways of cells. The long term results of this research will
contribute to our fundamental understanding of the regulation of cellular
function. ***