* 9400516
* GEM:  Determination of the Boundary Conditions on the       Ionospheric Electronic Potentials
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Daniel Weimer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Odile de la Beaujardiere
* 07/31/1995
* USD 49,936.00

The ultimate objective of the proposed research is to develop an improved model
of the ionospheric electric potentials in the polar cap. The initial step will
be to determine the locations of the convection boundaries, and how the electric
potential is distributed around the perimeter of the convection/electric field
reversal boundaries under different orientations of the IMF and two categories
of geomagnetic activity. Solving this problem is perceived to be the most
critical step towards the development of a better model of ionospheric plasma
convection. Measurements from the Vector Electric Field Instrument on DE-2 will
be used to obtain a data base of boundary locations and electric potentials
around the boundaries. The data will be sorted according to IMF orientation and
substorm activity, then an innovative but proven method of fitting the data will
be used to determine the locations of the convection boundaries and potential
distribution as a function of magnetic local time. These measurements will next
be used as the initial boundary conditions for numerical calculations, to
produce reasonable models of ionospheric electric potentials. The results of
this project will be needed to check the results of the GEM Program's global
geospace general circulation model (GGCM), and could be useful in the
development of the GGCM code. The proposed research will also help to obtain the
objectives of the GEM program's substorm campaign.