* 9400157
* Special Project:  ACM Study on Cryptography and Public      Policy
* CSE,EIA
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1995
* Stephen Kent, Association Computing Machinery
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 04/30/1995
* USD 59,290.00

9400157 Kent The proposed project is in response to the SKIPJACK initiative
announced by the White House on April 19, 1993. The initiative involves both a
chip for encryption (CLIPPER), to be incorporated into all telecommunications
equipment, and a key-escrow scheme to ensure privacy of users. The initiative
raises a number of serious public policy issues. This award is to provide funds
for convening a panel to explore a number of topics under the general rubric of
cryptography and public policy, as a service both to ACM members and to the
public at large. In particular, the "Clipper proposal" and the current export
control policy applied to cryptography will be analyzed with regard to their
effectiveness, impact on the global competitiveness of U.S. industry, and
implications for personal privacy. The panel will consist of the chair (the
P.I.), an additional seven members, and a staff member, and will prepare a
report in six months. The rationale provided for the use of the SKIPJACK
algorithm and the associated key escrow scheme, as a Federal Information
Processing Standard (FIPS), will be examined in detail. The panel will explore
the question "What must happen for this initiative to succeed and what might
cause it to fail?" The panel will also examine issues related to trade, privacy,
and technology development. ***