* 9400522
* International Advanced Robotics Programme: 2nd Workshop on  Mobile Robotics for Subsea Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1995
* Robert McGhee, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Norman Caplan
* 06/30/1995
* USD 60,180.00

9400522 Lee This four-day workshop on mobile subsea robots will be concerned
primarily with complete working systems or subsystems and will emphasize
experimental results. Participation will be by invitation only on the basis of
extended abstracts or complete papers. Participant will be selected by an
international Program Committee composed of leading experts in the field. A
maximum of twenty-five papers will be selected for presentation and inclusion in
the workshop proceedings. An IARP forum meeting will be held preceding the
workshop. Topics to be addressed in the workshop include: 1) system
architecture, 2) modeling, simulation, and display of operational environments,
3) task and mission planning and execution, 4) teleoperation and communication,
5) sensing and control, and 6) actuators, propulsion, and structures. In the
context of this workshop, the term robot will be taken to mean unmanned
computer-controlled vehicles operated under human supervision as well as
completely autonomous systems. The term mobile refers to a system able to move
from a base to a work site using its own propulsion system. With this
definition, the topic of this conference excludes fixed-base manipulators or
sensory packages and also excludes simple manually-controlled remotely operated
vehicles.