* 9400199
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  How Marine Organisms     Adapt to Low Salinity Habitats
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Susan Brawley, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1997
* USD 37,500.00

9400199 Brawley This three-year award supports U.S.-Sweden cooperative research
in marine biology. Researchers, undergraduates and graduate students at the
University of Maine, Stockholm University and University of Umea will conduct
field and laboratory studies on how marine organisms adapt to and invade
freshwater habitats over evolutionary time scales. By studying organisms in low-
salinity habitats, the investigators propose to extend their findings to
freshwater habitats. The Baltic Sea is an ideal site because it is the largest
body of brackish water on Earth and has an extensive and well-known post-glacial
history. Fucus vesiculosus, a fucoid algae found in abundance in the Baltic, is
the focus of the study. It has adapted gradually to brackish waters and serves
as an important spawning and nursery ground for marine organisms including some
economically important fish. The project takes advantage of complementary
expertise of U.S. investigator, Susan Brawley, and her Swedish counterparts,
Lena Kautsky and Goran Samuelsson. Dr. Brawley brings to this collaboration
expertise in biology, physiology and genetics of seaweeds. This is complemented
by Swedish knowledge in ecology and ecotoxicology. The research will advance
understanding of the geographical distribution, speciation and evolution of
marine seaweeds, particularly a species which is currently threatened by
pollution. ***