* 9400123
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research:  Biophysical and     Genetic Studies of Flavoprotein Peroxide and Disulfide      Reductases
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* H. Alexander Claiborne, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 07/31/1997
* USD 32,875.00

9400123 Claiborne This award supports Professor Alexander Claiborne, a
postdoctoral associate, and a graduate student, all from Wake Forest University,
to collaborate with three complementary research groups in the Department of
Biochemistry at Wageningen Agricultural University in the Netherlands. They will
carry out biophysical and structural studies on several flavoproteins from
Streptococcus bacteria, using state of the art nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
and time resolved fluorescence techniques. They will also carry out experiments
to gain understanding of the structure and genetics of two related lipoamide
dehydrogenases. The U.S. group has developed extensive experience working with
the enzymes in this medically relevant system. The Dutch investigators have
great expertise and superb facilities for biophysical and genetic approaches to
studying flavoprotein structure and function. The Wake Forest group has
excellent complementary facilities, but they will obtain particular benefit from
free access to the high field NMR equipment at Wageningen. Additional
interaction with the Netherlands Institute for Dairy Research will strengthen
the understanding of the genetics and physiology of streptococcal oxidative
metabolism. Streptococcus has a unique defence against the leukocyte- mediated
phagocytosis of bacteria, which is dependent upon destruction of hydrogen
peroxide. The hydrogenase and peroxidase enzymes being studied by Dr. Claiborne
and his group control that defence. Preliminary studies and substantial advance
planning with these Dutch experts have laid a promising foundation for
collaborative research on this important system. The Dutch participants are
heavily involved in two European scientific networks supported by the European
Union. Their U.S. collaborators will also benefit from links with these other
European experts. ***