* 9400577
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Approximation Theory and  Orthogonal Polynomials
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Paul Nevai, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1997
* USD 123,000.00

940577 Nevai This project is concerned with mathematical research in
approximation theory, orthogonal polynomials and related areas of analysis. The
work involves extremal problems, ordinary and generalized polynomial
inequalities, difference and differential equations, spectral theory of real,
complex and matrix-valued tridiag gonal (Jacobi) and banded matrices, Toeplitz
and Hankel and Hilbert space operators. Work will also continue on the
development of software directed at analyzing the numerical aspects of
orthogonal polynomials. Specifics of the research include investigations into
conditions on assuring boundedness for solutions of homogeneous and
nonhomogeneous perturbations oflinear difference equations in terms of their
unperturbed counterparts. The ratio and comparative asymptotics of extremal
problems involving weighted best approximation of monomials by lower degree
polynomials will be taken up. Efforts to understand the connection between a
Jacobi matrix and its spectral measure and its analogues on the unit circle will
also be made. Work will be done extending recent results on the asymptotic
behavior of Christoffel functions to measures in the complex plane and on
generalized polynomials and their suitability as means of approximation.
Approximation theory and especially the theory of orthogonal polynomials has
fruitful connections with many branches of mathematics such as differential
equations, operator theory, numerical integration, continued fractions and
control theory, to name a few. These subjects have received strong impulses from
the theory of orthogonal polynomials in the past and this process continues with
increasing vigor. ***