* 9400332
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Technology         Strategies for Project Integration
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Clyde Tatum, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1995
* USD 24,914.00

9400332 Tatum This award supports Professor C. B. Tatum of the Center for
Integrated Facility Engineering (CIFE) of Stanford University to collaborate
with Professor H. R. Schalcher and others of the Center for Integrated Planning
in Construction (CIPCON) of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich.
Professor Tatum is a recognized leader in the evaluation, understanding and
modeling of innovation and the introduction of new technology in construction
engineering. The Swiss group recently began a major research project to improve
construction project performance through integrated planning and communication
in the building process. They are testing this on a major commercial complex
planned for construction in Switzerland. The collaboration provides Dr. Tatum a
unique opportunity to extend and refine technologies and organization structures
for implementing new technology developed at CIFE by applying them to the CIPCON
project. A major barrier to improved performance in construction projects is
fragmentation of activities by functional specialists over the various stages of
the project. Advanced information technology can assist in meeting this major
challenge, but the process of implementing such technology is poorly understood
and the effort is frequently unsuccessful. This project will increase
understanding of approaches for effective use of new technology to improve
project performance in the vital construction industry. The U.S. has given
substantial attention to Japanese research and relatively little to European
work. In this area where European groups are world leaders, Dr. Tatum's
participation will provide valuable insight into the European methods for
innovation and the introduction of new technologies in their construction
industry. ***