* 9400628
* Preliminary Research on Common-Code Spread-Spectrum         Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Robert Scholtz, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Aubrey M. Bush
* 06/30/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9400628 Scholtz Spread spectrum (SS) communications, once a military approach to
jam-tolerant modulation design, is now being considered seriously for commercial
purposes. The typical military design, using a form of SS modulation called
code-division multiple access (CDMA), requires that each multiple access channel
be assigned a distinct spreading code that makes a user's transmission look like
wide-band noise to a receiver attempting to listen to another user's
transmission. This noise, called multiple access noise, is generated in the
receiver's correlator, and is related to the cross correlation properties of the
signals employed by different users. It is a primary limitation to the multiple
access system's capacity. Recently research has been directed toward a common
code multiple access (CCMA) system in which all of the users employ the same
wideband noise like carrier which is repeated every baud interval. Signals are
separated at the receiver simply by their arrival times, because wide bandwidth
signals have inherently a high time of arrival resolution capability. Hence two
signals that are present at the same time do not catastrophically interfere
(collide) with each other, unless their baud clocks are aligned to within the
reciprocal of the common wideband carrier's bandwidth. If matched filter
(correlation) reception is used in this environment ,then the system suffers
degradation caused by both multiple access noise and collisions. In contrast to
matched filter reception, inverse filter reception nearly eliminates multiple
access noise in the receiver at the cost of a small delay (a few baud times) in
the receiver. Inverse filters have been developed primarily for RADAR
applications. One recent paper has proposed common code modulation with inverse
filtering as a receiver. The objective of this project is to determine if CCMA
systems with inverse filtering as a receiver component are competitive with or
superior to traditional CDMA syst ems. Particular attention will be given to:
(a) the tradeoff between the residual multiple access noise and processing delay
in an inverse filter receiver, (b) signal design optimization, (c) the effects
of multipath and impulsive noise on common code receiver design and system
capacity, and (d) approaches to hybridizing CDMA matched filter systems with
common code inverse filter systems to obtain a system that has the stronger
points of each modulation. Potential payoffs include increased system capacity
because of multiple access noise elimination, reduced power control
requirements, and simpler central receivers, all in a system architecture with
complexity comparable to current designs. If the payoffs turn to be real, a new
paradigm for multiple access design will result. ***