* 9400072
* Construction of a 500-MHz REDOR NMR Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Jacob Schaefer, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1998
* USD 1,042,191.00

We propose to build an 11.75-T. 500-MHz rotational-echo double-resonance (REDOR)
spectrometer for solid-state 15N NMR experiments on proteins and protein
complexes. REDOR NMR is well suited to the characterization of binding sites of
uniformly 15N-labeled, freeze-quenched, lyophilized, non- crystallizeable
protein complexes. In a single experiment, REDOR measures accurate, long-range
distances from 31P, 19F, or 13C labels in substrates and inhibitors to both
sidechain nitrogens (Arg, His, and Lys signals are always well separated) and
backbone peptide nitrogens (REDOR difference signals from the peptide backbone
are sometimes resolved). Using these distances as constraints to molecular
dynamics simulations, plausible structures for protein binding sites can be
determined. To enhance the resolution, sensitivity, and selectivity of the 15N
experiment, we propose to build a solid-state NMR spectrometer specifically
designed for 15N REDOR. The spectrometer will feature four-channel transmission-
line probes tuned for 1H-19F-31C-15N. All rare- spin channels will permit
observation with more than 100-kHz proton decoupling, including the 19F channel.
Small- diameter coils will provide good filing factors for 100-kD protein
samples as small as 20 mg. Quantitative 50-MHz 15N NMR can be performed with
standard magic-angle spinning (5-8 kHz spinning speeds). High-sensitivity, high-
efficiency, high-power transmission lines require big pipes. We plan to use a 2
1/2-inch outer conductor and a 3/4-inch inner conductor for the transmission
line. This means that we need to build the spectrometer around a wide-bore
magnet. Robert McKay, the inventor of the transmission-line, multi- frequency,
high-power, high-sensitivity probe for solids NMR, will design and build the
probes and the spectrometer. This 500-MHz REDOR NMR spectrometer will be the
only one of its kind in the world. It will be used to provide answers to a
variety of important scientific (and practical) quest ions in the biological
sciences: the structures of big, non-crystallizeable protein complexes; the
architecture of cell walls, the mechanism of cell surface cell-cell, and DNA-
protein recognition; and the structure and dynamics of membrane proteins.