* 9400716
* Reorientational Dynamics of Dipolar Relaxations in Reactive Polymers
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Jovan Mijovic, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 09/30/1997
* USD 192,900.00

Mijovic This research is on molecular and phenomenological aspects of dielectric
properties of reactive systems in the frequency domain of the dipole relaxation
process. The work concerns both monofunctional (non-polymer forming reactants)
and multifunctional or polymer forming reactants. The unique feature of the
investigation is that it will probe the exact molecular make-up of the reactive
system, where the molecular probe is the dipole itself and the response is
measured in real time. The analysis is based upon the premise that the
dielectric response in the course of reaction must reflect a change in the type
and concentration of dipoles and a decrease in their mobility. Reorientational
dynamics of dipoles will be experimentally determined as a function of reaction
time and temperature over a wide frequency range that will always include the
major relaxation process. The observed dielectric behavior will be checked
against model predictions. For the monofunctional reactive formulation, we shall
seek to establish correlations between the dielectric properties and the known
mechanistic kinetics. Modelling of the multifunctional polymer forming system
will be based upon the fundamental correlation between the frequency-dependent
dielectric constant and its time- dependent counterpart, which will be
appropriately modified to account for the distribution of relaxation times in
reactive polymers. %%% This fundamental research is of utility in the
preparation of polymer-matrix composites in that it will allow a better control
of the chemical reactions in their manufacture.