* 9400890
* 1994 Aspen Winter Condensed Matter Conference, Aspen Center for Physics, Aspen, Colorado
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Thomas Appelquist, Aspen Center For Physics
* Standard Grant
* Ulrich Strom
* 12/31/1994
* USD 2,500.00

9400890 Appelquist The Condensed Matter Physics Conference for 1994 at Aspen
will focus on the symmetry of the pairing states of high temperature
superconductors, the doping dependence of the anomalous normal state transport
and magnetic properties of the high Tc materials, and the physics of three
dimensional Mott-Hubbard systems. In each of these areas exciting and
controversial new experimental and theoretical results have appeared, but these
results have not been critically examined or systematically related to other
work. On the topic of the symmetry of the pairing state, recent experimental
results of photoemission, penetration depth and Josephson tunneling will be
compared with results of other techniques such as NMR, specific heat and neutron
scattering. On the normal state properties the nature of the doping dependence
of transport properties and the spin gap behavior of the magnetic susceptibility
will be examined. The third topic of interest relates to the occurrence of
metal-insulator transitions in some regions of the phase diagrams of high Tc
superconductors. Certain three dimensional transition metal oxides also feature
metal-insulator transitions but are not superconductors. The conference will
examine this issue from a theoretical and experimental viewpoint. %%% High
temperature superconductors exhibit remarkable physical properties which have
potentially significant technological applications. It is the very unusual
properties of these materials which offer a daunting challenge to experimental
and theoretical practitioners alike. Many apparently contradictory experimental
results and theories have been published. This conference is well timed to
critically examine the available data and compare it to existing theory with the
hope of defining future directions of investigations. ***