* 9401052
* Processing of Ceramic/Polymer Nanocomposites                Using Thermal Spray
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Ronald Smith, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 11/30/1997
* USD 270,977.00

9401052 Schadler The overall goal of this project is to explore the potential
for thermal spray processing to produce unique, polymer nanocomposites that
could open up new applications. Specifically, the objectives of this project are
to develop the combustion flame spray and high velocity oxy-fuel processes for
spraying ceramic nanoparticle/polymer coatings, to explore a variety of polymer
matrices and ceramic particulate reinforcements in order to assess a wide
variety of potential applications, and to characterize the coating for the
appropriate applications. The scientific objectives of this project are to
understand the process-structure- property relationships for ceramic/polymer
composites formed using thermal spray techniques, to explore the micromechanics
of deformation in these nanocomposites in order to understand the mechanisms
that lead to improved mechanical properties, and to understand the effect of
ceramic surface preparation on the mechanical properties of the composites.
Successful completion of this project could lead to a better understanding of
ceramic/polymer nanocomposites, which have promising material properties
including substantial increase in toughness, reduced permeability of water, and
reduced coefficient of thermal expansion. Abrasion resistance, tensile strength,
and Young's modulus all seem to improve with the addition of nanosize ceramic
particles in the polymer.