* 9401936
* Assessment of Feeding Habits in Crab Larvae Using the       Polymerase Chain Reaction
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Ana Dittel, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9401936 DITTEL A fundamental, yet unresolved, question in Biological
Oceanography concerns the feeding habits and trophic dynamics of zooplankton. In
addition, the importance of understanding the ecological role of meroplankton in
marine ecosystems has generated considerable interest in larval nutrition. Most
studies concerning feeding behavior of larval forms have dealt with crustaceans,
particularly decapod larvae. It is well known that larvae require animal food to
complete development, but there is some indication that phytoplankton is also
utilized. However, most studies have been based on laboratory experiments using
prey such as Artemia salina nauplii and rotifers. The most common method used to
assess the natural diet of marine organisms has been gut content analyses.
However, this method has several drawbacks. For example, gut content analysis is
of limited use, particularly in crustaceans, due to the difficulty of
identifying crushed prey items. This project will use a new method, the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), to study the feeding habits of crab larvae
under natural conditions. This project will examine whether PCR can be used
successfully to assess the diet of crab larvae. If successful further research
concerning food preferences using potential prey items from the natural
environment will also be examined. ***