* 9401958
* International Postdoctoral Fellows:  Mechanisms Controlling Miniemulsion Polymerization
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Christopher Miller, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/1995
* USD 19,300.00

9401958 MILLER This award is under the International Junior Investigator and
Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a six-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Christopher M. Miller of Lehigh University to work with Professor
Robert G. Gilbert at the University of Sydney. Their project will apply
complementary knowledge and experimental techniques of the Sydney University and
Lehigh University groups to understand the fundamental science of processes
governing polymer formation, and properties of the resulting polymer in
miniemulsion systems. The project will build into already existing models for
miniemulsion kinetics the new discoveries that have been reported by the Sydney
group. An outcome of these will be computer codes whose predictions should be
consistent with the extensive data for archetypical miniemulsion polymerizations
compiled by Miller during his doctoral research. The project will make use of
the Y radiolysis relaxation facilities available to the Sydney group to carry
out several experiments. The increased understanding derived from these
experiments should pave the way for innovative design of these processes in the
future. ***