* 9401669
* Americas Program:  International College of Biophysics;     Trieste, Italy, September, 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1994
* Horacio Farach, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 11/30/1994
* USD 20,900.00

9401669 Farach This Americas Program award will support participation of 6 U.S.
lecturers and 8 researchers from Latin America, Africa and Asia in the
International College on Biophysics to be held in the International Center for
Theoretical Physics. Trieste, Italy in September 1994. The meeting will focus on
experimental and theoretical aspects of biomolecules: structure, dynamics and
solvent effects. The U.S. organizer for this meeting is Dr. Horacio Farach of
the University of South Carolina, Columbia. The International Center was
established to promote research by scientists from developing countries as an
effort to contribute to the growth and development of Third World technology. It
supports research activities in high energy and solid state physics, provides a
range of advanced courses and conferences, and offers a full program of visits
in all branches of physics, biophysics, biotechnology and applied mathematics.
The proposed meeting will give researchers from developing countries an
opportunity to be in direct contact with leaders in the field and obtain a
systematic, up-to-date knowledge of the present status of their own and related
research fields. Lecturers, in turn, will obtain a first-hand view of
development problems in third world countries, particularly with regard to
academic research, and will gain an international view of the field of
biophysics and a broadened perspective of its applications. ***