* 9401277
* Mathematical Sciences:  Oscillatory Integrals in Harmonic   Analysis and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Yibiao Pan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1996
* USD 43,166.00

9401277 Pan This award supports mathematical research on problems arising in the
theory of harmonic analysis. The work revolves around ideas relating to
oscillatory integrals and their applications. Oscillatory integrals are an
essential part of harmonic analysis. There are two kinds. The first involves a
single function acting as a generalized Fourier transform with nonlinear
exponent. The second is given by an integral operator with a kernel carrying
oscillatory factors. This project involves studies of both kinds. An important
class of oscillatory integrals of the second kind is the class oscillatory
singular integrals. As a combination of oscillatory integral and singular
integral, these operators are intimately connected to problems concerning the
convergence of Fourier series, singular harmonic analysis on the Heisenberg
group and other nilpotent Lie groups and singular Radon transforms. The project
involves a systematic study of oscillatory integrals to examine their
boundedness properties when applied to Lebesgue spaces, weak (1,1)-boundedness,
boundedness on Hardy spaces, optimal decay in the quadratic norm and
applications to convolution with measures supported on submanifolds. Harmonic
analysis combines those elements of mathematics best exemplifying the ideas of
synthesis. One seeks to decompose complex problems into fundamental components.
These components are then analyzed for their basic characteristics. Finally, the
solution is reconstructed through a recombination of the components. The Fourier
series and Fourier transform are examples of tools used in this context; one
discrete , the other representing a continuous decomposition. More recently the
theory of oscillatory integrals added new dimensions to some of the more
classical approaches to harmonic analysis. ***