* 9401652
* Mathematical Sciences: Analytic Discs and Integral Formulas in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1997
* Alexander Tumanov, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1997
* USD 60,002.00

Tumanov 9401652 This award supports mathematical research on problems arising in
the theory of functions of several complex variables. The work concentrates on
boundary values of holomorphic functions; more precisely that of identifying
functions on the boundary of a domain which can be boundary values of
holomorphic functions. Such functions must satisfy partial differential
equations known as the boundary Cauchy-Riemann equations. Solutions are known as
CR-functions. Techniques for extending CR-functions from manifolds include a
newly developing process of attaching discs to manifolds and looking at analytic
extensions through the discs to obtain holomorphic extension. Then the discs and
extensions must be sewn together appropriately. Another method involves integral
formulas which give the extension by means of an integration process using a
kernel which depends on the manifold (Szego kernel). A new line of research on a
long-standing problem of embedding CR-structures in domains of several complex
variables will also be undertaken. Several complex variables arose at the
beginning of the century as a natural outgrowth of studies of functions of one
complex variable. It became clear early on that the theory differed widely from
it predecessor. The underlying geometry was far more difficult to grasp and the
function theory had far more affinity with partial differential operators of
first order. It thus grew as a hybrid subject combining deep characteristics of
differential geometry and differential equations. Many of the fundamental
structures were defined in the last three decades. Current studies still
concentrate on understanding these basic mathematical forms. ***