* 9401538
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Daniel Rudolph, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/1997
* USD 229,500.00

9401538 Boyle Boyle will work on problems involving automorphisms of a shift of
finite type, good maps betwen Markov processes, expansive Z^n actions, finite
presentations of dynamical systems, topological orbit equivalence and ordered
cohomology, inverse problems for nonnegative matrices, and general symbolic
dynamics. As specific examples in the last three categories, he hopes with
collaborators and students to --characterize the ordered groups which arise as
the ordered first Cech cohomology group of a homeomorphism of a zero dimensional
dynamical system --characterize the nonzero spectra of integral nonnonegative
matrices by solving an associated factorization problem in the ring of formal
power series with integral coefficients --extend the definition of residual
entropy to smooth dynamical systems and determine whether in that case it is a
nontrivial invariant (as it can be in the zero dimensional case). Among the
topics proposed by Rudolph for study in measurable dynamics are restricted orbit
equivalence and characteristic factors for generalized ergodic theorems. The
notion of restricted orbit equivalence is intended as a method to investigate
the nature of a dynamical system by considering the perturbations of its orbit
structure. The choice of restriction one places on the kind of perturbation
allowed controls the type of structure observed. -- In investigating the
convergence of various kinds of generalized ergodic theorems, one searches for
natural splittings into parts converging to zero, and parts with nontrivial
convergence, but very limiting, usually algebraic structure. This latter
"characteristic factor" of the averaging method not only controls the
convergence, but also gives insight into the dynamics of the underlying system.
This is pure mathematical research in the general areas of dynamical systems and
matrix theory. The dynamical parts largely involve theoretical problems in
symbolic dynamics; this abstract s ubject is involved in practical problems of
encoding data in magnetic media, and it has a finite aspect which has lent
itself to applicability. (Abstract classficiation schemes gave rise to an
algorithm which is now part of an IBM product.) The matrix research is a
continuation of a successful, novel application of symbolic dynamics techniques
and viewpoint to some old, basic and difficult problems in another subject, the
theory of nonnegative matrices. The underlying philosophy of measurable dynamics
is to use observations of the behavior of a system over time to gain insight
into the structure of the system. In this one can loosen the notion of "time" to
include the spatial dimensions of a crystal or the linear dimension of a DNA
molecule. Such simple changes of perspective can lead to deep and fruitful
insights into how the structure of the system is encoded in its temporal
behavior. A central theme of the work is to use such simple real-world models to
obtain deeper understanding of dynamical systems. ***