* 9401493
* Mathematical Sciences: Imbedding and Multiplier Theorems forTriebel-Lizorkin Spaces and Spaces of Holomorphic Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1994,12/31/1995
* Igor Verbitsky, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1995
* USD 20,000.00

Verbitsky 9401493 This award supports mathematical research on problems related
to function spaces defined on domains in several real or complex variables. The
spaces, developed over the past decade play a major role in the analysis of
Calderon-Zygmund and partial differential operators, are known as Triebel-
Lizorkin spaces. They are refinements of the classical Sobolev and Besov spaces,
developed because of the crucial role they play in wavelet-type decompositions
of distributions. The basis for this work is a set of connections between
weighted norm inequalities, Carleson measures, Besov spaces with zero smoothness
and Hardy-Sobolev spaces in the unit of ball in complex n-dimensional space. It
goals are to determine forward and reverse embedding of discrete Triebel-
Lizorkin spaces into weighted sequence spaces with p-th poser norms. In
addition, work will be done characterizing positive measures on the line for
which the discrete maximal operator and Hilbert transform preserve the above
spaces. Finally, work will continue on questions related to peak interpolation
sets for the ball algebra in terms of the capacity of its subsets. Studies of
the classical function spaces expanded from concerns about their structure to
the application to the understanding of basic operators of more applicable
analysis. As the past two decades progressed, the spaces gained their impetus
from differential equations, singular operators and wavelets rather than from
functional analysis. This has led to a new and vigorous blend of mathematical
analysis exemplified by this proposal. ***