* 9401315
* Controlled Defects on the Vortex Phases and Dynamics of     High-Temperature and Conventional Amorphous Superconductors -- From DC to Microwave Frequencies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Nai-Chang Yeh, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 06/30/1997
* USD 218,000.00

9401315 Yeh technical abstract: The effects of controlled defects on the vortex
phases and dynamics of high-temperature and conventional superconductors will be
investigated by systematically varying the type and density of defects in the
superconducting samples. In particular, the role of zero, one, and two-
dimensional defects, as well as their interplay on the vortex phases and the
phase transitions, will be studied by measurements of low-frequency (dc- 10 MHz)
electrical transport and magnetic properties. The samples are yttrium barium
copper oxide single crystals with controlled densities of point and columnar
defects. In addition, the microwave vortex dynamics associated with the local
pinning properties of superconductors wil be compared with the critical dynamics
obtained at lower frequencies. Non-technical abstract: The presence of defects
in superconductors plays an important role in determining their response to
external electromagnetic fields and their tolerance to the increase of
temperature. The main theme of this work is to investigate the effects of
controlled defects on the properties of high temperature and conventional
superconductors in large applied magnetic fields. Information learned from this
investigation can lead to optimizarion of the properties of these
superconductors for a variety of applications in large magnetic fields,
including microwave components for communication signal detection and
processing, as well as high performance superconducting magnets. ***