* 9401550
* Mathematical Sciences: Isogenies and Operations in Complex  Oriented Cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Haynes Miller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1998
* USD 45,596.00

9401550 Miller A number of moduli problems for elliptic curves have been
studied, such as that of classifying elliptic curves with a given point of
specified exact order. Analogous but more intricate problems can be studied in
the context of one-dimensional formal groups. The resulting algebraic objects
also arise as generalized cohomology rings in algebraic topology. In particular,
the theory of subgroups and isogenies of deformations of formal groups over a
finite field is closely connected with the Morava K-theory and completed E(n)
cohomology of ring spectra with higher commutativity properties. Neil
Strickland, the postdoctoral associate, aims to prove a number of conjectures
making this connection more precise. This research is part of algebraic
topology, which studies certain features of higher dimensional shapes, such as
how many holes they have, how the holes are linked together or twisted around
each other and so on. These problems are meaningful even though physical space
has only three dimensions. For example, if one quantity depends on seven others,
then one can imagine drawing a graph of the functional relationship in an
abstract eight-dimensional space. It is possible and useful to study the
properties of this graph, even though it cannot be realized physically. Because
it is so hard to visualize such a space, it is helpful to convert questions
about it into algebraic problems. Broadly speaking, there are two methods of
conversion, appropriate to different types of questions. In geometry, the basic
algebraic operation is to measure distances and angles. In topology, one might
say that the basic operation is to count holes (although it is not so easy to
say what precisely is meant by a three-dimensional hole in a six-dimensional
object). An interesting feature of the subject is that certain topological
questions give rise in an unexpected way to algebraic problems which have
previously been addressed in apparently unrelated are as of mathematics, such as
number theory. The current project aims to clarify one quite spectacular example
of this phenomenon, and to extend the relevant algebraic knowledge so as to
cover a wider family of topological situations. ***