* 9401592
* Mathematical Sciences: K-Theory of Crossed Products of      C*-Algebras by Locally Compact Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Kevin McClanahan, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1996
* USD 33,997.00

9401592 McClanahan The investigator has previously shown that Pimsner's most
general exact sequence of K-groups is valid in the case of twisted crossed
products relative to a circle 2-valued cocycle. One component of the proposed
project involves extending this result to the case of unitary multiplier-valued
cocycles. A possible application of this result would be the computation of the
K-groups of certain group C*-algebras in terms of the K- groups of the group
C*-algebras of a normal subgroup and of an action of the corresponding quotient
group. The investigator plans to investigate extending Pimsner's exact sequence
for groups acting on trees to the partial crossed product setting. This will
enable the computation of the K-groups of many other amalgamated products of
C*-algebras. This project involves computation of invariants of operator
algebras. An operator is an infinite dimensional generalization of matrices.
Given the natural algebraic structure a collection of operators can frequently
be considered as an algebra. A C*-algebra is an algebra of operators with
additional topological structure that is closed under the adjoint operation. A
basic problem is to classify operator algebras up to isomorphism. This is
frequently handled by determining simple invariants associated with operator
algebras. One such invariant is the K-group of a C*-algebra. This project will
provide explicit computations of K-groups of product C*-algebras. ***