* 9401191
* Mathematical Sciences:  Some Bayesian Problems in Sample    Survey
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Glen Meeden, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 09/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

This proposal will consider the application of the Bayesian methodology to some
problems in finite population sampling. Over the past several years the
principle investigator has helped to develop a noninformative Bayesian approach
to some problems in finite population sampling. It is based on the `Polya
posterior' and is appropriate when one's prior beliefs about the units are
roughly exchangeable. The first major goal of this project is to extend the
techniques underlying the `Polya posterior' to the area of cluster sampling.
This promises to yield a flexible and unified theory for an important class of
problems. Recent developments in Markov chain Monte Carlo technology mean that
Bayesian models which until recently have been computationally intractable can
now be studied. The second major goal of this project is to use these methods to
develop Bayesian models for survey sampling when one's prior beliefs about the
units are no longer exchangeable. In one class of models to be considered the
units will be assumed to be partially exchangeable, while in another class the
populations will be assumed to be generated by a generalized urn processes. This
should yield a collection of models that extends the type of prior information
that can be used in an analysis in sample survey. A standard setting in survey
sampling or finite population sampling assumes each member of some population
possesses an unknown amount of a characteristic of interest. The statistician is
interested in estimating a quantity related to this characteristic of interest.
For example the characteristic of interest could be household income, the
population all households in a given city and the quantity of interest the
average or median household income for the city. The statistician will then use
the values of the characteristic in a sample drawn from the population to
estimate this quantity. The major goal of this project is to study how prior
information about the population can be used to construct sensible estimates
about the quantity of interest. It will use recent developments in computer
simulation to investigate various models for prior information which up until
now have been impossible to study.