* 9401284
* Mathematical Sciences: Mapping Class Groups and TeichmuellerSpaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Nikolai Ivanov, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 63,900.00

9401284 Ivanov The principal investigator, Nikolai Ivanov, intends to continue
his work on the mapping class groups of surfaces, braid groups of surfaces,
complexes of curves of surfaces, and Teichmueller spaces. The investigator
intends to concentrate on the interrelationships between these notions in order
to shed new light on the algebraic structure of the mapping class groups of
surfaces on the one hand, and the global geometry of the Teichmueller spaces on
the other hand. An important guiding principle here is a still fairly mysterious
analogy between the mapping class groups and Teichmueller spaces on the one side
and arithmetic groups and symmetric spaces on the other side, established in
earlier works of the principal investigator and other mathematicians. In
particular, the principal investigator intends to prove that braid groups of
surfaces have only the obvious automorphisms, and that there are no nontrivial
homomorphisms from the arithmetic groups of rank at least two into mapping class
groups. The principal investigator intends to continue his study of the rigidity
properties of the mapping class groups and Teichmueller spaces. He also intends
to give a general explanation of various phenomena in the topology of surfaces
exhibiting stabilization over the genus, including presentations of the mapping
class groups by generators and relations and the quantum field theory
representations. Finally, the investigator will continue his investigation of
rigidity and stability phenomena in the universal Teichmueller spaces. Mapping
class groups and Teichmueller spaces serve as a meeting ground for several of
the main branches of mathematics, including topology, complex analysis, and
algebraic geometry. Recently they have also proved to be important in some
questions of theoretical physics. These objects in a subtle way both resemble
and differ from the much more well understood arithmetic groups and symmetric
spaces. Various approaches to m ade this analogy (and difference!) precise and
explicit form the core of the project. While symmetric spaces form a well
established pool of possible spatial images investigated in mathematics (and
arithmetic groups to a big extent control their structure), Teichmueller spaces
gradually emerge as a new, richer and equally important pattern (and mapping
class groups are similarly expected to control their structure). The principal
investigator intends to concentate on two of the most interesting and striking
properties of these objects: rigidity and stability. Because of rigidity, the
structure of these objects is expected to be completely determined by their
shape only. Stability tells us that when these objects become more and more
complicated with a natural parameter (genus) growing, their main characteristics
cease to change at a certain point. The stability phenomena is expected to be
relevant not only to the mathematical but also to the quantum physics
applications of the mapping class groups and Teichmueller spaces. ***