* 9401739
* Patterns in Sigma Bond Complexation
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1997
* Robert Crabtree, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 04/30/1997
* USD 396,500.00

9401739 Crabtree This project, supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry Program, is concerned with the further development of
the chemistry of X-H sigma-bonds (X=H, N, Si and its congeners, and M)
coordinated to transition metals. This is a recently recognized area of
organometallic chemistry for which the underlying principles are unclear; the
goal of this reseach is to discover general trends across several classes of
sigma-bond complexes. Among the several goals to be pursued are: generation of
"stretched" dihydrogen complexes and new polyhydrogen species by steric
crowding, demonstration of a change in reactivity for unsymmetrically bridged
metal hydrides, and demonstration of a distinctive reactivity for sigma-bond
bound N-H complexes. Techniques for detection and characterization of such
compounds based upon NMR spectroscopy will be sought. %%% One of the most
exciting recent developments in transition metal chemistry was the discovery
that molecular hydrogen can bind to a metal complex without cleavage of the
hydrogen-hydrogen bond. Professor Crabtree has played an important role in the
elucidation of the factors that determine how molecular hydrogen will bind to a
metal and in the development of spectroscopic techniques for determining the
mode of binding. This project attempts to determine the role that such sigma-
bond complexes play in transition metal chemistry of other X-H bonds. Ultimately
the information obtained from this work will be important in the development of
a better understanding of organometallic reaction mechanisms and may be useful
in the design of more specific catalysts for industrially important reactions.
***