* 9401615
* A Variable Rate Real-Time Speech and Video Coder for Video  Teleconferencing from 19.2 to 64 kbps
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Craig Richardson, Atlanta Signal Processors Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/1997
* USD 299,020.00

SBIR Phase II Proposal ISI-9401615 PI: Craig Richardson Atlanta Signal
Processors, Inc. "A Variable Rate Real-Time Speech and Video Coder for Video
Teleconferencing from 19.2 to 64 Kbps" This project is funded under the National
Science Foundation's (NSF) Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program,
which is designed to provide an opportunity for small business, particularly the
small high technology firm, to participate in NSF research. Phase I of the SBIR
program serves as a filter to select promising proposals and determine if the
firm can do high quality research. Phase II is the principal research project.
Phase III is the conversion of the NSF-funded research into commercial
applications and technological innovation supported by follow-on private venture
capital or other non-federal financing. This Phase II project involves design
and development of a real-time video and speech encoder/decoder system that
combines a high quality, low bit-rate full color video coder with a high
quality, low bit-rate, variable rate speech coder. The target bit-rates for the
combined video and speech range from 19.2 kbps to 64 kbps for frames of size 176
x 144 and 352 x 288 at 15 and 30 frames per second. The real-time hardware
environment is based on a multi-processor configuration of digital signal
processors.