* 9401156
* A Next-Generation Infrastructure for Integrating Computing  and Communications
* CSE,EIA
* 08/15/1994,07/31/2000
* Domenico Ferrari, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/2000
* USD 1,786,341.00

9401156 Ferrari This award provides support for the development of Titan, a
computing system consisting of an integrated ensemble of computing and
communication elements, organized to provide the user with a number of services.
These services will include multimedia capabilities in delivery vehicles;
storage and communication; large computing power; large storage space;
innovative parallel languages, debuggers, and libraries; and high accessibility
from both mobile and fixed locations. The experimental facilities requested
include workstations and servers constituting the backbone of the distributed
system providing cycles to the user, ATM switches for linking workstations and
servers, a video editing system, a massive storage unit, and equipment for
linking the network to the currently available CM-5 parallel computer. The
proposed research projects fall into three areas: network and communications;
distributed supercomputer projects which are mainly concerned with providing
parallel computing to every user through a combined architecture, operating
systems, and programming language effort; and multimedia services which requires
integrating systems support, software support, and artificial intelligence tools
to create, store, play, edit, search, input, and output multimedia objects. The
networking, multimedia, and computing aspects of Titan form will form the
infrastructure for a number of computationally intensive applications.