* 9401403
* Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Scattering Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Xin Zhou, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1997
* USD 55,000.00

Zhou 9401403 This project is concerned with mathematical research on problems
arising in the theory of nonlinear partial differential equations. Several
topics will be addressed. Included in them is an analysis of the zero dispersion
limit for the focusing nonlinear Schrodinger equation. The focusing equation and
many other integrable systems have nonself-adjoint scattering operators. This
type of zero dispersion problem is not well understood. Work will also be done
on a perturbation theory for nonlinear Schrodinger equations. This will be done
through efforts to obtain relationships between the maximal norm and a weighted
quadratic norm of the potential. Once this is done, the perturbed problem can be
solved by a method of McKean and Shatah. A third line of investigation will
examine higher order equations and solitons. Equations in the Gelfand-Dikii
hierarchy give rise to isospectral deformations which can be reduced to the
study of a Riemann-Hilbert problem. Work will be done analyzing the long time
behavior of those Gelfand-Dikii flows for which the jump matrices are
oscillatory. The new features of this study includes the larger size of the
matrices and the jump data exhibiting singularities of different orders at the
origin; from this shock regions can be developed. Partial differential equations
form a basis for mathematical modeling of the physical world. The role of
mathematical analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to provide
qualitative and quantitative information about the solutions. This may include
answers to questions about uniqueness, smoothness and growth. In addition,
analysis often develops methods for approximation of solutions and estimates on
the accuracy of these approximations.