* 9401595
* The FASEB Conference on Yeast Chromosome Structure,         Replication and Segregation on July 23-28, 1994, Santa      Cruz, CA.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1995
* Molly Fitzgerald-Hayes, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1995
* USD 10,000.00

9401595 Fitzerald-Hayes A conference on Yeast Chromosome Structure, Replication
and Segregation will be held by the Federation of American Societies of
Experimental Biology (FASEB) July 23-28, 1994 at the University of California at
Santa Cruz. The meeting will be include a Yeast Genome Workshop to update the
community on the international effort to sequence the yeast genome and to
discuss the implications of this work for yeast research. In light of the recent
progress made to elucidate the motor components of the yeast kinetochore, the
Committee has decided to include a special session on Molecular Motors. Other
sessions will cover such topics as nuclear architecture, DNA replication, cell
cycle control, telomeres and position effects, mutations that cause
missegregation, meiotic chromosome segregation and the components of the mitotic
spindle. %%% A conference on Yeast Chromosome Structure, Replications and
Segregation will be held by the Federation of American Societies of Experimental
Biology (FASEB) July 23-28, 1994 at the University of California at Santa Cruz.
The main objective of this conference is to bring together a small group of
leading scientists in the field to discuss their recent work and exchange ideas.
The participation of minority researchers and younger scientists as well as
postdoctoral fellows and graduate students will be encouraged. There is abundant
evidence that what is discovered from studying yeast is relevant to our
understanding of mammalian chromosomes. Many of the components that participate
in the organization and function of chromosomes are highly conserved among all
eucaryotes, from yeast to man. Already, some of the molecular and genetic
studies on yeast chromosomes have led to discoveries of similar gene products in
higher organisms. Understanding the basic mechanisms of chromosome segregation
is essential for the prevention of chromosome transmission problems in humans.
Aneuploidy, genome rearrangements and other chromosomal abnormalities are k nown
to play important roles in cancer, spontaneous abortion and birth defects. ***