* 9401093
* Mathematical Sciences: Recurrence, Convergence and Entropy  in Ergodic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Vitaly Bergelson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 272,243.00

9401093 Bergelson The purposes of this project are to 1) to study types of
multiple recurrence for dynamical systems, including various aspects and
refinements of the polynomial Szemeredi theorem of Bergelson and Liebman, by
combinatorial and structural methods, 2) to examine the existence of bounds for
various measures of the stability of averages in ergodic theory, including
particular square functions for differences of various processes, through
measure-theoretic and Fourier transform techniques, and also 3) to consider
problems in entropy, isomorphism, and multiple mixing for different group
actions in measure spaces, using both the methods introduced for studying
entropy in dynamical systems with group actions, and the appropriate number-
theoretic estimates that apply to such systems. The purpose of this project is
to understand better the long-term behavior of dynamical systems from a variety
of viewpoints. First, by examining the nature of the underlying structure of the
dynamical system, types of many-fold repetition of recurrent behavior will be
studied. Second, using harmonic analysis methods, the stability and rate of
convergence of long term averages in the dynamical system will be considered.
Third, by methods of integration and number theory, the nature and extent of
chaotic behavior of dynamical systems with many modes of transformation will be
better understood. ***