* 9401352
* Mathematical Sciences:  One Higher Dimensional Wavelets fromFractal Interpolation Functions:  Construction and          Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Jeffrey Geronimo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9401352 Geronimo Work supported by this grant focuses on the application of
wavelets to signal and image processing as well as to numerical analysis. The
wavelet approach to problems in these areas has followed two basic paths:
developing the wavelet from the solution of a scaling equation or via splines. A
third procedure to be pursued in this work derives from recent construction of
fractal interpolation functions. The construction has advantages of both of the
previous methods, namely explicit regularity results, easily calculated inner
products and linear phase as in the spline case and orthogonality, compact
support and continuity as in the dilation equation case. The method also has a
multidimensional generalization that gives wavelets which are not tensor
products of univariate functions. This project continues investigations into the
construction and application of wavelets using fractal interpolation functions
in one and higher dimensions. In one dimension, the focus will be on
constructing smoother (at least differentiable) compactly supported and
orthogonal wavelets. In higher dimensions, the goal is to construct continuous,
compactly supported orthogonal wavelets. Applications will be made to image
processing by exploiting the unique properties (e.g. symmetry and regularity) of
the wavelets. The study and applications of wavelets represents are relatively
new branch of harmonic analysis in which single functions are used to generate
Hilbert (or other) space bases by which functions may be represented. While this
in itself is not too difficult, one seeks wavelets with additional properties
such as smoothness, compact support, localization in time and frequency. Coupled
with all of these demands, one also asks for computational simplicity.
Remarkably, there are such functions. The goals of this research are to extend
and refine basic knowledge in this field by combining existing techniques with
those developed in parallel within t he field of fractal interpolation.