* 9401755
* Mathematical Sciences: Group Proposal for Research: Research on Differentiable Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Wu-chung Hsiang, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1997
* USD 368,700.00

9401755 Hsiang This project involves research in topological manifolds and
differential geometry. The principal investigator, Wu-Chung Hsiang, has some
interesting new ideas relating to the Novikov conjecture. Together with Cynthia
Curtis, Hsiang is also interested in work on four-manifolds related to the
Poincare' conjecture. Curtis and Hsiang recall a theorem of Wall stating that
two h-cobordant four-manifolds may be "stabilized" by adding copies of S^2 x S^2
in such a way that the stabilized manifolds are diffeomorphic. They study
obstructions to "destabilization"; that is, they attempt to determine whether
the original manifolds were themselves diffeomorphic. Curtis also studies
generalizations of Casson's invariant for three-manifolds and related
invariants. Meanwhile, Zhuang-dan Guan studies geometric structures on
manifolds. He is interested in examples of compact holomorphic symplectic
manifolds which are not Kaehlerian, quasi-Einstein metrics, singularities on
rational curves, and homogeneous spaces. The investigators will study the
properties of objects which are 3-, 4-, or higher-dimensional. Specifically,
they will develop means of determining when two objects of the same dimension
are equivalent in some sense. Curtis and Hsiang are working together on a
certain class of four-dimensional objects. Their work relates to a conjecture of
Poincare' dating from the turn of the century. Guan works to determine if two
same-dimensional objects are equivalent in a stricter sense, taking more
geometry into account. The work of all three researchers relates in a general
sense to new and exciting developments in physics. ***