* 9401200
* Effects of Interpersonal and Mass-mediated Messages on      Hispanic Undergraduates' Decisions to Pursue Degrees in     Computer Science
* CSE,EIA
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Patricia Lawrence, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 06/30/1997
* USD 118,220.00

9401200 Lawrence The Department of Communication at the University of Texas at
El Paso (UTEP) is conducting a two-year research project to identify and assess
the impact of specific communication variables that may contribute to an
underrepresentation of Hispanics in computer science (CS) graduate programs and
academic professions. The project is based on the assumption that various
external messages, if internalized, can affect the decision-making process of
undergraduate Hispanic students by either encouraging or discouraging them to
enter or remain in the discipline. The study combines qualitative and
quantitative methodologies to ferret out messages that occur at the macro
(institutional/societal) and the micro (interpersonal) levels. It begins with a
series of focus groups to obtain a listing of the sources of beliefs, attitudes,
values, and concerns about computer science and CS professionals that exist
among Hispanic undergraduates. The list is being used to design, pilot-test, and
employ a survey instrument for collecting and comparing cross-sectional and
longitudinal data from stratified random samples of 600 students. The
significance of the project lies in the promise that its findings can be used to
identify problems that can be ameliorated by advocating the construction of
effective CS recruiting messages specifically targeted toward Hispanics. UTEP is
located on the United States-Mexico border, and it is the largest Hispanic-
majority (60.5%) university in the continental United States. ***