* 9401544
* Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras and Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* David Larson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1998
* USD 121,620.00

9401544 Larson One area of the research plan concerns prior work on
quasitriangularity considerations within von Neumann algebras. Work by this
investigator and co-workers on quasitriangularity led to the development of a
sub-optimization formula which has impacted recent work by others in control
theory with applications to electrical and aeronautical engineering. The plan is
to continue work in this direction. A second area of the plan concerns problems
related to triangular and semitriangular operators, and to reflexivity, that
arose out of prior work by this investigator and co-workers which yielded
counterexamples to open questions on these topics. The third area of the plan
concerns an operator-theoretic approach to certain aspects of orthogonal wavelet
theory obtained by interpreting orthogonal wavelets as wandering vectors for a
special set of unitary operators on Hilbert space. The new idea used is that the
set of all orthogonal wavelets for the usual dilation-translation wavelet system
(D,T) on the Hilbert space of square- integrable complex functions on the real
line can be parameterized in a natural way by a single wavelet v together with
the set of all unitary operators in the local commutant of the system at x.
Analysis of this unitary set yields information concerning the set W(D,T) of all
orthogonal wavelets. The research plan involves three separate but related
projects. The first builds onto previous work by this investigator in the area
of operator algebras. A formula which was derived three years ago to solve an
open problem in pure mathematics has recently impacted applications-oriented
research projects of several mathematicians and engineers working incontrol
theory. Further work in this connection is being pursued. The second project
continues previous work on properties of single operators and dual operator
algebras. Recent successes here include counter examples which have impacted
work of several other mathemati cians. The third project concerns wavelets.
Wavelet analysis has been the scene of a sizable research drive in mathematics
and engineering during the past few years. The new concept utilized in this
project is the idea of determining new wavelets and functional properties of
wavelets by analyzing structural properties of a certain naturally related set
of operators, using established techniques of single operator theory and
operator algebras. This overall plan accomodates the dissertation research of
four doctoral students. ***