* 9401208
* Mathematical Sciences: Fourier analysis of distributions    supported on hypersurfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1995
* Kanghui Guo, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1995
* USD 16,849.00

9401208 Guo This RUI award supports mathematical research on problems in
harmonic analysis related to spectral synthesis, which roughly states that
smooth, decaying functions vanishing off a set approximate Fourier transforms
vanishing on the same set. This project is mainly concerned with spectral
synthesis on manifolds, the restriction of the Fourier transform and partial
differential equations with constant coefficients. Specifically, the project
concerns distributions supported by hypersurfaces in Euclidean space and how the
curvature of the manifold is related to decay properties of the Fourier
transform of the distribution. The work draws on recent results giving
asymptotic estimates for weak spectral synthesis. Since there are examples where
weak spectral synthesis fails for general manifolds, it is necessary to
investigate the proper conditions, such as constant nullity, which will provide
positive answers. Harmonic analysis concerns the decomposition and
reconstruction of functions through representations in terms of simpler
components. One of the fundamental tools of harmonic analysis is the Fourier
transform which plays equally central role in the study of partial differential
equations where the two fields come together naturally. Analysis of the
transform, restricted to manifolds, is a relatively open field in which general
results are usually hard to achieve.