* 9401377
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Wave Equations of          Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Walter Craig, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 07/31/1995
* USD 20,000.00

9401377 Craig This award support mathematical research in three areas which
related the theory of partial differential equations and mathematical physics.
The focus is principally on conservative evolution equations. Examples include
nonlinear wave equations, Schrodinger equations, the Korteweg deVries equation
and versions of the Boussinesq system. These problems can all be written as
Hamiltonian systems, with infinitely many degrees of freedom. The analogy with
dynamical systems can be pursued with the goal of describing the important
features of solutions and the principal structures of the phase space in which
they are posed. The projects include the continuation of development of the
theory of Kolmogorov, Arnold and Moser to systems with infinitely many degrees
of freedom, in particular, to the above nonlinear equations. The intent of this
work is to understand the stable motions of nonlinear wave equations, either in
neighborhoods of equilibrium points, or for perturbations of completely
integrable systems. A second project concerns the evolution of singularities of
solutions of the Schrodinger equation, in both linear and nonlinear cases. This
requires microlocal analysis techniques in a novel setting in which there is an
interdependence of properties in the spatial and Fourier domains. The final
project involves work on the free surface problem of water wave, which is
important in mathematical fluid dynamics as well as partial differential
equations. Work will address steady free surface problems and nonstationary
problems, in both two and three dimensional settings. Partial differential
equations form a basis for mathematicalmodeling of the physical world. The role
of mathematical analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to
provide qualitative and quantitative information about the solutions. This may
include answers to questions about uniqueness, smoothness and growth. In
addition, analysis often develops me thods for approximation of solutions and
estimates on the accuracy of these approximations. ***