* 9401254
* FASEB Conference:  Virus Assembly, July 23-28, 1994 held at The Vermont Academy, Saxtons River, Vermont
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1995
* Eric Hunter, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 06/30/1995
* USD 5,000.00

Spear 9401254 This award is for partial support of a conference entitled "Virus
Assembly" to be held under the auspices of the Federation of American Societies
of Experimental Biology (FASEB) from July 23 to 28, 1994, at the Vermont
Academy, Saxtons River, Vermont. The purpose of the conference is to bring
together scientists working on all aspects of virus assembly and structure
(including the initial disassembly steps associated with viral entry into cells)
for bacterial, plant, animal and human viruses. The intention is to encourage
communication of ideas and hypotheses about virus assembly and structure, across
the usual taxonomic barriers, and to promote dissemination of results obtained
with a variety of different viruses using a variety of different experimental
approaches, including biochemical and genetic methods as well as X-ray
crystallography, electron microscopy and image reconstruction. There are no
other conferences devoted entirely to problems of virus assembly and structure,
across the viral taxonomic groups, except the previous two FASEB conferences on
this topic held in 1990 and 1992. The previous conferences in this series were
enormously successful and achieved the kind of communication desired. It seems
likely, given the current rate of progress in this field, that the FASEB
conference of 1994 also achieve the desired goals. %%% The purpose of the
conference is to bring together, for exchange of information, the leading
researchers on the structure and assembly of viruses. Viruses infecting humans,
animals, plants and bacteria are all included in the program because their
similarities and differences help to define the general principles of virus
structure and assembly. It is important to understand these general principles,
in part because the assembly of proteins and nucleic acids into complicated
structures is vital to the functioning of human cells and tissues as well as of
the viruses. In addition, some of the most promising new antiviral drugs and
agricultural pest control strategies are likely to act by interfering with virus
assembly. Understanding the structures of viruses allows one to predict the
properties of agents that should be able to block virus assembly and therefore
prevent the spread of virus infection. ***