* 9401168
* Mathematical Sciences:  Non-linear Partial Differential     Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Luis Caffarelli, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1998
* USD 99,000.00

Caffarelli 9401168 This project continues mathematical research on several broad
areas involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Of the two central
themes, one concerns Lagrangian coordinates and allocation problems. In its
physical interpretation, the work is concerned with the deformation or evolution
of a material body. In particular, efforts will be made to understand how
compression and rotation control the deformation. For instance, if the
infinitesimal compression is controlled, what other quantity of the rotation
must be controlled to assure that the deformation be smooth? This question, a
Lagrangian version of the Helmholtz divergence-curl decomposition for a velocity
or instantaneous deformation field, has arisen naturally in several areas where
one must compute large deviations (computational plasticity, models for front
formation in meteorological sciences, discretization of incompressible flows) as
well as problems of allocation, where one tries to allocate resources into a new
distribution which minimizes the allocation costs. A second theme concerns free
boundaries and their singular perturbations. These arise in continuum mechanics
when a rapid transition takes place in which the model assumes the presence of a
sharp interphase (the burning of a flame, the solidification of a liquid, etc.).
Studies of how well the sharp transition approximates the continuous phenomena
will be carried out. For instance, the geometric properties of the sharp
transition versus a narrow band of continuous transition, or when the limit of
the continuous phenomena is actually the expected sharp transition will be
analyzed. Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical modeling
of the physical world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much to
create the equations as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative
information about the solutions. This may include answers to questions about
uniqueness, smoothness and gr owth. In addition, analysis often develops methods
for approximation of solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these
approximations. ***