* 9401354
* Mathematical Sciences: Maximum Principles and Dilation      Invariant Estimates for Sobolev and Dirichlet Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Gregory Verchota, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9401354 Verchota This project in mathematical analysis focuses on the
application of methods of harmonic analysis to the study of partial differential
equations. Work will be done on the formation of estimates of solutions to
boundary value problems of elliptic operators with constant coefficients. The
tools employed include singular integrals and Sobolev and Hardy spaces on lower
dimensional Lipschitz surfaces. The lower dimensional theory, which is just
developing, seeks to yield new maximum principles for higher order equations and
systems. One of the underlying goals of the research is that of understanding
which properties of dilation invariant solutions might be considered operator
independent. Classical theory fails to distinguish those properties of solutions
that are operator dependent from those that are domain dependent. Boundary value
problems such as the Dirichlet problem are to be generalized in an algebraic way
to higher order operators and systems that may not conform to intuition on how
values at the boundary should control values inside a domain. Partial
differential equations form a basis for mathematical modeling of the physical
world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much to create the equations
as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative information about the
solutions. This may include answers to questions about uniqueness, smoothness
and growth. In addition, analysis often develops methods for approximation of
solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these approximations. ***