* 9401116
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Impact of German       Reunification on East German Women
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1995
* Peter Evans, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/1995
* USD 6,357.00

9401116 Evans This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral
Dissertation Research Program. It is a study of the impact of German
reunification on East German women, based on in-depth interviews conducted with
eastern German couples who have children. Topics covered by the interviews will
include: 1) employment in the new, capitalist labor market, 2) child care
arrangements before and after unification, and 3) financial and emotional
dependency of partners. Current German government policies have the effect of
encouraging women to leave the labor force to have families, while former East
German policy did the opposite. Thus, this research will examine an area where
governmental change may have a substantial impact, thus permitting the testing
of sociological theories of national transition. %%% The research supported in
this award will contribute to social-scientific understanding of transnational
aspects of global change and democratization. Across the world, massive shifts
in government policies can be expected to affect decisively the context in which
individuals and families make career decisions, and through these decisions, the
social and economic status of women. In addition to the scientific gains to be
achieved by the research, this award will materially assist a highly promising
student in completing research for the Ph.D. dissertation. Thus it contributes
to the future scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough training of the
next generation of social scientists. ***