* 9401222
* U.S.-Polish Collaborative Research on Efficient System      Support for Data-Parallel MIMD
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Isaac Scherson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 07/31/1995
* USD 30,500.00

9401222 Scherson This U.S.-Poland Joint Collaborative Research grant to study
"Efficient System Support for Data-Parallel MIMD" is between Dr. Isaac D.
Scherson of the Department of Information and Computer Science, University of
California Irvine, and Dr. Piotr Chrzastowski-Wachtel of the Informatics
Institute, Warsaw University. A novel massively parallel architecture, dubbed
P3, led to the identification of a number of important open problems related to
the feasibility, applicability and performance of very large SIMD systems.
However, because of the strong recent trend among commercial machines towards
the SPMD-style of programming on MIMD machines, the researchers are relaxing
their previous SIMD assumptions and applying their knowledge to SPMD system
support issues. Specifically, their goal is to model the SPMD paradigm and
reduce or even eliminate barrier synchronization to minimize wasteful processor
idling. To this end, the American researchers will collaborate with the Polish
researchers, who have performed extensive work on algebras and models of
concurrency. Additionally, the researchers hope this international exchange will
shed new light on their continuing research (MIP-9106949, MIP-9205737) on
scientific numerical techniques, and the development of very fast and efficient
interconnective networks. This proposed research in information and computer
science and engineering fulfills the program objectives of advancing science by
enabling leading experts in the U.S. and Poland to combine complementary talents
and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
***