* 9401418
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Functional Analysis in     Applied Science
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1996
* Peter Takac, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 04/30/1996
* USD 40,000.00

9401418 Takac This project is concerned with development and applications of
methods of modern functional analysis to problems arising in a number of
generally well-accepted mathematical models in applied science. The investigator
proposes to continue his development of modern functional analytic techniques
that are suitable for studying large-time asymptotic behavior of solutions to
monotone dynamical systems. A particular emphasis of this part of the proposed
research will be on the large-time asymptotic behavior of orbits (trajectories)
in almost periodic monotone dynamical processes. Various instability phenomena
are described by a parabolic system of complex Ginzburg-Landau equations. The
investigator proposes to establish the local (in time) existence, uniqueness and
complex analytic extension of solutions to the parabolic system. This will be
followed by a development of suitable global estimates in the Lebesgue-Hardy
spaces over a region in multi-dimensional complex space in order to prevent all
the derivatives of the solution from blowing-up in finite time. For the
Ginzburg-Landau equation it should be possible to obtain such estimates directly
from the equation. Global existence, uniqueness and complex analytic extension
of solutions to a mathematical model guarantee the existence and uniqueness for
all times of a particular physical (biological, material or economic) structure
described by this model, and its smooth dependence upon the spatial and temporal
variables (no sudden jumps). These properties are essential for the design of
measurements to be performed on the physical structure. Large- time asymptotic
behavior of solutions to a model determines the ultimate state of relationships
within the modeled structure. Mathematical models investigated in this project
are expressed in terms of non-linear differential equations. ***