* 9401572
* Environmentally Benign Immobilized Organometallic Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* John Gladysz, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 06/30/1998
* USD 330,000.00

In this Environmentally Benign Chemical Synthesis and Processing project,
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program,
academic chemist, Professor John Gladysz of the University of Utah and
industrial chemist, Dr. Istvan Horvath of Exxon Corporate Research Laboratory
will undertake the development of new solid acid catalysts. These acid catalysts
will be based upon protic organometallic compounds immobilized on solid
polymeric supports such as polystyrene and Nafion. It is expected that these
acids will exhibit new modes of reactivity that will involve both the acidic
proton and the metal center. Success in these endeavors could result in
processes that produce less acidic wastes than current methods. Immobilization
of the organometallic acids will require the development of new ligands and
methods for attaching them to the polymeric supports. Polystyrene will be
derivatized with fluorinated polydentate organophosphine or cyclopentadienyl
ligands, which will be used to bind metal hydride species. Alternative systems
will be based upon Nafion, which has been derivatized at the sulfonamide group
with donor groups such that metal hydride species can be covalently bound. New
compositions will be characterized by infrared and NMR spectroscopies, by
measurements of Hammett acidities, and by screening for catalytic activity in
alkylation reactions such as those that are required for petroleum feedstock
conversions. The majority of known industrial chemical manufacturing processes
involve some type of catalysis. A large number of these catalytic processes
involve the use of strong acids. Those that employ soluble acids often generate
large quantities of highly acidic waste that must be treated to reduce its
acidity prior to disposal. New solid-phase acids that may replace these are
highly desirable. This project undertakes fundamental studies of new materials
that ultimate provide the basis for more environmentally benign manufacture o f
important commodity chemicals.