* 9401775
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamics of Multi-Fluid Flow and     Interfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Demetrios Papageorgiou, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 37,500.00

9401775 Papageorgiou This research considers the interfacial stability of multi-
fluid systems with particular emphasis placed on the theoretical prediction of
practical operating parameter regimes in applications. The first part is
concerned with a new finding on the stability of oscillatory two-phase Couette
flow. It has been shown that periodic modulations in the background state can
completely stabilize interfacial modes in the long wave regime. These results
will be extended to all wavelengths by use of Floquet theory and numerical
integration of the governing system, and with analysis where appropriate. A
parallel project will address oscillatory two-phase core-annular flow both in
the linear and nonlinear regime by study of dissipative partial differential
systems and use of tools taken from dynamical systems theory. Nonlinear
evolution equations in both two and three dimensions will be derived and solved
numerically in order to model the nonlinear stability of two-fluid flows in
cylindrical geometries. There are numerous technological and natural processes
where instabilities in two-fluid flows are important and need to be understood.
Examples include, among others, lubricated pipelining for the transport of
viscous crudes, extrusion processes, enhanced oil recovery, coating processes,
directional solidification in melt-grown crystal technologies, and production of
photographic film. Biological applications include the collapse of pulmonary
vessels in new-borne babies due to interfacial instabilities leading to rapture
of the fluid covering of the tube walls. There are a number of other evolving
technologies both ground-based as well as in microgravity environments which
require a fundamental understanding of interfacial instabilities and rheology.