* 9401940
* U.S.- European Cooperative Research:  Scandinavian Business Locations in the Former Soviet Baltic Frontier
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Harley Johansen, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1998
* USD 28,068.00

9401940 Johansen This three-year award supports U.S.-Scandinavia-Baltic
cooperation in regional sciences and economics. The principal investigators are:
Harley Johansen of the University of Idaho; Folke Snickars of Sweden's Royal
Institute of Technology; and Inna Shteinbuka of the Latvian Ministry of Finance.
The investigators propose to explore business development by Scandinavian firms
in the Baltic States and Russian Federation. They will investigate patterns
associated with the movement of western firms into the region and with regional
development and processes. The project will start with a case study of a Finnish
oil company and their Baltic strategy for locating petrol stations. This will be
followed by studies on Swedish and Norwegian firms. The project takes advantage
of Scandinavian experience and longstanding ties to the region and access to
data and information. The Swedish investigator heads an important program in
regional sciences and economics and brings to this collaboration his expertise
and ties to the Latvian Ministry of Finance and University of Latvia. Investment
in private enterprise, especially in the form of joint ventures between western
companies and local partners, is a priority for Latvia and the other Baltic
States and Russian Federation. The project will form a foundation for
understanding the process and geographic patterns associated with movement of
western firms. Its results will be useful to Baltic economists; to development
of market companies in the region; and to western companies who have an interest
in investing in the former Soviet Union. ***