* 9401441
* Mathematical Sciences:  On the Qualitative Properties and   Classification of Solutions to Nonlinear Differential       Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Congming Li, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1996
* USD 40,000.00

9401441 LI This award supports mathematical research into the qualitative
properties of nonlinear elliptic partial differential equations and their
application to problems in geometry. Work involves the study of travelling wave
fronts on infinite cylinders arising from flame propagation and ignition in
combustion theory and population dynamics. Previous studies showed that the
solutions of the evolutions problems approach some stable travelling wave fronts
with certain speeds. There are cases where only one wave front exists. In other
cases there are more and part of this investigation is to find the stable wave
front. Work will also be done using the method of moving planes in the study of
semilinear elliptic equations with critical and sub-critical Sobolev exponents.
The goal here is to classify solutions which can then be carried over to fully
nonlinear equations. Continuing work on the problem of prescribing Gaussian
curvature on surfaces will also be carried out. This is sometimes referred to as
the Kazdan-Warner problem. One seeks necessary and sufficient conditions for the
solvability of the prescribed Gauss curvature via conformal changes of metric.
Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical modeling of the
physical world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much to create the
equations as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative information about the
solutions. This may include answers to questions about uniqueness, smoothness
and growth. In addition, analysis often develops methods for approximation of
solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these approximations. ***