* 9401180
* Mathematical Sciences: An Abstract Theory of Wavelets and   Multi-Resolution Analyses
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Lawrence Baggett, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1997
* USD 51,680.00

9401180 Baggett The purpose of this project is to continue formulating an
abstract setting the notions and theorems involved with the important area of
wavelet bases and multi-resolution analyses. Part of the project is to derive
results about the existence of wavelets and MRA's, quality of the wavelets and
MRA's, and summability results for wavelet expansions. In the abstract context,
one may bring to bear the powerful and modern theories of unitary
representations, von Neumann algebras, etc. Another part of the project is to
use abstract theory to describe the notion of windowed Fourier transforms, which
notion can also be formulated in terms of unitary representation theory and non-
commutative harmonic analysis. Research on Wavelet Theory is an incredibly
active area of mathematics. This is due mainly to the powerful applications to
important areas involving high performance computing such as data compression
and pattern recognition. Usually wavelet theory is approached using the real
variable techniques of harmonic analysis. This project is aimed at formulating
Wavelet Theory in an abstract mathematical setting. Powerful abstract
mathematics can then be applied to get automatic existence and convergence
theorems about wavelets. New insights into the fundamental nature of wavelets
will occur. In a reciprocal manner, the salient features of wavelets will be
reflected to produce new concepts in abstract mathematics. ***