* 9401999
* Borohydrides as Reducing Agents in the Synthesis of         Inorganic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Arumugam Manthiram, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 210,000.00

Manthiram This proposal addresses the use of borohydrides as reducing agents in
aqueous solutions to obtain reduced transition metal oxides and ceramic-metal
and metal-metal nanocomposites at ambient temperatures. It is proposed to
synthesize several novel reduced oxides of tungsten and molybdenum and vanadium
by a careful control of experimental conditions such as pH, concentration and
nature of the reactants, and aerobic vs anaerobic environment. The borohydride
reducing agents will also be used to synthesize at ambient temperatures ceramic-
metal and metal-metal nanocomposites that exhibit interesting magnetic
characteristics. The products will be characterized by X-ray diffraction,
thermal analysis, chemical analysis, spectroscopic techniques, electron
microscopy, electrical transport, and magnetic measurements. The observed
properties will be correlated with crystal chemistry, chemical composition and
microstructure. A thorough characterization of the products formed will provide
an understanding of the chemistry involved in the borohydride reduction-reaction
process. Such an understanding might provide important insights in exploiting
borohydrides for the synthesis of new inorganic materials. In general, the
proposed studies are of interest because of their technological applications
such as in magnetic recording. The proposed exploratory research may lead to a
kinetic accessibility of new phases that may otherwise be unstable at higher
temperatures. %%% Inorganic solids are generally synthesized by reaction between
the components at high temperatures to overcome the diffusional limitations.
Such harsh reaction conditions not only result in products with larger particle
size and inhomogeneity, but also lead to an inaccessibility of metastable phases
and unusual valence states. This proposal addresses the use of borohydrides as
reducing agents in aqueous solutions to obtain several novel reduced transition
metal oxides and ceramic-metal and metal-metal nano composites at ambient
temperatures. In general, the proposed studies are of interest because of their
technological applications such as in magnetic recording. The proposed
exploratory research may lead to a kinetic accessibility of new phases that may
otherwise be unstable at higher temperatures.