* 9401546
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Theory of Liquid        Crystals and Free Boundaries
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Fang-Hua Lin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1997
* USD 113,750.00

9401546 Lin This award supports mathematical research on problems in nonlinear
partial differential equations, variational calculus and geometric measure
theory. In the first part, work will be done analyzing singularities which
contain the generalized version of Reifenberg's theorem and its applications,
the p- harmonic mapping approach to Ginzburg-Landau vertices and the study of
dynamic and deformation of defects in nematics. In addition, an investigation
defects in biaxial liquid crystals will be initiated. The second part of the
project concerns the evolution of liquid crystals. It is represented by a
nonlinear system which can be viewed as a nonlinear coupling between flow of
harmonic maps and a Navier-Stokes system. Of particular interest is the
determination of global existence, uniqueness and stability of classical or weak
solutions. Work will also be done in studying the partial regularity of such
systems by exploring free interface problems arising in elasticity, optimal
design and liquid crystal droplets. Partial differential equations form a basis
for mathematical modeling of the physical world. The role of mathematical
analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to provide qualitative
and quantitative information about the solutions. This may include answers to
questions about uniqueness, smoothness and growth. In addition, analysis often
develops methods for approximation of solutions and estimates on the accuracy of
these approximations. ***