* 9401087
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Word and Unification   Problems and Automated Reasoning
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Deepak Kapur, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 07/31/1998
* USD 22,743.00

9401087 Narendran This award supports Paliath Narendran, Deepak Kapur and two
graduate students of the University of Albany, to interact with Professors
Freidrich Otto of the University of Kassel and Klaus Madlener and Jurgen
Avenhaus of the Computer Science Department of the University of Kaiserslautern.
All of them are widely recognized for their outstanding contributions to various
areas among their mutual interests, which include symbolic computation, theorem
proving, unification and algebraic issues related to term rewriting. The U.S.
participants are particularly strong in automated deduction and symbolic
computation, and they have been active in both theoretical and practical aspects
of these fields. Their interests and expertise are well matched and complemented
by their highly regarded German colleagues. This work has direct relevance to
theorem proving and constraint solving, which are emerging as crucial
technologies in future programming systems. Therefore the results of this
collaboration among these innovative mathematicians and computer scientists are
very likely to be theoretical advances that will have practical value in
designing and using programming languages and symbolic computation systems. The
involvement of the two graduate students will be a valuable experience at an
early stage in their research careers. ***