* 9401908
* Development and Evaluation of pH and CO2 Microelectrodes    for In Situ Determination of Deep Sea Pore Water            Carbonate Chemistry and Carbon Recycling Rate
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1995
* Frederick Sayles, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/1995
* USD 110,527.00

9401908 CAI This project is aimed at developing a fast and stable pCO2
microelectrode based on a flat tip Iroxide pH microelectrode and evaluating the
accuracy and applicability of pH and pCO2 sensors for measuring benthic carbon
recycling rates and pore water CO2 chemistry. The pCO2 microelectrode will be a
marked improvement of an earlier pCO2 sensor. It is planned to enhance and
optimize the response rate, stability, and precision of the pCO2 electrode. The
accuracy of the pH and pCO2 microelectrode measurements will be evaluated by
profiling various laboratory incubated sediments and comparing the results with
TCO2 concentrations from whole core squeezing samples. In situ measurements and
evaluation also will be conducted in two coastal environments. A goal in the
future is not only to collect high resolution and artifact-free in situ profiles
with microelectrodes, but also to over-determine the pore water carbonate system
by combining the in situ microelectrode measurements (O2,pH, and pCO2) and the
in situ sampling techniques (TA, TCO2, and nutrients) in a single device. The
measurements will define the O2/C/N ratios during organic carbon early
digenesis. This strategy will also give the three state-of-the-art approaches,
microelectrode, whole core squeezing, and benthic chamber incubation, a
reliability and internal consistency check. This combined approach is essential
for determining benthic response to the seasonal changes of C input and in
delineating controls over the pore water carbonate system and CaCO3 preser-
vation and dissolution.