* 9401855
* Mathematical Sciences:  Harmonic Analysis and Hyperbolic    Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Hart Smith, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1996
* USD 40,000.00

9401855 Smith This award supports mathematical research focusing on applications
of harmonic analysis to problems in the theory of hyperbolic differential
equations. Work includes the development of estimates for the wave group with
Dirichlet conditions on manifolds similar to that obtained with the additional
condition that the boundaries be concave. Estimates fail on manifolds with
convex boundaries although in these instances there exist multiply reflected
geodesics producing gliding rays which travel along the boundary. It is
therefore of interest to find worst case example where the estimates fail and
try to obtain newer estimates for this situation. Work will also be done on the
Hardy space for Fourier integral operators. Efforts will go into analyzing a new
function space on which the algebra of Fourier integral operators of order zero
act continuously. Certain operators associated with oscillatory problems are not
bounded on the standard Hardy spaces will remain bounded on the new spaces. One
of the first tasks is to obtain an alternate characterization of the space.
Finally, work will be done constructing frames for square integrable functions
which diagonalize the wave group. Harmonic analysis combines those elements of
mathematics best exemplifying the ideas of synthesis. One seeks to decompose
complex problems into fundamental components. These components are then analyzed
for their basic characteristics. Finally, the solution is reconstructed through
a recombination of the components. The Fourier series and Fourier transform are
examples of tools used in this context; one discrete , the other representing a
continuous decomposition. More recently the wavelet theory added new dimensions
to some of the more classical approaches to harmonic analysis.***