* 9401216
* Interhemispheric Transport:  Mechanistic Studies for        Understanding and Improving 3-D Chemical Models
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Dana Hartley, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 05/31/1998
* USD 225,021.00

Abstract ATM-9401216 Hartley, Dana Georgia Tech Title: Interhemispheric
Transport: Mechanistic Studies for Understanding and Improving 3-D Chemical
Models The primary goal of the proposal research is to obtain an improved
understanding of what mechanisms control the exchange of air parcels between
hemispheres: This information will be used to improve 3-D chemical transport
models that presently do not adequately simulate interhemispheric exchange. For
some models this will involve explicitly assessing and improving the model
dynamics. However, for transport models that use predetermined wind fields a
parameterization of the processes involved will be necessary. In order to
achieve these goals, a combination of analyses of both observations and general
circulation model outputs will be employed to study the dominant locations,
seasonality, and interannual variability of cross-equatorial transport. Studies
will also be performed to diagnose the dynamical processes related to the
exchanged of mass between hemispheres. The specific steps to meet these goals
include analyzing previously completed simulations of CFCl3 transport in the
Community Climate Model 2 (CCM2) forced with climatological sea surface
temperatures (SSTs) to determine the location and seasonality of the transport
between hemispheres. The PI will also perform runs of the CCM2, with CFCl3 as
the tracer, using observed SSTs to examine the influence of the El Nino/South
Oscillation (ENSO) on interannual variability of interhemispheric exchange.
After the parameterzation has been tested, it will be available for general use
in chemical transport models.