* 9401109
* U.S.-France Collaborative Research (INRIA):  Numerical      Analysis of Stochastic Differential Equations
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Philip Protter, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1998
* USD 40,000.00

9401108 Protter This three-year continuing grant supports U.S.-France
cooperative research in numerical analysis of stochastic differential equations
(SDE). The investigators are Philip Protter of Purdue University, Thomas Kurtz
of the University of Wisconsin, Denis Talay, French National Institute for
Research in Computer Science and Applied Mathematics and Jean Jacod, University
of Paris VI. The investigators have identified six topics for exploration,
including studies of the discretization of stochastic differential equations and
their flows; applications to numerical analysis of parabolic partial
differential equations and to mathematical finance; and numerical analysis of
interacting particle systems. Stochastic differential equations deal with the
modeling of random dynamical systems and have been applied to models for
statistical communication theory, finance theory, control theory among others.
With the advent of computers, it is now important to analyze such models
numerically. The project takes advantage of unique expertise of the INRIA
researchers, who are world leaders in stochastic differential equations. The
results of this work will further understanding of other numerical problems and
advance our understanding of the special nature of stochastic differential
equations. SDEs could eventually replace, for example, current financial models
with more efficient and faster computational models. ***