* 9401069
* Arthropod Biodiversity in a Lowland Tropical Rainforest II
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Donald Stone, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Joaquin Martinez Martinez
* 08/31/1997
* USD 365,000.00

9401069 Stone As the second phase of an ongoing collaborative project between
the Organization for Tropical Studies and the Instituto Nacional de
Biodiversidad (INBio, Costa Rica), a faunal inventory of tropical rainforest
arthropods (mites, spiders, and insects) will be intensified and broadened at La
Selva, a biotically rich and scientifically active biological station situated
in the Atlantic lowlands of Costa Rica. A full-equipped, dedicated arthropod
laboratory, collections facility, and data management system created with
previous NSF support in Phase 1 of the project, and the talents of the ALAS
Parataxonomists and Biodiversity Technician, who were extensively trained with
that support, will allow immediate and efficient use of physical and human
resources in Phase 2. The scope of the inventory will be expanded with the
addition of two kinds of new focal Taxa: (1) those within the broader Survey
Taxa established in Phase 1, for with many collections have been made and
specimens already prepared, and (2) new Focal Taxa not within Phase 1 Survey
Taxa, but added to enlarge the ecological and phylogenetic scope of the project.
Collection and preparation of new material in Phase 2 will shift to a series of
concentrated efforts, by the project staff and relevant collaborators, for one
Focal Taxon (or set of related Focal Taxa) at a time, using an ecologically-
structured, quantified-effort collection strategy and all techniques appropriate
for each taxon. Twenty-five systematists P.I.'s and Collaborators (including 7
Collaborators from Costa Rican institutions) will contribute to work of the
inventory in Phase 2, while enriching their own phylogenetic and biogeographical
studies with material form La Selva. Specimens will be integrated into the
national biodiversity inventory already underway at INBio, thus placing the La
Selva survey material in a larger geographical and systematic context, promoting
further study of this material by INBio's growing international network of
specialist s, and ensuring permanent accessibility of the specimens. The project
is structured to promote extensive avenues of collaboration between North
American and Costa Rican scientists. Exploration and evaluation of methods for
estimating arthropod faunal richness and composition will continue, through the
use of taxon ratios (both hierarchical and intergroup), species accumulation
curves, and parametric and non-parametric analyses of abundance patterns. The
design and functionality of the database application successfully developed and
implemented in Phase 1 for the project will be further refined and expanded, and
the application will be made available to other projects, both as a source of
experience-based ideas and as a working tool. Taken together, these activities
should serve to further position the project as a demonstration and
methodological evaluation pilot for other multi-taxon biodiversity inventories,
as well as a ground-breaking and significant inventory in its own right.