* 9401058
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems on the Interface       Between Geometry and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* F. Thomas Farrell, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1997
* USD 129,000.00

9401058 Farrell F.T. Farrell in collaboration with L.E. Jones (SUNY at
StonyBrook) will attempt to verify their conjectured calculation of the
algebraic K- and L-theories of the integral group ring of a given group in terms
of the K- and L-theories of the integral group rings of a class of subgroups of
that group. This class consists of all the virtually cyclic subgroups of the
given group. They envision applications of this work to differential geometry,
in particular, to questions of rigidity. The objective is to classify geometric
objects by numerical invariants. The geometric objects are Riemannian manifolds,
spaces which locally resemble Euclidean space except that the notion of distance
may be warped, and they arise naturally and ubiquitously in the mathematical
formulation of physical theories. Thus, as is familiar from the general theory
of relativity, a space can be curved; e.g., it could be a sphere or a torus
(doughnut surface). Some basic numerical invariants of such a space are its
fundamental group and its sectional curvatures. For example, the curvature of
the torus changes continuously from point to point, varying between positive and
negative numbers, whereas the curvature of the sphere of radius 1 is identically
1. Farrell and Jones have shown that two closed negatively curved Riemannian
manifolds with the same fundamental group invariant are homeomorphic; i.e.,
there is a continuous one-to-one mapping between their points. (The case of 3-
and 4-dimensional manifolds is still open.) But they gave examples where the
mapping can never be smooth. A search will be made for additional numerical
invariants guaranteeing a smooth mapping, which is highly significant for any
physical applications. ***