* 9401443
* Mathematical Sciences: Topology and Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Dusa McDuff, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 345,000.00

9401443 McDuff Dusa McDuff: The study of symplectic topology has made great
progress in the past decade, and is now sufficiently developed to have
significant impact in other fields, for example the use of Floer homology in
studying 3- and 4-dimensional manifolds, and, more recently, the application of
J-holomorphic curves in the study of mirror symmetry and quantum cohomology. In
recent years, McDuff has devoted her energies to developing the tools of
symplectic topology with the main aim of understanding the topological structure
of compact symplectic manifolds. She intends to continue working in the same
general direction in the next three years, in an attempt to solve some of the
very interesting problems which still remain. Lowell Jones: Jones will continue
his collaborative efforts with F. T. Farrell, investigating rigidity properties
of the classical closed spherical manifolds. In prior work they have shown that
closed nonpositively curved manifolds and closed double coset manifolds are
topologically rigid, in dimensions &gt; 5. In work in progress they show that
any closed complete affine flat manifold is topologically rigid, in dimensions
&gt; 5. They have also constructed many examples of strictly negatively curved
closed manifolds which are homeomorphic to one another but not diffeomorphic,
thus verifying that the class of nonpositively curved manifolds does not enjoy
smooth rigidity. Whether or not the class of closed double coset manifolds, or
the class of closed complete affine flat manifolds, are smoothly rigid remains
an open question which Jones intends to pursue. Dusa McDuff: A symplectic
structure is a very basic kind of geometric structure which underlies all the
equations of classical and quantum physics. In the last ten years, new tools
have been developed which allow mathematicians for the first time to gain some
understanding of the global meaning of this kind of structure. One focus of
McDuff's work is the geometric explora tion of the concept of energy. In physics
this is the driving force of movement (of systems ranging from the planetary
system to plasmas). The new methods of symplectic topology make it possible in
some cases to estimate the minimum energy required to accomplish a certain
movement. This work is very basic and should eventually have important
implications in the study of physical systems. Another focus of her work is the
attempt to understand what a symplectic structure really is by investigating the
geometric properties of the spaces which are symplectic. The idea is that these
spaces are the embodiment of the abstract idea of a symplectic structure. Lowell
Jones: In 1829 and 1832 the mathematicians N. Lobachevsky and J. Bolyai
independently solved a two thousand year old mathematical problem by verifying
that Euclid's fifth axiom for plane geometry is independent from the first four
of Euclid's axioms. They did this by investigating a new type of geometry having
"negative curvature." Today the 2-dimensional geometries of Lobachevsky and
Bolyai are important special cases of the larger class of geometric structures
having "non-positive curvature," which can occur in all the higher dimensions,
and which have been the focus of a tremendous amount of research over the last
forty years. An important theme in this research has been that each such
geometric structure has an associated algebraic structure (called the
"fundamental group") which acts as a sort of genetic code for the underlying
geometric structure. Although it is far from true that the fundamental group
always determines the underlying geometric structure, this is true in some
special cases. Jones has recently verified that the fundamental group always
does completely determine the "topological nature" of the underlying geometric
structure. To paraphrase this, Jones has shown that the fundamental group
determines the rough outline of the underlying geometric structure, even though
it does not de termine all the details of the geometric structure. ***