* 9401515
* Mathematical Sciences:  Inductive Limit C*-Algebras:        Classification and Nonstable K-Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Guihua Gong, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1997
* USD 57,592.00

9401515 Pasnicu The proposed research has two major objectives: 1.To classify
all the real rank zero (stable rank one) AH algebras by their graded ordered
scaled group. 2. To obtain nonstable K-theory results for AH algebras. The
completion of the first project would be a major step in the classification
problem of separable nuclear C*-algebras by invariants. The completion of the
second project will give a positive answer to an important conjecture of
Blackadar and will provide important information in itself and also concerning
the classification of nuclear C*-algebras. Operators are infinite dimensional
generalizations of matrices that possess a natural addition and multiplication.
There is a natural involution called the adjoint operation on operators that
behaves much like the transpose operation (reflection in the diagonal) on square
matrices. A collection of operators that is closed under addition,
multiplication, the adjoint operation and has a certain topological property is
called a C*-algebra. These algebras are important in several branches of
mathematics as well as in mathematical physics and dynamical systems theory. The
C*-algebras investigated here are ones that are built out of matrix algebras in
a limiting manner. The basic goal is to classify these important algebras using
simple invariants. ***