* 9401723
* Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Research in Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Charles Steinhorn, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

9401723 Steinhorn This project focuses upon questions having to do with
o-minimality and its extensions. Some of these questions relate to expansions of
archetypal o-minimal structures and structures whose domain has as its order
type that of the real numbers. Other problems concerning o-minimality are
intended to develop the structure of groups definable in o-minimal structures as
far as possible in analogy with locally Euclidean groups. Among the variants and
extensions of o-minimality to be considered are weak o-minimality and local
o-minimality. It is hoped that the latter will provide a suitable framework for
developing some model theory for subanalytic sets. Another goal of the research
is to begin to develop a general model theory for ordered structures, patterned
after stability theory. The research described above falls under the heading of
model theory within the branch of mathematics called logic. Model theory
attempts to deal with the properties of familiar mathematical structures which
can be described by a formal mathematical language such as predicate logic. The
focus of this project is a class that includes and behaves very much like the
polynomial and algebraic functions based on the real numbers that are studied in
freshman calculus and are used to describe many phenomena. There has been much
exciting progress during the past five years, in which model theory has played a
central role in deepening our understanding of familiar mathematical systems of
interest in diverse areas of mathematics outside of logic. ***