* 9401086
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Topology of Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Robert Daverman, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1998
* USD 61,000.00

9401086 Daverman The aim of this project is to characterize (1) low-dimensional
manifolds and (2) a class of nicely structured functions -approximate fibrations
- defined on them. Both components involve close scrutiny of continuous
functions on these objects, with severe restrictions imposed on the point
preimages. The first comprises the final aspects of a far-reaching effort to
characterize manifolds topologically; primarily it calls for determination of an
appropriate geometric notion of general position to fulfill the role played by
the Disjoint Disks Property in the characterization of high dimensional
manifolds. The second arises because recent results in the piecewise linear
category make it reasonable to expect discovery of widespread additional
conditions under which one quickly and easily detects an approximate fibration;
specifically, it seems that for many n-manifolds N , any map from an
(n+k)-manifold onto a reasonable space X with each point preimage homotopy
equivalent to N will be an approximate fibration. Interest in this class stems
from andtrades upon computable relationships among domain, range, and typical
fiber. New tools are sought for this effort, geometric ones in the first case,
to distinguish genuine manifolds from pretenders, and algebraic ones in the
second case, both to improve the recognition criteria and to expand the
applications. The projected research activity focuses on manifolds, a
foundational project in that these objects are central to so much mathematics.
One aim is to characterize low-dimensional manifolds, which would crown the far-
reaching effort to characterize manifolds topologically, with complete success
recently achieved in dimensions greater than 4, and hopes for related success in
the two remaining dimensions of interest. A second aim is to characterize
certain nicely structured functions, approximate fibrations, defined on
manifolds. This effort appears promising now because several resu lts from the
past two years make it reasonable to expect discovery of additional, useful
conditions under which one could quickly detect this class of functions. The
resultant ease and variety of computations about the various objects at hand
would be a significant benefit. New tools are sought for each of these efforts,
geometric ones in the first case, to distinguish genuine manifolds from
pretenders, and algebraic ones in the second case, to provide additional
relationships among domain, range, and fiber of the functions under
consideration and thereby to expand the applications. ***