* 9401080
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Double Standards and Pay:  The Relationship Between Standards for Performance and      Rewards
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Cecilia Ridgeway, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/1995
* USD 6,633.00

9401080 Ridgeway This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral
Dissertation Research program. It is a study of some of the social bases for the
acceptance or rejection of double standards for rewarding performance of tasks.
A series of social psychological experiments will be carried out using
undergraduate students, with computers used to simulate partners cooperating in
performing an assigned task. Through manipulation of the relative rewards given
to subjects and partners and also the social status characteristics of partners,
reactions of subjects to the establishment of a differential reward structure
will be studied. Previous work in experimental social psychology has examined
either how standards for evaluating others or individual reward expectations are
established, but this will be one of the few attempts to study both processes
simultaneously. Unlike some experiments, the results of this project should have
direct implications for important real-life situations involving the acceptance
or challenging of double standards for judging individual performance. In
addition to the scientific gains to be achieved by the research, this award will
materially assist a highly promising student in completing research for the
Ph.D. dissertation. Thus it contributes to the future scientific manpower of the
nation and the thorough training of the next generation of social scientists.
***