* 9401142
* Rapid Prototyping of Parallel Robot Vision Systems Using    Virtual Reality and Systems Simulation
* CSE,EIA
* 08/15/1994,01/31/2000
* Michael Scott, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 01/31/2000
* USD 1,500,000.00

9401142 LeBlanc This award provides support for the establishment of a
laboratory that uses two types of simulation technologies in the design of
visually controlled robotics systems. The first type of simulation technology is
the simulation of sensory interaction with physical environments, popularly
known as "virtual reality". Virtual reality can replace the real world in
testing and debugging a system. The second is execution-driven simulation of
complex parallel algorithms at the level of individual messages and memory
accesses, which can address the performance and low-level real-time problems of
interacting processes. The experimental facilities requested include a Silicon
Graphics Reality (SGI) Engine for scene generation in the simulated world, an
upgrade of an existing SGI Challenge multiprocessor for simulation of the
virtual world and control software, a computational engine for performing real-
time intermediate to high-level vision, a hydraulic robot arm for real-time
manipulation, a small-scale multi-processor for device control and medium-level
vision, and general purpose workstations. The focus of the proposal is the
development of simulations to aid in the development of real-world robotic
systems. Research topics to be explored include the development of principles
for constructing complex physical autonomous systems; the development of new
modes of simulation for virtual reality, and simulation and implementation of
robotic control algorithms.