* 9401376
* Grant for Exploratory Research:  Immobilized Porphyrins as  Versatile Stationary Phases in Liquid Chromatography
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1994,10/31/1995
* Mark Meyerhoff, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David J. Curran
* 10/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

This one year Small Grant for Exploratory Research in the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program supports the research of Professor Mark Meyerhoff at the
University of Michigan, and is focused on the development of porphyrin-based
stationary phases for the separation of members of the fullerene family of
compounds. The separation characteristics of the porphyrin phases will be
altered by changing the identity of the metal ion located within the porphyrin
ring, and by electrochemically controlling the oxidation state of the metal
center. Other potential applications include polyaromatic hydrocarbon analyses
and peptide separations. In recent years, a new type of chemistry has been
developed based on the discovery of the fullerenes. These are compounds with a
framework based only on carbon atoms and which have symmetrical structures, for
example, the soccer ball-shaped C60. These compounds show a great deal of
promise as new materials with unique properties, e.g., lubricants. This
research, supported by the Chemistry Division, will allow these new materials to
be characterized in much more detail. These studies will potentially allow for
the isolation of large quantities of these unique species, which is critical for
the development of new materials based on these compounds.