* 9401333
* Mathematical Sciences:  Nonlinear Partial Differential      Equations and Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Wei-Ming Ni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 129,640.00

Ni 9401333 Work supported by this award focuses on the mathematical analysis of
nonlinear partial differential equations, systems and their applications. The
research continues several projects such as the study of spike-layers in
mathematical biology. These arise in mathematical descriptions of the
chemotactic aggregation stage of cellular slime molds. One is interested in
solutions of the relevant equations which exhibit spiky patterns dependent on
the equation coefficients. Such patterns have been observed experimentally. A
second line of investigation concerns cross- diffusion in population dynamics.
The primary question to be studied here is one of determining and understanding
the steady states of such systems. Work will also be done measuring the
stability of steady states of a class of semilinear heat equations in
n-dimensional space and on the inhomogeneous semilinear elliptic or parabolic
equations arising in infinite particle systems in probability. Partial
differential equations form a basis for mathematical modeling of the physical
world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much to create the equations
as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative information about the
solutions. This may include answers to questions about uniqueness, smoothness
and growth. In addition, analysis often develops methods for approximation of
solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.