* 9401840
* The Identification and Characterization of Cytosolic FactorsInvolved in Targeting of Nuclear-Encoded Precursors to      Higher Plant Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Barry Bruce, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1996
* USD 35,000.00

9401840 Bruce, Barry, D. This is a start-up grant for a Post Doctoral Fellow in
Plant Biology. In plants and other eukaryotes, the translation of nuclear
encoded genes can be divided into two diverging pathways: one, where proteins
are translated on ribosomes associated with the endoplasmic reticulum and are
destined either for the ER/Golgi complex for secretion, or for the plasma
membrane; and a second pathway, where proteins are synthesized on free ribosomes
in the cytoplasm. In plants, proteins synthesized on free cytoplasmic ribosomes
can either remain in the cytoplasm, or being imported into one of four different
organelles: the nucleus, the peroxisome, the mitochondria or the chloroplast via
a post translational pathway. This post translational import requires a
precursor form of the protein containing a targeting sequence which directs it
to a specific organelle. It has been proposed that one prerequisite for the
import of these precursors is that they maintain an import competent
configuration. It is commonly accepted today that import of proteins into
mitochondria requires that they be in a destabilized conformation. The role of
protein conformation on import into chloroplasts is much less certain. The goal
of this proposal is to determine what defines the import competence of
chloroplast targeted precursors, and also what cytosolic factors are involved in
maintaining this competence. The small subunit of ribulose bisphosphate
carboxylase has been chosen as a model to address this question. The
investigation will focus on purification of cytosolic factors that interact with
the transit peptide for chloroplastic transport; on identification of trans-
acting chloroplast import factors by the two-hybrid cloning technique, that
allows specific protein-protein interactions to be identified in vivo through
the reconstitution of a transport activator; and assaying in vitro the soluble
factors in increasing import competence of the precursor of the sma ll subunit
of ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase. %%% The PI made good progress during his
post doctoral research on the problems concerning protein import into
organelles, and obtained results which suggest that the conformational
requirements for chloroplast import and mitochondrial import may be different.
The goal of this project is to investigate the specific requirements for protein
transport into chloroplasts. This is the topic that the PI started during his
post doctoral research in the Keegstra laboratory. He will be taking the project
with him to the University of Tennessee at Knoxville, where he starts a tenure
track position in January 1994. This start-up grant for NSF Post Doctoral
fellows in Plant Biology therefore will be essential to help him establish his
own laboratory, and also scientific status. ***