* 9401733
* GEM MACCS-East: A Magnetometer Array for Cusp and Cleft Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1999
* W. Jeffrey Hughes, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 02/28/1999
* USD 354,581.00

It is proposed to continue to operate and analyze data from the recently
installed MACCS array of fluxgate magnetometers located at cusp/cleft latitudes
(75o to 80o in arctic Canada in a joint effort with Augsburg College. During the
summers of 1992 and 1993 8 magnetometers were deployed at small communities in
the eastern arctic. These eight observatories span nearly 5 hours in magnetic
local time in the latitude region most valuable for ground-based observations of
the magnetospheric boundary layer, and serve to connect existing magnetometer
sites in Alaska and western Canada to the west and sites on Greenland and Baffin
Island to the east. In addition, it is proposed here to add data loggers at
three standard Canadian observatories (Resolute, Cambridge Bay and Baker Lake).
This would allow to obtain 1 s data from these sites and routinely combine this
data with the MACCS data base so effectively extending the MACCS array another
hour to the west. The purpose of the MACCS array is to study ionospheric
currents, plasma flows, and waves associated with the magnetospheric cusp and
neighboring regions. In association with the radar systems beginning to operate
in this same area, these magnetometers will provide high resolution, two-
dimensional data on the electrodynamics of cusp convection. The MACCS data also
contain numerous high latitude substorm signatures. As the GEM program begins
its substorm campaign, it is proposed to use MACCS data to study the small,
contracted oval substorms associated with northward IMF, and the recovery phase
of regular substorms during which the activity moves poleward over the MACCS
array.