* 9401417
* Mathematical Sciences: Eigenvalues of Elliptic Operators in Gaps of the Essential Spectrum
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Gunter Stolz, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/30/1997
* USD 63,890.00

9401417 Hempel The research will focus on magnetic phenomena, starting with
situations where a thin layer of solid matter is locally penetrated by a strong
magnetic field. The mathematical problem is to analyze the eigenvalues of the
perturbed Schrodinger operator in the gaps of the essential spectrum. The
perturbation occurs as a first order differential operator. A portion of the
project involves numerical computations of the eigenvalues. A second project is
to obtain a model for crystals with impurities. In an attempt to be realistic,
these models will consider the case of a random distribution of impurities. This
project involves research in mathematical physics. In mathematical physics one
has to frequently analyze the effect of local perturbations in a homogeneous or
periodic reference material. An important example is provided by solid state
physics where impurities in insulators or semi-conductors lead to new energy
levels, so-called impurity levels. These impurity levels are basic for the
quantum mechanical theory of the color of crystals; in particular, lasers
operate on such impurity levels. Similarly these impurity levels affect the
conductivity properties of doped semi-conductors. These impurity levels are
studied mathematically by analyzing eigenvalues of perturbed differential
equations. ***