* 9401834
* Mathematical Sciences:  Some Problems in Simulations and    Applied Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Sheldon Ross, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/1996
* USD 42,000.00

Ross A basic probability identity is established and applied to obtain new
simulation estimators concerning (a) system reliability, (b) a multi-valued
system, and (c) the probability distribution of the time until a given pattern
occurs when data is generated by a stationary Markov chain. It has been shown
that the variance of this new estimator is often of the order a-squared when the
usual estimator's variance is of order a and a is small. The investigator will
indicate how this estimator can be combined with standard variance reduction
techniques. Additional studies of the estimator, as well as on variations of it
are proposed as are additional applications. The research also concerns how the
identity can be used to provide approximations and bounds in applied
probability. General bounds as well as specific applications are indicated and
proposed for further study. Many problems involving chance phenomena are too
complex for one to obtain analytical solutions. In such cases a combination of a
probabilistic analysis and a computer simulation leading to statistical
estimators of the quantities of interest is often a potent method of attack. The
investigator has indicated how a basic probability identity can be effectively
employed in obtaining efficient simulation estimators. The purpose of this
research is to study its usefulness, both in the simulation and the
probabilistic analysis phase, in a variety of applications. The investigator has
also indicated extensions of the identity along with potential areas of
applications. ***