* 9402948
* A Comprehensive Approach to Chemical Process Scheduling     Problems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Joseph Pekny, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/1998
* USD 233,146.00

Abstract - Pekny - 9402948 Industrial chemical processing success requires
efficient management of capacity and the ability to quickly adapt to changes in
the marketplace. A large number of constraints, the increasing scope of
operations, time and efficiency pressures, and the combinatorial complexity
implied by discrete decisions make scheduling and planning problems difficult to
solve. This research will lay the foundation for developing process scheduling
tools that are based on rigorous optimization methods, are robust to failure,
easy to use in an industrial environment, can be quickly integrated with
corporate databases, and can address very large and highly constrained
scheduling and planning problems. Rigorous optimization methods provide an
estimate of the best achievable performance available and, in the best case,
they produce a schedule that is provably optimal for a given industrial
scenario. The focus for this project is to provide the methodology and
information necessary for understanding and controlling the critical components
of process performance in a system that is sufficiently flexible to incorporate
technological advances and that is designed to account for the fact that the
scheduling and planning function will continue to evolve over time. The
prototype system to be used is based on the premise that all such systems can be
viewed in a modular fashion. The objectives of the research are: (1) development
of a formulation specifically tuned to sequencing considerations that will
complement existing formulations and be able to address a range of processes in
considerable detail, (2) development of an efficient means to strengthen the
formulation of scheduling problems through the introduction of strong
inequalities derived from problem physics, (3) development of large scale
integer programming solutions capability specific to scheduling and planning
problems and sufficient to address long time scales, and (4) integration of
symbolic reasoning and mathematical programming methods to reduce the training
required to use a sophisticated system and mitigate the robustness problems
inherent with exclusive use of optimization methods on combinatorial
optimization problems.