* 9402501
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Cloning and            Characterization of a cDNA for a Nuclear Protein that       Binds to the 5' Upstream Region of a Rice Glutelin Gene
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Benito de Lumen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 09/30/1996
* USD 120,361.00

9402501 De Lumen This award supports the travel expenses for Dr. Benito De Lumen
of the Department of Nutritional Sciences at the University of California at
Berkeley to spend eleven months in Japan conducting collaborative research with
Dr. Fumio Takaiwa, Department of Cell Biology at the National Institute of
Agrobiological Resources in Tsukuba. The research will focus on the regulation
of gene expression at the transcription level that results in tissue and stage-
specific expression in rice seed endosperm. Dr. Takaiwa and his team have made
significant progress in cloning and characterizing a number of rice glutelin
genes. Working with Dr. Takaiwa, Dr. De Lumen will attempt to clone and sequence
a cDNA encoding a nuclear protein that binds to the 5' upstream region of a rice
glutelin gene, then to establish the stage-specific expression of this cDNA, and
finally to compare its homology with cloned transcription factors. This project
depends heavily on the groundwork established by Dr. Takaiwa in identifying
upstream DNA control sequences in a rice glutelin gene that interact with
nuclear proteins. This work should facilitate the cloning of similar
transcription factors using methionine-rich protein genes from soybeans when Dr.
De Lumen returns to his laboratory in Berkeley. This award is funded under the
auspices of the Center for Global Partnership (CGP) of the Japan Foundation
under the NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program. ***