* 9402071
* Long Tree-Ring Chronologies for the Eastern Mediterranean:  Phase II
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Peter Kuniholm, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

Kuniholm With National Science Foundation support Dr. Kuniholm will continue to
develop a dendrochronological sequence for Southern Europe and the Near East. To
date he has collected sections of sequences which extend back to ca. 7,500 BC
and which cover major portions of Turkey, Greece, Italy and adjacent areas in
Southeastern Europe. With partial NSF support he will continue this work. Over
the course of two field seasons, together with his colleagues, he will visit
numerous sites in the region to collect old wood. Analysis at Kuniholm's Cornell
laboratory will then permit their incorporation into a master chronology. The
goals of this work are to fill in the gaps which remain in the chronology and to
fill in its extended range. This research is important for several reasons. Most
importantly, from an archaeological perspective, a tree ring chronology will
provide an absolute dating technique which will allow dates to be assigned to
wood and charcoal recovered from archaeological sites. Precise dating is
critical in such research. The information will also be useful to
paleoecologists, climatologists and others who use data derived from the past.
The tree ring chronology will not only provide a basis to increase our
understanding of past human behavior, but will also help to illumine such issues
as the effect of human actions on climate.