* 9402988
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies on 3- and 4-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Joan Birman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1998
* USD 425,100.00

9402988 Morgan Professor Morgan continues to study Donaldson polynomial
invariants of smooth 4-manifolds M. This includes searching for explicit
computations. One is a blow-up formula that would express the invariants for the
connected sum of M with a complex projective plane in terms of those for M. Such
a formula should prove essential for understanding general relations among the
invariants. Another part of the project, continuing work begun with Tomasz
Mrowka of Cal Tech, studies the invariants of a 4-manifold split into two pieces
by a 3-torus. These invariants should be related by a generalized product
formula to the invariants of the two pieces. In a more qualitative vein,
Professor Morgan intends to look for other contexts in which these invariants
may be defined, hoping that other points of view will illuminate the theory and
will explain some of the surprisingly simple and coherent numerical results now
being obtained. Professor Birman's project centers on the theory of knots and
links in 3-space. She is approaching this problem from two points of view. The
first is joint work with W. Menasco (now in its 8th year, with much of the
preliminary work completed). Its goal is an algorithmic solution to the link
problem, via the theory of braids. Her second project is closely related to the
first, and involves Vassiliev-Kontsevich invariants of knots and links in
3-space. These numerical invariants include all the information which is
contained in the Jones polynomial and its generalizations, and possibly more. A
central question is whether Vassiliev invariants contain more information than
Jones invariants, and, in particular, whether they detect orientation. The
asymptotics of the dimension of the Vassiliev algebra, as the order of the
invariants goes to infinity, also involves some very interesting problems in
combinatorics, which Professor Birman is studying. Professor Morgan's research
concerns invariants of four- dimensional man ifolds, while Professor Birman's
centers on computers and knots. Each is an effort to tame geometric complexity
by rendering it susceptible to numerical or algebraic computation. Consider the
latter, for example. While knots are among the most familiar of everyday objects
(as every fisherman knows), their classification turns out to be a deep and
difficult problem in 3-manifold topology. Roughly speaking, given two knots, one
would like to be able to decide (with the help of a computer) if one can be
twisted and deformed, keeping its ends fixed and without cutting the string)
until it looks like the other. Precisely describing a method for doing this is
an unsolved problem on which Professor Birman is working (with W. Menasco, of
SUNY Buffalo). A different aspect of the same question concerns a vast
collection of computable invariants (discoverd by V. Vassiliev) which give a
partial answer to the knot question. With regard to the algebraic invariants,
the central question is exactly what information is 'missed' by the Vassiliev
invariants. While the motivation for this work is a wish to understand the
underlying mathematical structure, one would expect that answers to questions
such as the ones being asked would have applications wherever knots (or
4-manifolds) occur, i.e. to biology, chemistry, and physics. ***