* 9402647
* Electrons in Two-Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Arnold Dahm, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 365,000.00

9402647 Dahm Technical abstract: The properties of electrons in two dimensions
will be investigated using semiconductor heterostructures and electrons on
helium films. Studies will be carried out in the variable-range hopping regime
in gated heterostructures. A search will be made for a predicted Coulomb gap in
the density of states. The magnetic field dependence of the localization length
will be studied in an attempt to measure the energy of the "floating"
delocalization states. The conduction properties of a pinned electron crystal on
a liquid helium film will be carried out. This is a model sliding charge-density
wave with a coupling to "impurities" (substrate potentials) which can be varied
through a wide range by changing the film thickness. Non-technical abstract: The
aim of this study is to achieve a better understanding of the laws of physics
governing two- dimensional systems. The investigations span the spectrum of
interest from a classical system of electrons on a helium surface to the quantum
limit of electrons in semiconductors. The study of two-dimensional electrons in
semiconductors is closely related to the 2D Hall effect and results from this
study may have applications to electronic devices. Electrons on a helium surface
form a model system to study properties of phenomena which occur in three
dimensions within a more limited set of variables. ***