* 9402262
* Temperature Stable Alternative to Li Compensation of        Silicon Radiation Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1997
* John Walter, IntraSpec Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 02/28/1997
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9402262 WALTER SBIR phase-II funds are provided to investigators at
IntraSpec Inc. to develop a technology for the fabrication of less expensive
silicon radiation sensors. Silicon x-ray energy spectrometers have become a very
important tool for elemental analysis in research and industry. Currently, the
deep sensitive depths required for silicon x-ray detectors and some other
silicon detector applications usually are obtained by a compensation technique
commonly referred to as Li Drifting. Unfortunately, Li Drifting is only quasi-
stable at room temperature and very unstable at higher temperatures. The
temperature stability problem limits the performance and general usefulness of
these detectors by prohibiting modern device processing technologies like oxide
surface passivation and high-temperature contact formation. This research
addresses the feasibility study of an alternative approach to compensation of
silicon which would allow sensitive depths > 3 mm, be compatible with high-
temperature oxide passivations, allow high-temperatures contact formation , and
be cheaper than Li Drifting. this new technology should result in cheaper x-ray
detectors which will operate satisfactorily at the higher temperatures
obtainable with thermoelectric or other alternative cooling techniques. It also
should make it possible to build very large area, deep sensitive depth detectors
at reasonable prices. A high-temperature compatible technology which can replace
Li compensation will have a large impact on the silicon x-ray energy
spectroscopy market; particularly in the area of portable field instruments. It
also will unlock new market opportunities in silicon charged particle detector
spectroscopy and perhaps in optical detectors. ***