* 9402458
* SBIR Phase II:  Low Cost Electron Beam Hydrocarbon Emission Control Systems
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/1996,10/31/1998
* Rodney Petr, Science Research Laboratory Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

This is an award to support research on a concept for reducing emissions of
hydrocarbons from industrial thermal process exhaust gases and waste
incinerators. The emission control concept to be studied is based on using
ionizing radiation produced by a beam of energized electrons accelerated by a
solid-state, induction device. The objective of this project is to determine the
commercial feasibility of the process, the technical feasibility of which was
established in Phase I of research conducted under NSF Grant No. 92-60496. This
Phase II project involves conduct of laboratory experiments to determine the
rate of hydrocarbon destruction by the electron beam, the dose and dose-rate
needed, and effectiveness of the beam in a simulated stack environment. Results
of the experiments are planned to be used in design of interfaces between the
induction accelerator and other system components. The proposal leading to this
award was submitted in response to NSF 92-30, Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) under Topic 25d, Environmental Systems. Results of this research are
expected to determine the commercial feasibility of the proposed concept and the
basis for its commercialization. If successful, a process based on this concept
has the potential of being widely used to control emissions of pollutants from
incinerators and from industrial processes that result in production of gaseous
hydrocarbons air pollutants.