* 9402016
* Synthesis, Characterization and Physical Properties of      Alkalides and Electrides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,09/30/1997
* James Dye, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 09/30/1997
* USD 480,000.00

Abstract 9402016 Dye This research involves the synthesis and characterization
of crystalline salts and vapor-deposited thin films that contain alkali metal
anions (alkalides) or trapped electrons (electrides) and cations that are
complexed by cyclic or bicyclic poly-oxa molecules. Particular emphasis will be
given to the study of the optical, magnetic and electrical properties of single
crystals using a variety of techniques. Because different electrides have widely
different properties, and since their behavior often is dependent on the thermal
history of the sample, new complexants will be synthesized to provide a wider
assortment of crystalline electrides. Recent theoretical treatments have pointed
out the importance of anionic cavities and empty channels in electrides and the
extended nature of the unpaired electron wavefunction in molecular electrides.
To relate experiment to theory, simple complexants for Li+, such as 9-crown-3,
12-crown-3 and cryptand 1.1.1 will be synthesized and used to prepare electrides
for study. The use of alkalides and electrides to prepare nanoscale transition
metal and intermetallic particles, both free and in zeolite cages will be
studied. %%% This research is concerned with the synthesis and characterization
of crystalline salts and vapor-deposited thin films that contain alkali metal
anions (alkalides) or trapped electrons (electrides) and cations. Alkalides and
electrides are two new, interesting classes of materials. Electrides, in
particular, provide the unique opportunity to examine the behavior of electrons
that do not "belong" to a particular atom or molecule, but rather, occupy the
holes and channels between close-packed large complexed cations. They provide
the opportunity to study such phenomena as non-metal to metal transitions in
systems that approach a lattice of nearly free electrons, and magnetic
interactions and electronic conductivity in 1, 2, and 3 dimensions. Emphasis
will be given to the study of the optical, magnetic and ele ctrical properties
of single crystals using many characterization methods.