* 9402726
* Engineering Research Center for Neuromorphic Systems Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 11/15/1994,03/31/2006
* Pietro Perona, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lynn Preston
* 03/31/2006
* USD 28,027,275.00

9402726 GOODMAN The goal of the Engineering Research Center in "Neuromorphic
Systems Engineering" is to develop the technology infrastructure for endowing
the machines of the next century with the senses of vision, touch, and olfaction
which mimic or improve upon human sensory systems. The Center will raise
artificial neural network technology to became an "enabling technology" for
industry (comparable with the impact of the introduction of the microprocessor).
Although the U.S. is the world leader in neural network research, a quantum leap
in technology is needed for this research to manifest itself as innovative
processes and products in U.S. industry. The Center will aim to facilitate this
leap by focusing on sensory processing in which the natural parallelism of
artificial neural networks, and neuromorphic VLSI and optical circuits can
provide solutions to problems that are hard for conventional computing. These
problems include vision, audition, tactition, and chemical sensing (olfaction).
Coupling high bandwidth arrays of sensors and actuators with the processing
power and learning abilities of distributed neural networks will generate a
quantum leap in human-machine interaction and machine-environment interaction.
The Center will take a multi-disciplinary approach through the tight coupling of
sensors and intelligence required to achieve sensory processing. Algorithms and
VLSI hardware must be developed together. Lessons must be learned from
neurophysiology, anatomy, and psychophysics but then translated into rigorous
engineering design and practice. In order to have massive impact on industry,
these design technologies must be automated to the level that digital
Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) are today. The educational
mission of the center will be assisted by Caltech's existing Computation and
Neural Systems (CNS) Ph.D program. Established in 1986, the goal of this
multidisciplinary program is to stud y the structure and computational powers of
both living and synthetic neuronal circuits and systems. The program currently
has 34 doctoral students working in the laboratories of 20 Caltech faculty
members, spread across the divisions of Engineering and Applied Science,
Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The Center
will run an effective program for industrial collaboration and technology
transfer, as well as an outreach program to academia, schools and local
business. Industrial guidance will be obtained through the creation of an
industrial advisory board. Ultimately, low cost hardware solutions to these
sensory processing tasks will open up new areas of application in industry and
ensure U.S. competitiveness in such areas as automatic inspection, quality
control, flexible manufacturing, telecommunications, process control,
transportation, consumer electronics, autonomous machines, smart sensors, and
robotics. This award begins the ERC with an initial cooperative of agreement of
five years. ***