* 9402505
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Fluid Flow             Approximation in Open Networks
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1995
* Karl Sigman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 10/31/1995
* USD 63,918.00

9402505 Sigman This award supports the foreign travel expenses for Dr. Karl
Sigman from the Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research at
Columbia University to spend seven months in early 1995 in Japan. Dr. Sigman
will be conducting theoretical research with Professor Masakiyo Miyazawa of the
Department of Information Sciences at the Science University of Tokyo in the
area of fluid flow approximation in open networks. Discrete objects such as bits
of data, jobs, and customers, arriving over time to a facility can be
approximated as a flow of a fluid. The purpose of this study is to obtain
approximations and bounds for system performance in the case when primitives of
the model, such as the arrival and processing mechanisms, are general processes.
Such approximations and bounds are of interest in areas as diverse as
telecommunications, manufacturing and finance, where real systems are becoming
increasingly complex and are not easily analyzed through classic queuing
methods. Fluid flow models of discrete systems are of interest as providing
tools for the analysis of systems that are important yet mathematically
intractable. This project brings together the related research interests of Dr.
Sigman in the importance of fluid flow approximation to queuing networks with
the expertise of Prof. Miyazawa, one of the world's ranking queuing theorists.
This award is funded under the auspices of the Center for Global Partnership
(CGP) of the Japan Foundation under the NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program. ***