* 9402263
* Direct Determination of the pH Distribution in the Glacial  Oceans Based on the Boron Isotope Composition of            Foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Wallace Broecker, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/1997
* USD 209,346.00

9402263 BROECKER Scenarios designed to explain the 80 ppm glacial to
interglacial difference in atmospheric CO2 content recorded in ice cores can be
placed into tow categories, those involving the ocean's biologic pump and those
involving the ocean's CaCO3 cycle. The former group received most attention; but
cadmium concentration and carbon isotope measurements on foraminifera appear to
rule against them. The latter group have, to some extent, been rejected out of
hand because the dissolution record for deep sea sediments appears to dictate
against the rather large CO32 content changes required to accomplish the
observed atmospheric CO2 change. Recently Archer and Maier-Reimer have found a
way around the dissolution record constraint. They show that because of the
influence of respiration CO2 released to the upper centimeter of sediment it is
possible to have a rather large change in the steady state lysocline depth. This
study will employ the boron isotope method to determine whether the Archer and
Maier-Reimer scenario is feasible. Preliminary measurements on paired glacial
and holocene foraminifera (both benthic and planktonic) suggest that the ocean's
pH was, as required by the Archer and Maier-Reimer scenario, 0.2 to 0.3 units
higher during glacial time. The thrust of this research is to make more such
measurements with the highest attainable accuracy and also to explore the
validity of the numerous assumptions on which the boron isotope pH method as
applied to marine CaCO3 is based.