* 9402547
* Photopumped VUV Laser at 60nm and Its Potential Application for Material Science Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Szymon Suckewer, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/1998
* USD 200,120.00

9402547 Suckewer The goal of this project is to develop a VUV laser with an
output lasing wavelength near 60 nm. Because its photon energy (~20eV) matches
molecular bonding energies and is typical of the energy values used in
photoelectron spectroscopy, there will be several very important applications
for a source of this type in chemical research. Ultimately we envision the
development of a practical laboratory-size instrument with output power at a
wavelength of ~60 nm which exceeds any present source,including synchrotrons.
Our prototypes will be used in experiments conducted in collaboration with Prof.
G. Scoles and his group in the Chemistry Department for (a) high resolution
photoelectron spectroscopy at high dilution and (b) mass spectroscopy and time-
of-flight molecular beam experiments. This laser may also become an important
device for material science research particularly in the study of photoelectron
effects in semiconductors and for solid state physics in general. As has been
the case with other laser developments, success may lead to many unexpected
applications perhaps opening up new areas of physics and chemistry. Our proposal
for the development of VUV laser in MoVII uses the photopumping scheme of
Feldman and Reader. The scheme is based on their observation of a unique line
coincidence for two different ions of the same element, namely the MoII line at
13.65 nm which coincides with a MoVII line. Both line are strongly coupled to
the ground state. This makes them a suitable pair to be exploited for the
photopumping scheme i.e. for the creation of a population inversion and gain on
the 4p56s-4p55p transitions in MoVII at a wavelength near 60nm. ***