* 9402780
* Speed of Constraint Satisfaction Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Paul Purdom, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 12/31/1997
* USD 173,892.00

This research investigates finding fast algorithms for constraint satisfaction
problems. A constraint satisfaction problem is one in which a series of
constraints is imposed on a set of discrete variables. The task is to find a set
of values for all the variables that satisfies all the constraints
simultaneously. For example, when scheduling traffic lights each light may be in
one of only three discrete states. Furthermore, there are constraints on the
states of the traffic lights that require that no two cross-streets get green
lights at the same time. A constraint satisfaction problem may have thousands of
variables and thousands of constraints. Constraint satisfaction problems arise
in diverse areas. These include generating tests of correctness for electronic
circuits, understanding line drawings by computer, solving combinatorial
problems, and predicting the folding of RNA molecules. The set of constraint
satisfaction problems is one of the NP complete problem sets, so it is unlikely
that a fast algorithm for all constraint satisfaction problems will ever be
found. Indeed, brute force algorithms for constraint satisfaction problems may
be extremely slow. Nonetheless, algorithms have been found that are fast for
most problems in certain NP complete problem sets. This research concerns
finding and characterizing the algorithms and problem sets for which constraint
satisfaction problems can be solved quickly, with the aim of finding general
algorithms that are fast over as wide a range of problem sets as possible.