* 9402854
* Mathematical Sciences: World Congress of Bernulli Society   for Math Statistics and Probability- Partial Support for    junior participants
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/1994,11/30/1994
* M. Ross Leadbetter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 11/30/1994
* USD 24,960.00

9402854 Leadbetter Travel support and expenses are requested for the
participation of at least 24 promising junior researchers and graduate students
in the 3rd World Congress of the Bernoulli Society for Mathematical Statistics
and Probability, which is to be held jointly with the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics (IMS). The Bernoulli Society schedules a
4-year "World Congress for Probability and Mathematical Statistics", which is an
integral component of the infrastructure for scholarly exchange of ideas on an
international level. It plays a role in the fields of probability and
mathematical statistics similar to that of the International Congress of
Mathematicians (ICM) in the field of mathematics. The Congress was last held in
1990 in Uppsala, Sweden, jointly with the 53rd annual meeting of the IMS. (The
IMS and Bernoulli Society are the two principal international organizations for
Mathematical Statistics and Probability.) This enormously successful conference
provided strong encouragement to the societies to consider further joint
meeting, designating Chapel Hill, NC (site of the University of North Carolina)
as venue for the next Congress scheduled for June 19-25, 1994. The Congress is
expected to attract up to 800 participants including many internationally
recognized statisticians and probabilists. The Organizing Committee desires to
encourage the attendance and significant involvement of promising junior
researchers and graduate students, and has instituted a "Host/Mentor" program to
pair junior participants with established researchers. This is designed to
ensure their introduction to, and instigate significant interactions with
talented senior and foreign statisticians and probabilists at the meeting. The
Congress Program emphasizes probability and statistical theory and application
with eleven invited sessions in Probability, thirteen in Statistical Theory and
eleven on Applications. In add ition, a number of related workshops and special
lectures are planned.