* 9402020
* Diffusive and Ballistic Vortices in Superconducting         Josephson Arrays
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Terry Orlando, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 270,000.00

9402020 Orlando Technical abstract: The diffusive and ballistic motion of
vortices in one and two dimensional arrays of Josephson junctions will be
studied both experimentally and numerically. By using niobium arrays we will
explore a new physical regime where the penetration depth is smaller than the
unit cell of the array. These investigations will be used to model vortex
motion, to study coherent motion of vortices, and to study novel phase-locked
solutions of non-linear dynamical systems. With sub-micron size junctions, the
arrays can exhibit ballistic motion of the vortices and give rise to mesoscopic
transport which. Non-technical abstract: Josephson junctions form the basis of
most devices in superconducting electronics. We will study a lattice of such
devices coupled together. In such a lattice the magnetic field is bound in
bundles of quantized magnetic flux called vortices. These arrays allow one to
study vortex motion in new regimes where motion can be ballistic and can give
rise to novel collective states that are coherent or even quantum mechanical. By
understanding such motion one will be able to design more efficient and novel
superconducting electronic devices. One can also add to the understanding of
quantum mechanical effects which occur on macroscopic (rather than atomic)
lengths and to the understanding of new non-linear effects in dynamical systems.
***