* 9402184
* Spontaneous Formation of Identical Collections of           Nanostructures During Semiconductor Heteroepitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Jeff Drucker, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1997
* USD 273,227.00

9402184 Drucker Research will be carried out to develop a fundamental
understanding of the processes associated with direct epitaxial deposition to
spontaneously form a collection of identical, defect free nanostructures during
Ge/Si(100) heteroepitaxy. A unique combination of both in situ (low energy
electron microscopy, scanning tunneling microscopy and ultrahigh vacuum scanning
transmission electron microscopy) and ex situ (transmission electron microscopy)
microscopy will be used to asses the size, uniformity, areal density and spatial
distribution of these nanostructures. Tuning the size of uniform collections of
dots will be investigated by varying the concentration of mobile adatoms
(supersaturation) on the growth surface through changes in deposition
parameters. The size of these nanostructures will be tuned through the Bohr
radius in Ge, about 10 nm, to investigate the effects of quantum confinement.
Use of direct epitaxial deposition allows formation of the target structures on
a semiconductor surface, in situ and, most importantly, in a single step. %%%
The primary goal of this program is to develop a fundamental-understanding of
the epitaxial growth, processing, and properties of Ge/Si quantum dots so that
they can be exploited in the realization of a variety of advanced electronic and
photonic devices. An important feature of the program is the training of
graduate and undergraduate students in a fundamentally and technologically
significant area of materials and processing research. This research will
contribute to improving the general performance of advanced devices and
integrated circuits used in computing, information processing, and
telecommunications. ***