* 9402659
* Collaborative Project: Defining Plant Signals that StructureMicrobial Communities in the Rhizosphere
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1997
* Frans deBruijn, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Erik T. Nilsen
* 11/30/1997
* USD 124,000.00

9402659 deBruijn Natural bacteria on and near roots contribute to plant growth,
but little is known about how particular bacterial species form communities in
the rhizosphere. Therefore, it is important to clarify the molecular basis of
plant-microbe signaling and define its role in bacterial growth, survival, and
colonization of roots. Recent results show that small quantities of certain
plant compounds regulate transcription of genes required for infection by
Rhizobium and Agrobacterium bacteria. It is postulated that other plant-induced
genes in these bacteria control earlier stages of root colonization and that
homologous genes are present in other rhizosphere microbes. This project will
use Rhizobium and Agrobacterium as models to find novel plant-regulated genes
that are important for understanding broader issues of rhizosphere biology. By
moving beyond the well-studied nodulation and virulence genes in these
organisms, it is hoped to build a basis for future research on rhizosphere
ecology. This project specifically will 1) define chemical structures of plant
signals that induce genes in soil bacteria, 2) isolate novel bacterial genes
responding to the compounds, 3) deduce signal transduction pathways, and 4)
assess the importance of the molecules as regulators of microbial colonization
in the soil. These goals will be achieved by identifying natural signals from
alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) which induce transcription of random
bioluminescence (lux) gene fusions in R. meliloti and A. tumefaciens. The tools
and experience for this project are available in the complementary programs of
the three co-principal investigators. D. A. Phillips has studied Rhizobium-
legume interactions for many years and uses modern methods to isolate and
identify compounds involved in that symbiosis. Drs. Kado and de Bruijn are
experienced microbial geneticists with major research programs on Agrobacterium
and Rhizobium. This project will define in molecular terms how al falfa controls
root colonization by two model soil microbes, and it will develop information
and tools required for testing detailed hypotheses on physiological processes
that structure microbial communities in the rhizosphere. This is a collaborative
project with Drs. Phillips and Kado at the University of California, Davis. ***