* 9402512
* U.S.-Denmark Program:  Dissertation Research in Arctic      Atmospheric Chemistry
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1996
* Sheldon Landsberger, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 11/30/1996
* USD 12,800.00

9402512 Landsberger This award supports dissertation-related research in Western
Europe by a PhD student of Dr. Sheldon Landsberger from the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The graduate student, Mr. Steven Biegalski, will
carry out atmospheric chemistry research at the RISO National Laboratory in
Roskilde, Denmark. Dr. Landsberger and Mr. Biegalski are actively involved in
research using source-receptor models to characterize the airborne pollutants in
the Arctic and also to study the influence that halogens have on the destruction
of ozone. Dr. Landsberger has received funding from Denmark to visit and
collaborate with Dr. K. Heydorn and Dr. Kare Kemp of the Neils Bohr Institute.
They are directing a Danish project to develop receptor models based on analyses
of Arctic aerosols. Funding from the Western Europe Program of NSF will enable
Mr. Biegalski to accompany Dr. Landsberger and to stay for two two-month periods
to carry out research that will contribute to his dissertation. Participation in
the ongoing research at RISO National Laboratory will give Mr. Biegalski access
to field samples and specialized equipment and procedures not available to him
at the University of Illinois. These will give him further insights into the
role that the long range transport of atmospheric aerosols, particularly trace
elements, play in global change. He will also gain experience in international
collaboration at an early stage of his research career, and establish solid
professional contacts with a leading atmospheric chemistry research group and
its network of European collaborators. ***