* 9402623
* Mathematical Sciences: Ideas, Problems, and Methods at the  Interface between Biology and Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Courtney Coleman, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1994
* USD 4,000.00

9402623 Cooke The investigator and his colleagues organize an
internationalconference that brings together applied mathematicians
andmathematical and theoretical biologists to discuss research at theinterface
between mathematics and biology. Mathematical modelsare presented to lend
insight into a wide variety of biologicaland biomedical areas, including
population and community dynamics,cell and tumor dynamics, epidemiology,
immunology, and physiology.Advances in mathematical methods that are useful in
analyzingbiological data and models are explored via lectures ondifferential
equations, dynamical systems, functional analysis,control theory, and
probability and statistics. The program forthe meeting includes eight principal
survey lectures;approximately 80 shorter lectures and 20 posters by
otherparticipants present recent research results. The purpose of the Conference
is to provide a forum forexposition of new research in the field of mathematical
biologymathematics applied in biology), and to promote interactionbetween
mathematical and biological scientists. Interactionbetween mathematics and other
sciences has always played animportant role in the advancement of scientific
knowledge.Recently, as biological knowledge has exploded, interactionbetween
biologists and mathematicians has increased. Theseinteractions have improved
understanding of theoretical andpractical questions in biology, and have
stimulated mathematiciansto develop new methods appropriate for these questions.
In thisConference, research papers are given on mathematical analysis ofthe
spread and possibilities for control of AIDS and otherepidemics, on questions
about scales of measurement in ecology andenvironmental science, on radiotherapy
and chemotherapy, onseveral physiological medical problems, and on other
problems. Newbasic research on mathematical methodology is also reported.
Aspecial effort has been made to attract a mix of established andnew
researchers, includin g women and minorities. The format ofthe meeting includes
plenary survey lectures, individual researchpapers, and poster sessions, thus
encouraging exchange of ideasamong established and new researchers in this
interdisciplinaryfield.