* 9402019
* He Isotopic Composition of Micrometeorites as a Tool for    Evaluating Sedimentation Rates
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Robert Anderson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 06/30/1997
* USD 173,019.00

9402019 ANDERSON During their travel in the inner solar system, fine cosmic dust
particles acquire large amounts of noble gases owing to their surface to volume
ratio. When these particles enter the earth's atmosphere, those sufficiently
small to enter the earth's atmosphere at cosmic velocities without suffering
ablation, are called micrometeorites and retain their noble gases, including He.
Not only do the micrometeorites have high He concentrations, but they also have
very high 3He/4He ratios, several orders of magnitude above that of terrigenous
materials. The micrometeorites eventually settle down to the bottom of the ocean
where they are mixed with other sediments. This project will use the bulk
sediment He concentration and isotopic composition as a measure of
micrometeorite concentration in the sediments. If the flux of micrometeorites to
the earth has remained constant in geological past, then their concentration in
sediments can be used to quantitatively evaluate sedimentation rates and the
fluxes of different sedimentary components and changes in these fluxes through
time. This research will test the assumptions that the flux of micrometeorites
to the sediments have stayed constant over time and that the micrometeorites in
sediments retain their He for time-scales of interest. If successful, this
approach will expand our ability to look at high resolution sedimentation rates
to millions of years.