* 9402226
* Demand Driven Computation of Partial Data Flow and its      Application in Software Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Mary Lou Soffa, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 05/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

Although data flow analysis was first developed for use in compilers, its
usefulness is now recognized in many software engineering tools. Because of the
origin of global data flow analysis, that is, compilers, the computation of data
flow for software tools is based on the traditional data flow framework.
However, this framework for computing data flow is not producing the efficiency,
the preciseness, or the type of data flow problem needed for software tools.
These problems are due to the requirements of exhaustive data flow that
information is computed for all possible executions, at all points, and all
information is computed at each program point. This work investigates the
definition of data flow problems when the properties of all executions, all
program points and all information at each program point of exhaustive data flow
are relaxed, producing partial data flow information computed on demand. The
goal is to define a formal framework, in the vein of the traditional framework,
where partial data flow problems can be defined and computed. Because the number
of problems will grow with partial data flow, and the data flow problems will
not be known in many cases until run time, this project investigates the
implementation of partial data flow analysis by defining a specification
technique to express the demand driven problem and automatically generating the
algorithm that computes the information. In order to define partial data flow,
information has to be provided that reduces the scope of data flow analysis.
This information can either be static information, provided before execution, or
dynamic information that is used to either further refine static data flow or to
drive its computation. This work first focuses on debugging and testing tools
and then explores other applications in software engineering.