* 9402136
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Analysis of            Japanese Observations of Mars
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Bernhard Lindner, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 06/30/1995
* USD 65,112.00

9402136 Lindner During a four-month research visit to Japan, Dr. Bernhard L.
Lindner, Staff Scientist, Atmospheric and Environmental Research, Inc.,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, will work with Japanese scientists at universities in
Kyoto and Kyushu and at the Kwasan Observatory in Kyoto to investigate a 20-year
historical database on the seasonal regression of the martial polar caps. The
project will analyze these observations with an existing theoretical model. The
principal collaborator will be Professor Kyosuki Iwasaki, Lecturer, Kyoto Gakuen
University. The specific objectives are to understand (1) ice behavior on
regional scales such as the Mountains of Mitchel, (2) interannual variations
observed in polar-cap regression, (3) the temporary halt observed in the
regression of the north polar cap at latitude 65N from L(S) = 20 degrees-50
degrees, and (4) the observed variations in the regression of both polar caps
with longitude. This analysis should assist in planning future ground-based
observations and should also assist in intercomparison of these observations
with those of future Mars missions, such as the planned Planet-B mission, a 1996
launch of the Japanese Mars Mission. In addition to Professor Iwasaki, the other
Japanese investigators involved in this project are Professor Tokuhide Akabane,
Lecturer, Hida Observatory, University of Kyoto; Professor Yasunori Narumi,
Kyushu Tokai University; and Professor M. Makita, Director of the Kwasan
Observatory. ***