* 9402186
* Impact of Toxic Dinoflagellates on Digestive Physiology and Metabolism of Copepods
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* R. Patrick Hassett, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1996
* USD 134,946.00

9402186 HASSETT Due to the dramatic and sometimes catastrophic consequences of
red tides, toxic dinoflagellates have been intensively studied over the years.
However, relatively few of these studies have dealt with effects of
dinoflagellates on zooplankton. The main objective of this project is to
determine how the dinoflagellates, Alexandrium tamarensis and Scrippsiella
trochoidea act upon the copepod digestive system and metabolism. These studies
will examine if different copepod species have different susceptibilities and
how these relate to feeding history and nutritional status, and will determine
if other dinoflagellate species have similar impacts on copepods. This project
will use visual description and morphometric analyses of the gut cells of
several copepods feeding upon the 2 species of dinoflagelattes in laboratory
experiments. Analyses of gut morphology will be conducted at both the light and
electron- microscope level , and also will include observations of the digestive
system of live copepods under light microscope. Changes in physiological rates
(digestive enzyme activities, metabolic enzyme activities, excretion rate, and
respiration rate) and feeding rate also will be determined to assess the
consequences of ingesting a toxic dinoflagellate or of being exposed to
dinoflagellate toxins. After establishing the interactions between copepods and
the two dinoflagellates, this project will use the knowledge gained as a basis
for a survey of impacts of other dinoflagellate species on copepods.