* 9402580
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research (INRIA):  Perturbation     Analysis and Parallel Computing for Production Management
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Jeffrey Herrmann, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/2000
* USD 30,000.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in operations
research and production systems between Ioannis Minis of the University of
Maryland and Jean-Marie Proth of INRIA (French National Institute for Research
in Computer Science and Applied Mathematics) in Lorraine, France. The objective
is to develop a system that facilitates effective and efficient production
planning for complex manufacturing systems. The investigators will study a
multi-product production planning problem. The problem addresses a way to
determine the number of products to be manufactured over many time periods in
order to minimize the cost function. The investigators propose to use a
parameterized hierarchical production management system to deal with the
numerous variables and account for random events that disrupt production. In
this approach they will aggregate the time units, the machines, and the part
types in order to reduce the size of the problem. After computing a solution for
the aggregated problem, they propose to solve the subproblems corresponding to
each group of machines in order to achieve a near-optimal detailed production
plan. The U.S. investigators bring to this collaboration considerable expertise
in optimization and perturbation analysis, production hierarchy, and aggregation
schemes. This is complemented by the French investigator's expertise in
production planning and scheduling, parallel computing, and his practical
experience in manufacturing.