* 9402110
* Construction of an Inlet System for Automated Tritium       Measurements by He Isotope Mass Spectrometry
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Peter Schlosser, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/1996
* USD 187,272.00

9402110 Schlosser This award provides funding to construct an inlet system for
mass spectrometric measurement of tritium by the He ingrowth method. The inlet
system will automate the processing of tritium samples 1) increasing the
capacity of the laboratory, and 2) improving the quality of the tritium
measurements. The increased capacity of the laboratory will be necessary to
process the large number of samples generated by a variety of NSF-funded
research projects, particularly WOCE studies of deep water formation in the
Arctic and Antarctic oceans and long-term observations of deep water formation
in the Greenland/Norwegian and Labrador seas. The PI has established a state-of-
the-art laboratory for noble gas measurement over the past six years. The
laboratory currently consists of two mass spectrometers; one dedicated to heavy
noble gas measurements (from 3He to 136 Xe) and the other dedicated to He
isotope and tritium measurements. The demand for He isotope and tritium
measurements has grown to the point that separated mass spectrometers are needed
for He and tritium. This demand has been created by oceanographic studies funded
by NSF/OCE, NSF/OPP and NOAA. NOAA has provided $200,000 for acquisition of
third mass spectrometer that will by dedicated to tritium measurements. This
proposal will allow the PI to construct an inlet system for the new tritium mass
spectrometer consisting of (1) a cryogenic cold trap system for separation of
helium from other gases, (2) gas pipettes for standardization, and (3) the
sample inlet and purification lines. The expected capacity of the new system
will be 1500 samples per year which should by sufficient to meet the demands of
currently funded research projects. Future expansion of the inlet system will be
possible should demand exceed 1500 samples per year. Joint funding for this
award will be provided by the OCE Arctic Systems Science Program, the
OCE/Physical Oceanography Program, the OCE/Instrumentation and Techn ical
Services Program, and the Polar Ocean and Meteorology Program.