* 9402416
* U.S.-Brazil:  Adaptive Finite Element Methods Applied       To Thermal Cyclic Shakedown Problems For Hardening Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* J. Tinsley Oden, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 08/31/1997
* USD 16,941.00

This U.S.- Brazil Cooperative Science Program award supports travel expenses,
computer time and publication costs, related to the visit of J. T. Oden, U. of
Texas, Austin to Belo Horizonte, Brazil. Prof. Oden will work on numerical
analysis of thermal shakedown problems; his Brazilian counterpart is J. Franco,
of the Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte. An important
objective in solid mechanics is to determine conditions under which mechanical
and structural systems fail. Limit load analysis, particularly shakedown theory
of classical plasticity is one of the ways in which these conditions may be
determined. The present work involves the development of a new and general
theory of failure analysis, extending classical shakedown theories, that focuses
on the following: -general material constitutive laws, including possibly non-
ductile materials, -upper and lower bounds for limit and shakedown
loads,-variable multiple- parameter load factors,-inclusion of the effects of
thermal cyclic loading on material behavior, -development of computational
schemes to determine bounds on limit and shakedown loads, -development of
schemes for numerical error estimations and adaptivity to control the
computational process and produce very accurate simulations of failure
mechanisms and limit loads, -comparisons with available data, experimental,
computational and analytical.