* 9402271
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Molecular                Characterization of Bacteria Isolated from Casuarina Nodulesin Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1995,10/31/1998
* Ann Hirsch, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/1998
* USD 45,000.00

9402271 Hirsch This Americas Program award will support Dr. Ann M. Hirsch,
University of California, Los Angeles, and Dr. Maria Valdez, Instituto
Politecnico Nacional, Mexico, in a research collaboration on nitrogen-fixing
symbiosis between Frankia microbe strains and the Casuarina tree (Ironwood). The
objective is to find efficient nitrogen-fixing strains that can be used to
inoculate Casuarina, an Australian tree introduced in Mexico only 50 years ago.
The researchers aim to determine the means by which various isolates found in
nodules of the Casuarina tree fix nitrogen, and, particularly, to examine
whether the bacteria have alternative nitrogenase genes. Deforestation and the
loss of arable lands in tropical and subtropical countries are major global
concerns. Numerous efforts to reclaim areas stripped of trees have failed
because the fragile tropical soils become depleted in both nitrogen and
phosphorous once the trees are removed. The introduction of nitrogen-fixing
trees that also establish mycorrhizal relationships is an approach to this
problem. This project will enable researchers to identify nitrogen- fixing
organisms that are well adapted for nitrogendepleted tropical soils, and is of
potential interest to other tropical and subtropical countries having
extensively deforested regions with eroded soils. ***