* 9402642
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Causes of      Latitudinal Diversity Patterns
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Wade Worthen, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1995
* USD 19,800.00

9402642 Worthen This award is under the International Junior Investigator and
Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a six-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Wade B. Worthen of Furman University to work with Dr. Klaus Rohde
at the University of New England in New South Wales, Australia. Their research
will directly test the effects of temperature on the speed of selection and rate
of mutation using Drosophila melanogaster flies as a model system. There are two
aspects to their plan, the first is selection and mutation experiments in the
lab and second, a field and literature survey of latitudinal changes in
drosophilid diversity and generation time. The focus of the research will be
several lab experiments selecting for various traits in Drosophila melanogaster
under different temperature treatments. These experiments will determine whether
populations at higher temperatures have higher mutation rates, shorter
generation times, and more rapid responses to selection than populations at
lower temperatures. This research is likely to make an important contribution to
the study of biodiversity and will expand what we know about a critical
determinant of a primary global pattern ***