* 9402938
* Cross-Sectional Scanning Probe Microscopy/Spectroscopy of   Semiconductor Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Chih-Kang Shih, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9402938 Shih The Principal Investigator will investigate the structural,
electronic and optoelectronic properties of semiconductor heterostructures and
the correlation between them by using three forms of scanning probe microscopy
(STM): scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/S), tip-induced
luminescence, and localized photoluminescence based on scanning near field
optical microscopy (SNOM). The unprecedented spatial resolution of these
techniques make them the ideal tools for microscopic investigations of these
properties at the heterostructure interfaces. The work will focus on: (1) band
discontinuities; (2) metallurgical controllability; and (3) effects of
structural defects on the electronic and optoelectronic properties. % % % % This
project will develop novel experimental methods to study the physical properties
at the interface between two different semiconductors. The study will allow
direct visualization of the arrangement of different atoms at such interfaces.
More importantly the study will allow one to understand how these atomic
arrangements influence the behavior of electrons and the light emitting
properties in electronic devices. The results will have immediate technological
impact on the development of future electronic devices to be used in the next
generation computers and optical communications. ***