* 9402690
* Collaborative Research:  Is Variable Retention of           Larvae Nearshore a General Cause of Variable Recruitment
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Steven Gaines, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1997
* USD 220,921.00

9402690 Gaines Although it is widely acknowledged that oceanographic processes
influence benthic communities, little effort has focused on this issue in a
synthetic way. Prior research by the PI's had taken a predictive and
experimental approach to explaining spatial and temporal variation in the
recruitment of the northern acorn barnacle, Semibalanus balanoides, in
Narragansett Bay. About 80% of the large interannual variation in barnacle
recruitment in the bay over the last decade is explained by annual variation in
bay flushing times, which set the extent of retention and export of larvae from
the bay. This renewal project will test the generality and consequences of the
previous findings in other estuaries and examine additional taxa. Only by
undertaking studies across biogeographic areas and a wide range of taxa will the
linkages between oceanographic processes and the population and community
dynamics of benthic assemblages be unraveled. The project will use replicated
bays in New England with differing flushing characteristics to examine the
relationship between spatial and temporal variation in bay flushing time and the
recruitment of common shoreline species. The generality of mechanisms generating
recruitment variation is an unresolved issue, yet it has important implications
to the dynamics of marine communities. With simultaneous studies on five
important space occupiers of the NW Atlantic, this project will begin to develop
a general understanding of linkages between hydrodynamic processes and the
populations and community dynamics of benthic assemblages. ***