* 9402551
* Constraint Imperative Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Alan Borning, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/1998
* USD 182,000.00

This project continues work on Constraint Imperative Programming (CIP)
languages. A constraint represents a relation that should be maintained by a
computer program. Constraints have a number of desirable properties that make
them useful in building systems such as interactive graphical applications. They
are declarative statements, rather than imperative statement; a programmer need
only to state ``what'' rather than ``how''. Additional advantages result from
embedding support for constraints in the programming language itself. First, it
becomes convenient for programmers to use constraints. Second, the language
implementation can ensure that the constraints are checked automatically. Third,
a more uniform and elegant language can result from expressing standard
constructs as constraints. Finally, more opportunities for optimization are
opened to the compiler. In this project, the activities include investigating
techniques for compiling object-oriented constraint imperative languages, such
as Kaleidoscope, to produce efficient code. To accomplish this, the system does
as much compile time analysis of the constraints as possible. Other activities
include developing tools for writing, browsing, and debugging constraint
imperative programs, investigating the compilation of Kaleidoscope programs to
run on shared memory MIMD machines, and testing the utility of this class of
languages by programming a set of representative applications. Another important
focus is the development of a more efficient and powerful constraint
satisfaction algorithm. A final activity is work on debugging support for
constraint systems. The work on constraint satisfaction algorithms and debugging
is useful both to support constraint imperative languages, as well as other
kinds of constraint-based systems.