* 9402308
* A Study of the Transfer of Carbon Across the Seasonal       Boundary Layer of the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Sallie Chisholm, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 05/31/1997
* USD 325,030.00

9402308 MARSHALL Dynamical, chemical and biological processes will be studied
that control the transfer of carbon across the seasonal boundary layer of the
ocean on the scale of ocean gyres. The study is mechanistic and designed to
elucidate the role of the seasonal cycle in controlling the relative importance
of the solubility and biological pumps. It explores the possibility that extreme
conditions prevailing at the end of winter, not only determine key dynamical
properties of the main thermocline- such as its ventilation rates, temperature
and salinity properties- but also has a major effect on the rates and
geographical pattern and seasonality of the carbon flux, both across the sea
surface and through the base the mixed-layer. The inclusion of a realistic
seasonal cycle can change these rates by as much as a factor of two and cannot
be ignored in discussions of the natural or anthropogenic carbon cycle. The
study employs a bio-geochemical model of the carbon cycle, driven by off-line
transport parameters from a general circulation model of the North Atlantic
undergoing a seasonal cycle. A hierarchy of experiments is proposed in which the
model is integrated separately with representations of; a passive tracer; air-
sea transfer and inorganic chemistry of carbon; nutrients and biology. The
sequence will culminate in a comprehensive experiment, bringing all three
processes together, biology, chemistry and the dynamics as well as the effect of
enhanced air-sea exchange associated with winter storms. The experiments are
designed to identify those processes which control the rate at which the ocean
inducts carbon into its interior in different dynamical regimes. They are a
crucial first step towards understanding the response of the ocean to the
anthropogenic input of carbon.