* 9402314
* CRB:  Exploring the Significance of Model Structure in      Viability and Harvesting Analyses
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1996
* Peter Kareiva, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Taber D. Allison
* 11/30/1996
* USD 109,000.00

9402314 Kareiva Models are playing an increasingly important role in resource
management and conservation biology. These "applied ecological models" are used
in a different spirit than basic ecological theory -- they are used to project
scenarios or identify management options for particular species, and are based
upon sketchy data often analyzed under tremendous time pressure. Typically,
rather arbitrary decisions are made about model structure -- whether or not to
include age and stage structure, how many age classes, what type of
environmental variability should be included, should density dependence be
considered, and so forth. Unfortunately, the implications of decisions about
model structure are virtually never explored in even the most rudimentary
fashion. In this Conservation and Restoration Biology research, the PI's will
perform a computationally intense comparison of different resource management
and viability models in which simulated data is modeled in different ways, and
the performance of the different modeling approaches is contrasted. To ground
these studies in real world problems, the PI's will also apply the same wide
variety of models to two case studies: a viability model for the Northern
Spotted Owl, and a harvesting model for the Serengeti wildebeest. The goals are
threefold: (1) to use simulated data sets to understand how aspects of life
history structure and environmental variability influence the sensitivity of
model results to model structure, (2) to develop convenient computational
approaches for evaluating different models when presented with real data, and
(3) to alert applied ecologists to the danger of settling on one model structure
without exploring alternatives. %%% This research will provide an important
linkage between resource management, conservation biology, and ecological
theory. The need to address the advantages and limitations of applied ecological
models is paramount. Too often, decisions are made with incomplete data, and
based on incomplete an alyses. This research will provide the basis for
assessing the utility of various models for the conservation of species and
management of natural resources. ***