* 9402723
* Engineering Research Center for Low Cost Electronic Packaging
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/1994,10/31/2006
* Rao Tummala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mary Poats
* 10/31/2006
* USD 29,606,169.00

9402723 TUMMALA This award establishes a new Engineering Research Center (ERC)
at the Georgia Institute of Technology on Low-Cost Electronic Packaging. The
vision of the ERC is to improve performance of electronic products significantly
while simultaneously reducing size and cost. The objectives of the ERC are: (1)
to carry-out research, development and prototype manufacturing in low-cost,
high-performance, and portable electronic packages consistent with industry
needs, (2) to transfer this knowledge to industry, and (3) to train future
leaders by educating students, industrial personnel, and faculty from Georgia
Institute of Technology and other institutions. The essential components of the
ERC are research, partnerships with industry, education, and technology
transfer. The research thrusts include: (1) package design and modeling, (2)
low-cost micro-chip module (MCM) based on novel materials, processing, and large
area planarization, (3) MCMs with integrated passive and active devices, (4)
MCMs with integrated optoelectronic components, (5) novel interconnect materials
and processing tools, (6) assembly, (7) testing including built-in self test for
mixed-signal designs and fault location. (8) thermal management, and (9) large-
area prototype manufacturing. The electronics industry is built on the following
technology elements: semiconductor chips, electronic packages, power sources,
displays, and the systems that are formed through integration. The United States
leads in the design of computers, telecommunication system, and the use of
electronics in most industrial and commercial applications. The United States
trails in consumer electronics, and is increasingly dependent on non-domestic
sources for electronic packages and production equipment. Electronic packaging
is one of the most important strategic technologies in electronics. The ERC will
have a major impact on education of students in this important topic. The
Georgia Institute of Technology is among the largest producers of electrical,
mechanical, and industrial engineering students in the United States. This ERC
will expose undergraduate, graduate and post- graduate students to this area of
high national economic importance. This award initiates the ERC with a 5-year
cooperative agreement. ***