* 9402540
* Fiber Optic Sensor for Real Time and Continuous Monitoring  of pH and Dissolved Oxygen in Sea Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Mahmoud Shahriari, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Norman Caplan
* 08/31/1997
* USD 269,107.00

9402540 Shahriari The research aims to develop and test a fiber optic sensor for
pH and dissolved oxygen monitoring simultaneously in sea water. This sensor will
utilize a porous glass optical fiber immobilized with pH and oxygen sensitive
photochemical compounds via a sol- gel coating technique. The microporous nature
of the non- densified sol-gel coatings, in which photochemical dyes are
immobilized, provides a unique local environment that is environmentally stable
and immune to photochemical bleaching and chemical leaching due to decomposition
or degradation of the immobilized photochemical compounds. The research for the
proposed fiber optic sensor consists of three parts: (i) development of an
optical coating material which is photochemically sensitive to both pH and
dissolved oxygen, and characterization of its optical and photochemical
properties; (ii) preparation of a fiber optic pH/dissolved oxygen sensor based
upon this coating, and determination of its photochemical stability and optical
quality; (iii) evaluation of the sensor in simulated sea water environments in
an effort to optimize the sensor parameters under a range of chemical and
physical conditions. Such a development offers potential applications for marine
environmental monitoring. In this proposed reseach the combined resources of
Rutgers' Fiber Optic Materials Research Program (FOMRP) and those of its
Institute for Marine and Coastal Sciences will be devoted to development and
implementation of optical fiber pH/DO sensor for monitoring of sea water.