* 9402443
* Study of Pressure-Induced Phase Transitions Through         Vibrational Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1994,10/31/1997
* Shiv Sharma, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/1997
* USD 320,000.00

9402443 Jayaraman This project will explore, characterize and attempt to
rationalize pressure-induced phase transitions in some select rare earth
containing oxide materials using mainly Raman and infrared spectroscopy to
pressures up to 50 giga pascals. Pressure-induced phase transitions including
amorphization are observed in these systems. It is hoped to establish criteria
for pressure-induced amorphization by investigating the detailed behavior of
some select molybdates at high pressure and elevated temperature. In one of the
rare earth oxides it is hoped to achieve metallization at pressures near 40 giga
pascals and test the exciting possibility of high Tc superconductivity. Pressure
induced transitions in certain perovskite oxides will be investigated. The
stability of the perovskite structure at high pressure and temperature will be
examined. The results will be significant to materials science as well as to
earth science. % % % % High pressure is a route to transform materials into
novel states, of interest to science and technology. The most spectacular
example in this context is the well known conversion of graphite to diamond
under high pressure and temperature. Current advances in pressure generation
techniques using the diamond cell make it possible to subject materials to
hitherto inaccessble regions of simultaneous high pressure and temperature. New
pressure-induced phase transitions with new material properties are distinct
possibilities, such as driving many insulators into metallic state, and in some
cases even into superconductors. Surprisingly many oxide systems turn into a new
type of glasses at high pressure. The present project will focus on several
oxide systems which bear the promise of yielding new material states of interest
to technological applications and to basic science. ***