* 9402860
* Acquisition of High Resolution Powder X-Ray Diffractometer
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Thomas Mallouk, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1996
* USD 121,170.00

Partial funding is provided for the acquisition of a high resolution powder
x-ray diffractometer to support basic research in materials chemistry by faculty
in the Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, and Clay Mineralogy programs at
Pennsylvania State University. The primary users will be eight faculty and 43
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, undergraduates, and research
associates. The instrument will have special capabilities for low-angle x- ray
diffraction of materials with large unit cell dimensions; and for thin films of
layered materials. It will have a Peltier detector for increased sensitivity, a
glancing angle attachment for the study of nanocomposite materials containing
small crystallites in polymer matrices, and modern software for library
searching of known phases, indexing, peak fitting, and profile refinement of
crystal structures. The x-ray diffraction equipment currently available at the
University is not adequate for many of the proposed experiments, e.g., studies
of metal-organic thin films, polymer multilayer structures, intercalated clays
with large interlayer spacings, new mesoporous molecular sieves, and ab initio
solution of crystal structures from powder x-ray diffraction data. This
equipment will be dedicated to non-routine research problems. Routine
qualitative phase identification in polycrystalline samples will continue to be
conducted on the existing diffractometers. A primary objective in the study of
new solid state compounds and composite materials, regardless of their ultimate
application, is the determination of the relationship between physical
properties and the structure and/or surface composition. X-ray diffraction is
the most generally applicable and powerful technique for this purpose.