* 9402989
* Engineering Research Center for Particle Science &Technology at the University of Florida
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1994,09/30/2006
* Brij Moudgil, University of Florida
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lynn Preston
* 09/30/2006
* USD 29,762,037.00

9402989 MOUDGIL The two-fold mission of the Engineering Research Center for
Particle Science and Technology is to: (1) develop cost effective processing and
handling of particulate systems relevant to a wide range of industries, such as
chemicals and allied products, textiles and paper products, coal, metals and
minerals, energy and environmental, construction, land and coastal management,
agricultural and food processing, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals, advanced
materials, etc., and (2) to educate students and other professionals in the
engineering practice of particle science and technology. A cross-disciplinary
integrated research program will focus on: (1) dispersion, consolidation and
redispersion, (2) transport and handling, (3) particles in effluents, and (4)
analysis and characterization. Research on simulation, modeling and
visualization will provide the integrating base for the Center's research
activities. A testbed facility will be built for validation, demonstration and
development of process and product ideas generated by the Center. The
educational program will include development of curriculum in particle science
and technology, new courses and a minor in particle science and technology.
Faculty and industrial experts will jointly develop computer assisted learning
modules, multimedia presentations and textbooks. A particle science and
technology certificate program for industrial personnel will be implemented. The
Center will initiate a vigorous outreach program to disseminate information to
other academic and industrial institutions. A consortium of 30 large and medium,
and 18 small companies will actively participate in the Center's research and
educational programs, and four national laboratories will have joint research
projects with the Center. Twenty-eight faculty members, 3 postdoctorals, 45
graduate and 25 undergraduate students from 12 departments will participate
during the first year. The University of South Flori da and Columbia University
will participate in the Center as subcontractors. This award established the ERC
under an initial 5-year Cooperative Agreement. ***