* 9402025
* NSF-CGP Fellowship Program:  Investigation of the Third-    Order Nonlinear Optical Properties of Crystalline Organic   Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,03/31/1995
* Edward Van Keuren, Individual Award
* Fixed Amount Award
* Edward Murdy
* 03/31/1995
* USD 26,210.00

9402025 Van Keuren This award supports the foreign travel expenses for Dr.
Edward Van Keuren to spend six months at the Solid State Chemistry Laboratory of
the National Institute of Materials and Chemical Research (NIMCR) located at
Tsukuba, Japan. Dr. Van Keuren will be conducting research over a period of six
months on third-order nonlinear optical properties of crystalline organic
materials with Dr. Hiro Matsuda, a senior research investigator at NIMCR. The
crystalline organic materials to be investigated are of interest due to their
potentially large third-order optical effects, fast time responses and as model
systems for understanding the basic physics of the molecular structure/optical
properties relationship. Dr. Van Keuren is very familiar with the work being
conducted by Dr. Matsuda, having been a fellow at NIMCR supported by the
Japanese Science and Technology Agency. The optical measurement systems recently
installed at NIMCR represent a broad spectrum of available state-of-the-art
measurement techniques for third-order optical processes. The collaboration will
utilize the experience of Dr. Van Keuren with optical systems and nonlinear
optical measurements with the synthesis and optical characterization facilities
available at NIMCR, along with the expertise of the participating Japanese
investigators. The award is funded under the auspices of the Center for Global
Partnership (CGP) of the Japan Foundation under the NSF-CGP Science Fellowship
Program. ***