* 9402945
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamics in Almost Periodic          Parabolic Equations and Coupled Map Lattices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Wenxian Shen, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1997
* USD 57,269.00

9402945 Shen Shen proposes research in two areas: time almost periodic parabolic
equations and lattice dynamical systems. Both areas are frequently encountered
in applications, for example, time almost periodic parabolic equations often
occur in the theory of nerve pulse propagation and population genetics, coupled
map lattices serve as useful models to describe various spatio-temporal
structures in fluid dynamics, chemically reacting systems, biological networks,
etc. Though much research has already been devoted to these two areas, many
important and fundamental issues are still far from being well understood. In
doing research on time almost periodic equations, Shen will focus on the long
term behavior of general bounded solutions, the existence of specific solution
types and their stability and bifurcations, the existence of global attractors
and their structures. Meanwhile, Shen will pay particular attention to those
properties of almost periodic equations which do not arise in the periodic case
(there is strong evidence in her recent work and the work by many other
researchers that time almost periodic equations are distinctively different from
periodic ones). In doing research on lattice dynamical systems, Shen plans to
develop general ways to study the existence of chaotic solution structures and
to establish stability criteria and bifurcation scenarios for these classes of
solutions. Moreover, Shen intends to give a detailed description of the
dynamical behaviors for discrete versions of certain differential equations
related to nerve pulse propagation, fluid dynamics, chemically reacting systems,
etc. Shen proposes research in two areas: time almost periodic parabolic
equations and lattice dynamical systems. Both areas are frequently encountered
in various fields of sciences, such as the theory of nerve pulse propagation and
population genetics, the theory of chaotic patterns in fluid dynamics,
chemically reacting systems, biological networks, e tc. Though much research has
already been devoted to these two areas, many important and fundamental issues
are still far from being well understood. In this research, Shen will focus on
the long term behavior of general bounded solutions, the existence of specific
solution types, and the structure of global attractors for time almost periodic
equations. Moreover, Shen plans to study chaotic solution patterns in general
lattice dynamical systems and intends to give a comprehensive description of
dynamical behaviors for discrete versions of certain differential equations
related to nerve pulse propagation, fluid dynamics, chemically reacting systems,
etc.