* 9402529
* Acquisition of 500 mHz NMR Instrument
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Alexandre Blumstein, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1996
* USD 347,000.00

Funds are provided to The Center for Advanced Materials (CAM) to acquire a
500-MHz NMR instrument for research programs of more than 50 faculty, staff and
graduate students within the University. The availability of this instrument
will allow the Center to expand and develop substantial interdisciplinary
research in materials. Currently, no capability for 500-MHz studies exists at
the institution. Research initiatives just underway include studies of:
1)synthetic analogues of natural poly(beta- hydroxyalkanoates); 2)
stereochemical and repeat unit sequence analysis; 3) characterization of rigid-
rod like site-selective Chitosan derivatives; 4) characterization of
biodegradation products; 5) characterization of fermentation reactions and
products; 6) reversible association/gelation of amphiphilic cation-anion
polymers; 7)relative strength of intraand intermolecular ionic interactions; 8)
well-defined blockgraft- and functional polymers by living cationic
polymerization; 9)initiation via haloboration in living cationic polymerization;
10) syntheses and characterization of biotinylated copolymers of thiophene and
nonlinear optical chromophore substituted copolymers of thiophene which are
precursors for monolayer, photovoltaic and biosensor applications; 11) syntheses
and characterization of novel polydiacetylenes for second and third order
nonlinear optical applications; 12) syntheses and characterization of guest-
host, sol-gel, and interpenetrating polymer network(IPN) systems for NLO
applications; 13) NMR studies of polyacetylenes; 14) and studies of chemical
shifts, coupling constant, and molecular structures of selenium and tellurium
compounds. Funds are provided to The Center for Advanced Materials (CAM) to
acquire a 500-MHz NMR instrument for research programs of more than 50 faculty,
staff and graduate students within the University. The availability of this
instrument will allow the Center to expand and develop substantial
interdisciplinary research in m aterials. Currently, no capability for 500-MHz
studies exists at the institution. The greater chemical shift dispersion of the
high field instrument is advantageous for characterization of materials,
particularly polymer stereochemistry, sequencing and biological macromolecules.
Such information is extremely valuable for determining mechanisms of
polymerization and degradation and macromolecular interactions. In addition, the
four-fold gain in sensitivity will permit studies of low sensitivity nuclei
and/or dilute spin systems that are currently either inaccessible or accessible
only through the preparation of isotopically enriched materials.