* 9402896
* Unreliable Failure Detectors for Reliable Distributed       Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Sam Toueg, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 10/31/1998
* USD 230,000.00

The starting point for this research is a fundamental problem in fault-tolerant
distributed computing: reaching agreement among processes in a system that is
subject to failures. It is well-known that this problem, called Consensus, has
no deterministic solution in asynchronous systems, even if it is assumed that
communication is reliable and no more than one process may fail. The
impossibility of solving Consensus ( and other related problems such as Atomic
Broadcast) is one of the most severe obstacles to implementing fault-tolerant
applications in asynchronous systems. In recent work the PI has introduced a
novel approach to circumvent such impossibility results: he showed that
unreliable failure detectors can be used to solve Consensus (and Atomic
Broadcast), even if the information that they provide about failures is highly
inaccurate, e.g., even if they make an infinite number of mistakes. Since such
failure detectors can be implemented in realistic distributed systems, and since
various considerations make the asynchronous models especially attractive, this
work suggests an approach to fault-tolerance that is viable in practice. The
objectives of this research are to broaden the applicability of this approach by
removing the limitations of the earlier work, and to explore in more concrete
terms its practicability. Specific goals include: (1) tolerating communication
failures, including network partitions (the earlier work assumed reliable
links); (2) tolerating process failures of various types (the earlier work dealt
with crash failures only); (3) considering shared-memory systems (the earlier
work dealt with message-passing systems); and (4) solving other problems that
are central to fault-tolerant distributed computing, including Group Membership
and Group Multicasts (the earlier work solved Consensus and Atomic Broadcast).
In order to assess the cost and benefit of using unreliable failure detectors
complexity questions are also explored. Finally, the practicality of this
approach is validated by implementation on an experimental platform.