* 9402625
* Mathematical Sciences: Symmetries and Integrability of      Difference Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1994
* Willard Miller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 09/30/1994
* USD 5,000.00

9402625 Miller This award covers partial expenses for U.S. research
mathematicians to participate in a workshop whose primary focus concerns
symmetries and integrability of difference equations. The motivation lies in
efforts to develop tools for solving nonlinear differential equations. There are
two main methods, one involves Lie group theory, the other is integrability
theory. A notable development in the last twenty years exemplifying
integrability theory was the introduction of the inverse scattering transform. A
much more recent development is that similar techniques are being successfully
applied to solve equations that involve discrete variables: difference and
differential-difference equations. Such equations are important in physics in
their own right, in the study of discrete systems and theories on lattices,
cellular automata, etc. Moreover, difference equations an variations thereof
have gained great prominence recently in the theory and applications of quantum
groups. The workshop brings together contingents of leading researchers from the
United States and Canada together with a sizable number of graduate students and
postdoctoral faculty to work together, with few formal lectures, for a period of
seven days on issues related to some of the truly exciting emerging areas of
mathematics and mathematical physics. ***