* 9402361
* Characterization of Dissolved Organic Matter in Seawater by Ultrafiltration and Chemical Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1998
* John Hedges, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 10/31/1998
* USD 247,056.00

9402361 HEDGES Over the next three years joint research will continue on the
sources and reactions of dissolved organic matter (DOM) in seawater. Studies
will focus primarily on the 20-30% of total dissolved organic matter which can
be gently isolated in relatively large amounts by tangential-flow
ultrafiltration. The three central objectives of the research are: 1. To
identify the biological sources and transformations of the major DOM components.
2. To elucidate compositional trends among DOM constitutes of different size. 3
To characterize in detail the compositions and associations of the various
organic materials comprising seawater DOM. Research to determine the biological
and digenetic origins of DOM will emphasize rapid processes occurring in the
upper water column where large differences in DOM concentrations and
compositions are observed. A better understanding of compositional trends among
dissolved organic materials of different size will help to delineate processes
affecting DOM cycling and to judge how representative ultrafiltered isolates are
of bulk DOM. More detailed characterizations of the compositions and forms of
ultra- fitered DOM will aid in distinguishing its biological sources,
identifying key transformations, and deconvoluting functional re- lationships
among DOM constitutes. This line of research has already provided new insights
on both the reactive and refractory components of the immense seawater DOM pool
and should continue to yield information useful over wide range of oceanographic
studies.