* 9402923
* U.S.-Brazil Science Program:  Dynamics of Spin and Charge   Fluctuations in High Temperature Superconductors and RelatedSystems
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1997
* George Reiter, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/1997
* USD 15,120.00

9402923 Reiter This U.S.-Brazil award will support a collaboration between Drs.
George Reiter of the University of Houston, Houston, TX and F.C. Barreto of the
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil. The goal of the project is to form
an international collaboration between scientists experienced in the treatment
of low-dimensional magnetic systems, and to resolve fundamental issues in the
dynamics of spin and charge that have arisen in the study of high temperature
superconductors. No generally accepted theory exists of the mechanism for
superconductivity nor of the dynamics of the normal phase in the high Tc
superconductors. Two key issues are whether or not the carriers in the materials
can be described as a strongly correlated Fermi liquid, and whether or not the
carriers would phase separate if not limited by the Coulomb interaction from
doing so. There is no agreed upon answer to the first question. While the answer
to the second question is yes, at some values of the parameters for the models
that have been used to describe the Cu-O planes the situation remains unclear
for the actual physical values. A treatment of the three band (Emery) model is
proposed, which has the potential of answering both of the above questions. ***