* 9402572
* Optimal Hybrid Control of Buildings with Nonlinear          Hysteretic Cladding Connection Elements
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Barry Goodno, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/1996
* USD 120,000.00

9402572 Goodno Experimental and analytical investigations of hybrid control
systems designed to combine passive damping provided by cladding-structure
interaction with robust active control systems will be continued in this second
phase of the overall research. The research plan is organized into three primary
tasks: (1) development of new low-dimensional controller designs for robust
control of building structures; (2) development of hybrid design approaches for
optimization of the combined active (control) and passive (cladding) systems;
and (3) experimental verification through simple scale model lab testing. The
principal products of the proposed research are expected to be: (a) new
approaches to designing low-dimensional controllers in output feedback settings
that can be used for robust control of building structures; (b) integrated
design methods for active/passive control systems in which the design process
concurrently optimizes active and passive subsystem properties; (c) modeling,
analysis and synthesis procedures along with representative designs which
combine advanced cladding systems with several different active control systems
(e.g., active bracing or variable stiffness systems) to form economical hybrid
control strategies; (d) development of improved computer models and extension of
present software to include consideration of techniques for hybrid control of
buildings using architectural cladding; (e) verification of basic hybrid system
behavior through scale model lab experiments. ***