* 9402734
* Mathematical Sciences:  3D Scanning:  From Physical Objects to Electronic Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* John McDonald, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 07/31/1998
* USD 290,024.00

Stuetzle 9402734 The goal of this project is to develop methods that will enable
rapid, automatic, and inexpensive "3D scanning"; that is, the use of optical
scanning technology to create electronic models from physical objects such as a
clay model of a car, or a turbine blade. 3D scanning is at present an important
technology, used in a number of critical US industries, such as automobile and
aerospace production. However, the expense of current scanner hardware and the
need for extensive human intervention has prevented 3D scanning from achieving
its full potential. The methods developed by our interdisciplinary research team
will make 3D scanning far less expensive, faster, and more automatic. The goal
of 3D scanning is the inverse of computer aided manufacturing: given a physical
object, such as a clay model of a car, a turbine blade, a chair, or a house,
create an electronic model that captures its shape and color. 3D scanning is at
present an important technology in a number of critical US industries, such as
aerospace and automotive production. However, the expense of current scanner
hardware and the need for extensive human intervention in both data collection
and modeling has prevented 3D scanning from achieving its full potential. This
grant will result in new algorithms and software that will enable new scanner
systems that are faster, more automatic, smaller, less expensive, model other
visual properties in addition to shape, and produce higher quality and more
usable output.