* 9402394
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Species        Assemblages of Leptocephali in the South Pacific
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Michael Miller, Individual Award
* Fixed Amount Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1995
* USD 26,220.00

9402394 Miller This award is under the International Junior Investigator and
Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Michael J. Miller to work with Dr. Peter H. J. Castle at Victoria
University of Wellington in New Zealand on species assemblages of leptocephali
in the South Pacific Ocean. The purpose of their research, is to learn about the
distributional ecology and zoogeography of leptocephali, the larval form of
eels. This will lead to better understanding of the reproductive ecology,
migration and recruitment mechanisms of adult marine eels. The focus of the
collaboration will be the analysis of catch data of leptocephali collected
during a series of cruises made in the south Pacific. They will concentrate on
analysis of species assemblage structure and individual life histories in
relation to major current systems and the many islands and atolls in the region.
Further research may find that long-lived leptocephali can be used as indicator
species to examine patterns of circulation on a variety of time scales and may
provide valuable information about ecological disruptions caused by global
climate change or direct human impacts on marine communities. ***