* 9402486
* Engineering Adaptive Software
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Karl Lieberherr, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1997
* USD 293,500.00

9402486 Lieberherr This project would study the engineering of adaptive software
that adapts without modification to a wide range of requirement changes and that
can be reused in unplanned ways. Adaptive programming is at a higher level of
abstraction than object-oriented programming. The key idea is that each adaptive
program specifies a family of object-oriented programs. Adaptive software
subsumes previously developed concepts of class dictionaries and propagation
patterns. Adaptive software has two parts: a data part and a functional part.
These two parts are loosely coupled through constraints, allowing the same
functional part to wopk with different data parts and the same data part to be
matched with different functional parts. The loose coupling yields adaptiveness
and allows high-level structuring and reasoning about software. To further
understand and facilitate the engineering of adaptive software, this project
would study the following topics: (1) Type systems for adaptive software,
enabling safety checking at the level of adaptive programs; (2) Reengineering
algorithms which abstract higher-level structures from lower-level structures,
extending our previous work on abstracting class dictionary graphs from objects
and propagation patterns from call graphs; (3) Analysis of adaptive software,
addressing resource consumption (such as time and space) at the level of
adaptive software; (4) Visual programming, as motivated by the use of graph
specifications in adaptive software; (5) Experiments with building an adaptive
software library and associated tools. ***