* 9402636
* U.S.-Taiwan Cooperative Research: Surface Characterization  of Catalytic Materials by Positron Annihilation Radiation   Lineshape Measurements
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1995,12/31/1998
* W. Huang, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 12/31/1998
* USD 31,000.00

This is a three year cooperative research project proposed by Dr. Wei-Feng
Huang, University of Louisville, and Professor P.K. Tseng, National Taiwan
University. This proposal is to develop a technique to characterize the internal
surface of zeolite. It requests funds to support the P.I.'s travels to Taiwan
and expenses of his U.S. industrial collaborator at United Catalysts Inc. for
sample preparation. Dr. Wei-Feng Huang and his Taiwan collaborator (Prof. Tseng)
are excellent researchers in this area. Dr. Huang has been productive and is
highly regarded by his colleagues in positron annihilation research. The
proposed collaboration is mutually beneficial. The U.S. principal investigator
gains access to equipment that is not available to him on his campus and can
provide his expertise in conducting the 2D-ACAR measurements. If this method
proves to be successful, it could make a significant contribution to the
chemical and petroleum industries, which utilize zeolite catalysts. This project
is jointly supported by the NSF and the Taiwan National Science Council (NSC),
which provides major support for laboratory operations. The modest support from
the NSF in this case is extensively leveraged by the NSC.