* 9402695
* Growth, Mutation and Recombination in Bacteriophage
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2000
* Franklin Stahl, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 850,000.00

Abstract 9402695 In crosses involving either pro- or eukaryotes, genetic
exchanges may be nonrandomly distributed with respect to each other, i.e., they
may show "interference." The investigation of two systems in which interference
is manifest will continue. In both systems, interference may depend on a
"machine" that moves along chromosomes. Understanding of these machines will
contribute to our understanding of molecular mechanisms of genetic
recombination. (1) When the RecBCD recombination pathway of E. coli operates on
phage lambda carrying the recombination hot spot Chi, recombinant chromosomes
recovered in phage particles have sometimes indulged in a pair of exchanges, one
reciprocal and one not. The nonreciprocal exchange occurs not at random but to
the right of the reciprocal one on the standard lambda linkage map. The basis
for this nonrandom relationship resides in the RecBCD protein, which enters DNA
at a double-chain break and travels destructively along the duplex, changing
from an exonuclease to a "recombinase" when it encounters the sequence
5'GCTGGTGG3' (Chi). Models for the mechanisms of the two exchanges and for the
relationship between them are being tested. (2) In many eukaryotes, the presence
of one exchange in a meiotic bivalent reduces the probability of finding an
exchange in nearby intervals (chiasma interference). A simple model that unites
observations on gene conversion with those on chiasma interference has been
developed. The model supposes that conversions occur at random with respect to
each other, but that those with associated crossing over are invariably
separated by several conversions that lack associated crossing over. Thus, the
two kinds of recombination events(one of which is sometimes called "reciprocal"
and the other not) are nonrandomly distributed with respect to themselves and
each other. Development of the model and testing of it continues. Hypotheses
regarding mechanisms underlying the model are being te sted. Such mechanisms may
involve a "machine" that travels along the synaptonemal complex resolving
double-chain break-repair intermediates such that a fixed number of repair
events unaccompanied by crossing over fall between neighboring crossovers. %%%
Recombination occurs in almost all organisms, and is responsible for leading to
new combinations of genes in offspring as well as protection against damage to
DNA and genes. A better understanding of this process should be applicable to
many organisms, and could lead to the development of better ways of introducing
foreign genes into organisms ("genetic engineering"). ***