* 9403696
* Upgrading the Imaging and Data Management Capabilities of   the DSV ALVIN:  Cameras, Lighting, Navigation, and Data     Management Programs
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Barrie Walden, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/1997
* USD 343,685.00

Proposal #94-03696 The Oceanographic Instrumentation program funds the
acquisition of shared-used scientific instrumentation aboard research vessels
and other oceanographic facilities that are primarily used by NSF-funded
investigators. This award to Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI)
provides funding for instrumentation upgrades for the submersible ALVIN which is
owned by the Navy and operated by WHOI in support of oceanographic research.
Funding for operation of the ALVIN is supported by NSF, NOAA and ONR.
Instrumentation to be acquired or upgraded includes a new 3-chip CCD camera and
a new 1-chip CCD camera, HMI and Quartz-iodide lighting systems, a laser ranging
system, an EXACT high precision navigation system, computer upgrades for
improved post-dive data processing, and new video recording equipment in order
to record data from all camera systems and provide more efficient post-
processing of video data. In addition, the award provides funding for the PI to
develop specifications and seek bids for an improved long-baseline navigation
package for the ALVIN. Additional funding will be considered for the long-
baseline navigation system if the PI is able to find a commercially available
system. Joint funding for this award is being provided by the NSF Oceanographic
Instrumentation program, the NSF Biological Oceanography Program and NOAA. ONR
participated in the review process and may provide funding to support any future
acquisition of a long-baseline navigation system if a suitable system is found.