* 9403486
* U.S.-Brazil Science Program:  Genetic Manipulation of Garlic(Allium sativum L.) in Vitro and in Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Philipp Simon, Agricultural Research Service Madison
* Interagency Agreement
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/1996
* USD 3,555.00

9403486 Simon This U.S.-Brazil award will support collaboration between Dr.
Philipp Simon of the University of Wisconsin, and Dr. Amaury Buso of Empresa
Brazileira de Pesquisa Agropecuaria (EMBRAPA). This project will establish
cooperative research to advance the genetic manipulation of garlic (Allium
Sativum L.) in vitro and in plants. The research will perfect and expand true
garlic seed production and develop methods of garlic cell culture and genetic
transformation. Garlic, which is an important vegetable crop the world over, has
been domesticated for thousands of years but sexual reproduction has been
unknown. Generation of sexual recombinants is limited. Because a system of
genetic transformation has not been developed which would allow foreign genes to
be introduced, a virus-free garlic can be produced, but viral genes for cross-
protection cannot be inserted. The U.S. researcher's work has enabled sexual
reproduction and evaluation of variation in garlic, while the Brazilian
researchers have worked extensively with garlic cell culture and plant
production. The two sides will exchange their expertise and complementary skills
to generate new garlic variation from sexual reproduction and develop a system
for introducing foreign genes into garlic. The research will be accomplished
through an exchange of visits between the U. Wisconsin Agricultural Research
Service and EMBRAPA. ***