* 9403598
* Mathematical Sciences:  Riemann Problems for Nonlinear      Conservation Laws in One and Two Space Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Suncica Canic, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 07/31/1995
* USD 3,240.00

9403598 Canic This award supports mathematical research focusing on solutions of
nonlinear systems of conservation laws. The investigation has two goals. The
first is to understand the structure of solutions of Riemann problems for a two-
dimensional system of conservation laws that model weak shack reflection. The
second is to elucidate the physical admissibility of shockwave solutions of one-
dimensional systems. The reflection of weak shack waves has been extensively
studied both experimentally and numerically, but the corresponding two-
dimensional Riemann problems for the compressible Euler equations are
intractable on a theoretical level. This work will consider solutions of the
unsteady small disturbance equation that arises in an asymptotic limit of the
Euler system. In the study of one-dimensional systems of conservation laws, the
physical admissibility of shock waves is a central question. A recent study of
stability of viscous-admissible shock waves for quadratic conservation laws
under generic two-parameter perturbations. These results use the theory of
unfoldings of vector fields within the framework of the fundamental wave
manifold. In this project, work will be done to extend these results to
perturbations within the three-parameter family that arises naturally in this
context. The study of wave phenomena and shocks is represented mathematically by
partial differential equations or systems of such equations. The equations
reflect certain physical (conservation) laws which govern the solutions. The
mathematical and numerical analysis of these solutions is the basis for studies
supported by this grant. ***