* 9403462
* Mathematical Sciences:  Scaling Limits of Nongradient       Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Horng-Tzer Yau, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1998
* USD 106,000.00

The very first question concerning stochastic dynamics is the rate of relaxation
to the equilibrium. One can roughly divide these rates into two categories: the
exponential relaxation and the power law relaxation. The main objective of this
research is to study dynamics with the power law decay. The first goal is to
derive the macroscopic scaling limiting equations rigorously and then to study
various corrections to these equations. In the past few years, several methods
have been developed for these problems. One of the major restrictions to these
methods is a technical condition called the gradient condition. The investigator
will study several nongradient models, in particular, the hydrodynamical limit
and the rate of relaxation to equilibrium of lattice gas at finite temperature.
A related problem for lattice gas with random field will also be considered.
Finally, the investigator will study problems related to a time scale longer
than the hydrodynamical scale. These are particularly important because the
incompressible Navier-Stokes equation is believed to be the long time
(diffusive) scaling limit of Hamiltonian systems. A basic problem concerning
dynamical system is to determine the rate of approach to the equilibrium. In
this research the investigator will study dynamics with slow relaxation to
equilibrium, which most natural processes follow. Major goals are to determine
the precise rate of relaxation to the equilibrium of these processes and to
derive macroscopic equations governing the macroscopic behavior of relaxations
and then to study various corrections to these equations. In the past few years,
several methods have been developed for these problems for several types of
models. But some major restrictions of these methods prohibit the study of more
realistic models. The investigator will study several models to extend the
current technology and to address some key technical difficulties. Models of
interest include: the lattice gases at finite temperature, the effect of random
impurities in a lattice gas, and the discrete velocity model which simulates the
incompressible Navier-Stokes equation.