* 9403889
* Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Timothy Wagner, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1996
* USD 71,199.00

Funds are provided for the purchase of a single crystal X- ray diffractometer to
conduct four interdisciplinary research programs at a predominantly
undergraduate institution. Currently, no capability for refining single crystal
structures exists at the institution or in the research laboratories of local
universities. The proposed equipment provides capabilities to conduct
collaboration research with industry and outside research institutions.
Specifically, the equipment is to be used in: 1) quantitative analysis of
titanium aluminum alloys; 2) determination of bond lengths and valences in
alumina and magnetoplumbite-type compounds; 3) examination of organometallic
polymers and rigid rod polymers; 4) investigation of ployfluroarylene bridged
polymers; 5) exploration of vinyl polymers having highly fluorinated side
chains; 6) study of chiral phosphonate transition state analogues as inhibitors
of HIV-1 protease; and 7) the determination of the correspondence between
changes in the crystal structure of pumpellyite with changes in its composition.
These studies have applications in the development of high-performance, high-
temperature alloys, better understanding of structure/property relations of the
crystal chemistry at the spinel blocks, development of industrially important
polymers, and establishing a rational design in the synthesis of analogues of
HIV-1 protease. %%% Funds are provided for the purchase of a single crystal X-
ray diffractometer to conduct four interdisciplinary research programs at a
predominantly undergraduate institution. Currently, no capability for refining
single crystal structures exists at the institution or in the research
laboratories of local universities. Researchers from Departments of Chemistry,
Physics, Geology, and Material Engineering conduct a diverse range of studies
that have applications in: 1) the development of high- performance, high-
temperature alloys, 2) better understanding of structure/property relations of
mate rials, 3) development of industrially important polymers, and 4)
establishing a rational design in the synthesis of analogues of HIV-1 protease.
The proposed research includes collaboration with industry and outside research
institutions.