* 9403553
* Statistical Studies in Biomolecular Sequences               and Topics in Total Positivity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Samuel Karlin, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 08/31/1997
* USD 197,500.00

This research will concentrate on three areas: (i) Theoretical studies of
recombination stochastic models incorporating interference effects. These
include characterizations of multimarker crossover distributions and analysis of
higher order crossover interference forms. Apart from their intrinsic interest
as a class of stochastic processes, these should be helpful in constructing
genetic maps of multiple genetic markers. (ii) Statistical studies of molecular
sequences emphasizing score based methods. These play a role in identifying
distinctive sequence features in DNA and protein sequences and in identifying
significant common segments in protein sequence comparisons. (iii) New
directions and developments in the theory of multivariate total positivity
motivated by applications related to random walks on graphs, especially on the
n-dimensional hypercube. The general problem of deciding when a probability
distribution on the hypercube is multivariate totally positive is fundamental in
characterizing positive and negative interference for recombination stochastic
structures. The research on recombination processes is of importance in
developing genetic maps (for example, mapping of disease genes in relation to
other easily observable markers). The studies on majorization and stochastic
comparisons can provide insights in developing computer algorithms relevant in
combinatorics and of interest in queuing systems, branching phenomena, and birth
and death stochastic processes. Statistical studies of patterns in biomolecular
sequences can be used as benchmarks for distinguishing chance occurrences from
proper functional and structural attributes in DNA and protein sequences.