* 9403895
* Valence Instability, Magnetism and Superconductivity in     Single Crystal Multinary Copper-Niobium Oxides
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Robert Shelton, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/1997
* USD 274,500.00

9403895 Shelton Technical abstract: This experimental research program focuses
on multinary oxides that display a combination of properties including high-
temperature superconductivity, long-range magnetic order, valence fluctuations
and anisotropy order parameters. To determine the intrinsic physical properties,
the research emphasizes experiments on high quality single crystals. Three
systems form the core of these studies; namely rare-earth barium cuprates, rare-
earth barium niobates, and rare-earth strontium niobates. To insure consistency
and uniformity in interpreting the experimental results, a great variety of
complimentary experiments will be performed on the single crystals. Non-
technical abstract: This experimental research program focuses on three families
of materiald that show great promise for technological applications as well as
probing the exciting state of high-temperature superconductivity. Due to the
intrinsic complexity of these multi-component materials, great emphasis is place
on using the highest quality crystals for this study. Goals with practical
components include: elemental substitutions to stabilize the superconducting
state against fluctuations in operating environment of the superconducting
device; discovery and characterization of materials from the same family
suitable as insulating analogs in device fabrication. ***