* 9403699
* Mathematical Sciences:  Optimization Methods for Optimal    Control and Parameter Identification Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Matthias Heinkenschloss, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 57,000.00

9403699 Heinkenschloss This research is concerned with the development and
analysis of fast and robust methods for the solution of optimal control and
parameter identification problems governed by nonlinear partial differential
equations. These problems are usually formulated in infinite dimensional
function spaces; a discretization of these problems leads to large sparse
nonlinear programming problems. Many of these problems, in particular, parameter
identification problems, have an inherent ill-posedness. These structures will
be utilized in the design and analysis of the optimization methods. The
algorithms operate on a sequence of nested discretizations. They use mesh-
independence properties and grid refinements to compute good starting values in
an efficient way. Moreover, they will incorporate multilevel ideas to obtain
inexpensive and good derivative information from coarse grids. Iterative solvers
will be used for the inexact solution of subproblems to address the large scale
structure of the problems. To globalize the convergence and to address the ill-
posedness, trust region strategies will be used. The algorithms will be
formulated in a rather modular form allowing the incorporation of application
dependent efficient solvers, such as domain decomposition methods and multigrid
methods. The mathematical formulation of many problems in development and
production leads to optimal control and parameter identification problems.
Examples include the design of aircraft wings, the control of heating processes,
and the nondestructive testing of materials. These mathematical models are
complex and their numerical solution is very time consuming and often nearly
impossible if 'of-the-shelf-methods' are used. The goal of this research project
is the development of new, efficient and robust algorithms for the solution of
these problems exploiting their inherent structure.