* 9403210
* Investigating Bonding Symmetry on Surfaces and at Interfaces Using Perturbed-Angular-Correlation Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1999
* Gary Catchen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 180,000.00

9403210 Catchen This is an interdisciplinary program to investigate bonding
symmetry on surfaces and at interfaces using perturbed-angular- correlation
spectroscopy. The investigations will use the indium- lll radioactive PAC probe
to measure nuclear electric quadruple interactions on well characterized
semiconductor surfaces of gallium-arsenide and related compounds produced by
molecular beam- epitaxy (MBE). In addition, interactions at strained interfaces
will be investigated, within as-grown and annealed low-temperature gallium
arsenide, and epitaxial metals deposited in-situ. These experiments can produce
information on: (1) the strength and symmetry of bonds between probe and surface
atoms, (2) the thermal stability of various semiconductors and metal surface
sites, (3) the kinetics of indium-lll probe diffusion and redistribution at
semiconductor-semiconductor and semiconductor-metal interfaces, (4) the local
strain at the indium-lll probe in pseudomorphic materials, (5) the interaction
of these probe atoms with point defects in the crystals and the evolution of
those interactions with annealing, and (6) magnetic hyperfine fields and the
character of surface magnetism in epitaxial magnetic-metal films. % % % % This
is an interdisciplinary program to investigate chemical bonding symmetry on
surfaces that are prepared by molecular-beam epitaxy. Surfaces of gallium-
arsenide semiconductors and related compounds, and interfaces between surfaces
of dissimilar but related crystals such as the interface between gallium-
arsenide surface and an indium arsenide surface will be investigated. The work
will be extended to the investigation interfaces between gallium arsenide and
various magnetic metals. The study also will include epitaxial growth under non-
optimal and non-equilibrium conditions. The investigations will use a nuclear
technique known as perturbed-angular-correlation (PAC) spectroscopy. The
technique involves measuring the interactions of ra dioactive probes, which are
deposited during crystal growth, with the effect of local electric field and
magnetic fields in the vicinity of these radioactive probe nuclei. The indium-
lll isotope will be the isotope of choice. ***