* 9403621
* Acquisition of an Electron Spectroscopic Imaging Filter for a 400 kV Transmission Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Marc De Graef, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1995
* USD 120,000.00

This work is concerned with the quantitative characterization of materials at
the highest levels of spatial resolution. This award will be used to purchase an
imaging energy filter, which will be added to a high- resolution transmission
electron microscope. The addition of such a filter will open the path to many
new observation modes such as elastic bright field imaging, electron
spectroscopic imaging and diffraction and electron spectroscopic convergent beam
electron diffraction. The filter is to be mounted after the microscope lenses
and hence all previously available observation modes will remain accessible. The
filter will permit researchers to obtain chemical information at near atomic
resolution. Among the projects which will benefit from the energy filter are:
extension of the point resolution of the existing instrument down to the
information limit by means of energy filtering and wave function retrieval
techniques, analysis of the structure of fullerene nanotubes and magnetic
nanocrystals, determination of the degree of Cr-segregation in Cobalt alloy thin
films used for magnetic recording, in-situ observations of the formation of
titanium disulfide platelets from sulfides, in-situ observation of diffusion
processes in polycrystalline films, and characterization of the chemical
structure of pressure-induced amorphous phases. %%% Quantitative
characterization of materials requires not only a complete crystallographic
description of the structure, but also a detailed chemical understanding of all
defects and internal interfaces at the highest levels of spatial resolution. The
addition of this imaging filter to the transmitting electron microscope will
permit researchers to obtain chemical information at near atomic resolution for
technologically-important materials such as crystalline, quasi-crystalline and
amorphous solids, fullerene nanotubes and magnetic nanocrystals, and alloy thin
films used for magnetic recording.