* 9403833
* RUI:  Hydrographic Survey and GIS Database Development for  Anthropogenic Debris and Marine Habitats at McMurdo         Station, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1994,10/31/1997
* John Oliver, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 10/31/1997
* USD 216,341.00

This project will map and characterize seafloor debris and associated benthic
habitats and to contour the seafloor in the vicinity of McMurdo. Large numbers
of barrels with unknown contents and other debris have been dumped or
accumulated in the near-shore marine environment in McMurdo. This project will
be the first critical step in determining the extent and risk to the environment
of the potentially toxic debris. The principal investigators will use high
resolution sidescan sonar, bathymetric profiling, scuba surveys, and
photographic records to document the distribution and nature of debris while
also mapping local physical habitats. The proposed work will also produce the
first detailed bathymetric contour chart of the McMurdo area. Depth contour data
are key elements in the development of accurate nearshore currents models needed
to predict the movement of effluents from the new McMurdo sewer outfall. These
data sets will be incorporated as the foundation elements in a comprehensive
benthic Geographic information System to be maintained on existing National
Science Foundation and Antarctic Support Associates computer facilities.
Elements to be include will be the base map overlays for sidescan sonar images,
depth, navigation tracks, debris, habitat type, community type sediment
chemistry and pollutant loads, species lists and photographs.