* 9403794
* Mathematical Sciences:  Detection and Estimation Problems inQuality Control, Dynamical Systems and Genetic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Tze Lai, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 09/30/1997
* USD 300,000.00

A major direction of the proposed research is in sequential change-point
detection schemes. Powerful techniques to tackle this problem are currently
available from recent advances in sequential testing theory and boundary
crossing problems in random fields. It is expected that relatively simple
algorithms which are not too demanding in computational and memory requirements
for on-line implementation and yet are nearly optimal from a statistical
viewpoint will be developed for a wide variety of practical applications. Not
only will the methodology to be developed address the widely recognized
discrepancies between the assumptions underlying conventional control charts and
today's industrial processes, but it will also integrate both the detection
aspect and the quality measurement aspect of industrial quality control. Another
closely related direction of research is in fixed sample change-point problems
and its applications to econometrics, signal reconstruction and genetic linkage
analysis. Related fundamental problems in boundary crossing probabilities of
random processes and random fields will be investigated, and are expected to
lead to definitive solutions of some long-standing problems concerning the
distribution of generalized likelihood ratio statistics in change-point models.
A third related area of research is estimation and control of time series models
and stochastic dynamical systems whose parameters may change with time. Although
in practice abrupt parameter changes typically occur very infrequently, the
unknown times of their occurrence have led to prohibitive complexity of the
Bayes estimators and controllers in the literature. By using parallel recursive
algorithms and combining some new ideas in sequential change-point detection
with empirical Bayes methodology, it is anticipated that asymptotically
efficient estimation and control schemes which have manageable complexity and
which can be implemented on-line will be developed. An important objeat ive of
the proposed research is the development of a powerful statistical methodology
for quality control of modern industrial processes and for automated fault
detection in complex manufacturing systems. Another important goal is to develop
statistical methods appropriate for analysis of genetic linkage data related to
disease susceptibility and other traits in humans, animals and plants and for
extraction of relevant information from these data that may lead to better
diagnostic tests and treatments of the disease.