* 9403566
* Theoretical Studies of Free Radical Polymerization
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Ben O'Shaughnessy, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/1998
* USD 168,000.00

9403566 O'Shaughnessy Theoretical research will be conducted on free radical
polymerization, a method widely used in the synthesis of mass produced polymers
and many types of advanced polymeric materials. The kinetics of free radical
polymerization are intimately associated with the static and dynamical
properties of high polymer solutions and melts through the process of
termination of growing living chains by interpolymeric reaction with one
another. A systematic theory of free radical polymerization will be developed
based on recent advances in the theory of interpolymeric reaction rates which
exploit concepts of scaling and universality. The principal quantities of
practical and fundamental significance will be evaluated. This work will provide
a basis for first principles models of closely related methods such as emulsion
polymerization and will allow the interpretation of a large body of experimental
data on the properties of polymers in the liquid and glassy state. %%% Modern
analytical and computational techniques will be applied to the problem of free
radical polymerization. This is one of the primary processing methods whereby
polymeric materials are produced, yet it has very little theoretical basis.
Thus, this research will provide a fundamental understanding of this important
processing technique. ***