* 9403733
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  The Role of    Caridina Nilotica, A Freshwater Prawn in Fishery            Transformation and Ecosystem Change in Lake Victoria
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Donn Branstrator, Individual Award
* Fixed Amount Award
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/1996
* USD 19,850.00

9403733 Branstrator This award is under the International Junior Investigator
and Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a nine-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Donn K. Branstrator to work with Dr. F. W. B. Bugenyi at the
Fisheries Research Institute (FIRI) in Jinja, Uganda. This study of the role of
Caridina Nilotica, a freshwater prawn in fishery transformation and ecosystem
change in Lake Victoria, East Africa will produce a data set that will greatly
benefit major scientific efforts studying ecosystem changes and how these
changes are documented in the sedimentary record. Results from this project will
be used to interpret recent limnological changes in Lake Victoria and the
relationship between water column processes and the sediment record with respect
to Caridina. In addition, the understanding of lake ecology which this research
will provide, will help implement effective strategies for sustainable use of
these lakes and maintenance of their socio-economic value. ***