* 9403522
* Quantum Vortex Events in the Critical Flow of Superfluid    Helium-4 Through Microscopic Apertures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* William Zimmermann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 08/31/1996
* USD 40,000.00

9403522 Zimmermann This is a research effort in the area of low temperature
condensed matter physics. The project will investigate critical velocities and
phase-slip in the flow of superfluid helium-4 through submicron and micron-size
apertures in thin, free-standing films of submicron thickness. The aim of the
work is to understand fundamental quantum vortex processes involved in the first
onset of dissipation in superfluid flow as the velocity is increased from zero.
Use is made of a high-Q superfluid resonator to excite oscillatory flow of the
superfluid through the aperture and to sense the onset of dissipation. %%% This
is a research effort in the area of low temperature physics. The project
involves the study of superfluid helium, which does not transport heat energy as
ordinary fluids. The heat energy in such systems requires generation of
vortices, analogous to smoke rings, that can by generated as the superfluid
moves through microscopic apertures. The research will study fundamental aspects
of vortex generation and energy dissipation in superfluid helium-4. The work is
of fundamental significance but may as well have technical importance in the
general field of fluid hydrodynamics. The project includes computer modeling of
the fluid hydrodynamics under experimental observation.