* 9403798
* Mathematical Sciences:  The Modulation of Flames of Various Types in a Premixed Reactive Atmosphere
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Michael Booty, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1997
* USD 55,000.00

9403798 Booty Steady, one-dimensional, premixed flames (or "deflagration waves")
involving reactions that are highly activated can be categorized by their
propagation Mach number, with flames of different Mach number having a different
mathematical structure. In practice, however, most flames are spatially narrow
and continually adjust both their speed and shape in accordance with the local
environment through which they travel. The aim of the project is to clarify some
of the outstanding issues regarding the unsteady and nonplanar propagation of
different types of flames. These are governed by a coupled system of nonlinear
partial differential equations, viz. the reactive Navier-Stokes equations, of
which approximate solutions will be sought by (i) the systematic use of
asymptotic and perturbation methods, for identifying significant or
distinguished limits, and (ii) numerical methods. Steady, one-dimensional flames
can be categorized by their propagation speed, with flames of different speed
having a different mathematical structure. In practice, however, most flames are
spatially narrow and continually adjust both their speed and shape in accordance
with the environment through which they travel. The aim of the project is to
address some of the outstanding issues regarding the unsteady and nonplanar
propagation of different types of flame. In particular, (i) circumstances should
be established under which a freely propagating, low-speed flame can either be
extinguished or develop into a high-speed detonation wave, and (ii) the
mechanism determining the different ways in which these events can occur should
be clarified. This has applications to the control and safety of combustion
phenomena in various different contexts.