* 9403318
* PRF/J: Metabolic Cost of Detoxifying Plant Secondary        Compounds and the Evolution of Herbivore Host Specialization
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1998
* Dana Garrigan, UT Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Margaret Palmer
* 02/28/1998
* USD 69,600.00

9403318 Garrigan The metabolic load (ML) hypothesis suggests that quantitative
differences between specialist and generalist insect herbivores are responsible
for the evolution of dietary specialization. This hypothesis is underpinned by
two critical assumptions: that the capability to detoxify plant secondary
compounds is physiologically costly to insects and that specialists have a
detoxification advantage relative to generalists. Rigorous evaluation of the ML
hypothesis will only be possible when reliable data are collected in a
consistent fashion for several specialist and polyphagous herbivore. Bomb
calorimetry and newly - developed flow through respirometry will be employed to
calculate growth and metabolic efficiency for 12 Lepidopteran herbivore (six
generalist and six specialist) species being fed six different plant - derived
toxins; cost and efficiency estimates will be in comparable energetic units. %%%
This research addresses the topic of host specialization in plant / insect
interactions. Within the past five to ten years, the scientific community has
come to recognize that a treasure trove of biologically active chemical
compounds exists within the natural world. The most intelligent way to
understand this complexity is by ascertaining how it evolves over ecological /
evolutionary time. One of the most elegant ways of accomplishing this goal is by
"assaying" coevolved ecological relationships using a battery of extractive and
quantitative chemical methods of analysis. Results of such studies can then be
adapted for pharmacological purposes. ***