* 9403583
* Migration of the Pacific-Indian Isotopic Boundary and       Evolution of the Australian-Antarctic Discordance:  A       Drilling Site Survey
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Jean-Christophe Sempere, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 01/31/1998
* USD 445,769.00

9403583 Sempere An improved understanding of the systematics of mantle
circulation is a high scientific priority in solid earth geophysics. By mapping
the areal distribution of crustal compositions over key areas of ocean floor,
quantitative information about the size, composition, and distribution of mantle
reservoirs, variations in mantle temperatures, the efficiency of convective
stirring in the mantle, and the longevity of individual mantle reservoirs can be
obtained. One very important problem of this type, which can be addressed by
surficial sampling and crustal drilling, concerns the origin and evolution of
the distinctive isotopic and geochemical signature of the Indian Ocean upper
mantle. Lavas erupted at Indian Ocean spreading centers are isotopically
distinct from those of the Pacific. A unique and sharp boundary between Pacific
and isotopic provinces has been identified within the Australian-Antarctic
Discordance along the spreading ridge. The objective of the present project is
to map this boundary away from the ridge crest, since limited available data
tends to indicate a westward migration of the boundary over time. Seismic
reflection, gravity and magnetic data and dredge samples will be collected in
the off-axis area during a 40 day research cruise in early 1996. These data will
also provide site-survey information in support of a proposal to the Ocean
Drilling Program to sample old crust in an attempt to map the history of the
boundary. The project involves scientists from the University of Washington,
Oregon State University, and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. ***