* 9403874
* Mathematical Sciences:  Asymptotics for the Spectra of      Long-Memory Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Norma Terrin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1996
* USD 43,000.00

A sequence of observations made over time is said to be stationary if the
covariance between two data points depends only on how far apart in time the two
observations were made, and not on the times themselves. A stationary sequence
has long memory if, as the distance between observations gets larger, the
covariances decay so slowly that the classical limit theory for stationary
sequences is not applicable. Data with long memory have been observed in many
fields, from economics to geophysics. Most recently, climatologists studying
global warming have modeled temperature data using long memory. The research
outlined in this proposal is aimed at an understanding of the asymptotic
properties of some functions of long-memory processes which are of interest to
statistical researchers. One of the primary tools to be employed in the proposed
research is the spectral density, which is the Fourier transform of the
covariance function. It both captures the essential nature of long memory, and
makes many difficult problems mathematically tractable. Many types of data are
observed over time. Examples are monthly birth rates, daily stock prices, and
hourly temperature readings. Frequently sequences of data (referred to as time
series) contain observations that are interrelated. For example, the value of a
stock tomorrow is related to its current value. Classical statistical theory for
analyzing time series relies on the assumption that observations taken far apart
in time are not closely related. However, in many fields from economics to
geophysics, data which does not have this property has been observed. That is,
observations far apart in time may nevertheless be closely related. Most
recently, climatologists have observed this phenomenon (called long memory')
while studying global warming. Consequently, to determine whether global warming
has indeed occurred, new methods for studying long-memory sequences are needed.
The research outlined in this proposal is aimed at developing techniques for the
analy sis of long-memory data.