* 9403893
* Generation of Environmentally Benign  Alternative Syntheses by Computer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1994,12/31/1996
* James Hendrickson, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Lesser Blum
* 12/31/1996
* USD 194,720.00

Professor James B. Hendrickson is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to continue in the development of his computer
program SYNGEN, and to adapt it for the determination of environmentally benign
synthetic routes to target molecules. The program SYNGEN assesses the target
molecule in terms of its basic skeleton to determine all of the best ways to
assemble the skeleton from available starting skeletons, and then it generates,
systematically and rapidly the chemistry for all viable routes from a catalog of
real available starting materials. The program will be adapted to generate only
the most economical syntheses first, thus eliminating costly routes, and then
the resulting solutions will be ordered to bring to the fore those utilizing a
minimum of toxic or hazardous chemicals en route. This will be accomplished by
establishing a quantitative standard for environmentally acceptable chemicals
from the data available in databases and linking these directly into the route
generation process. For the most part, industrial syntheses have been based on
economic considerations with an emphasis on developing synthetic routes which
employ inexpensive starting materials and efficient high-yield synthetic
reactions. Until recently, the production of toxic or hazardous by-products has
been a hidden cost in the synthetic industry. Now, since toxic or hazardous
waste must be disposed of in an environmentally responsible manner, and since
the cost of such waste disposal is high, this cost is no longer hidden and must
be considered a parameter in the overall cost of production. Hendrickson has
been working on a computer program, SYNGEN, for several years with the primary
objective of developing economic synthetic routes for targeted organic
compounds. With minor modifications, he will be able to incorporate toxicity
information into his synthetic materials databases in such a manner as to give
higher we ight to feasible synthetic routes which are environmentally benign.