* 9403774
* Mathematical Sciences: The Development of Techniques and    Applications of Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Christopher Jones, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/1998
* USD 174,000.00

9403774 Jones Mathematical models for the state of an evolving physical system
are the subject of investigation of dynamical systems. The goal is the
development of techniques for determining the eventual state of the system,
whether it be of simple form, steady-state or periodic, or even chaotic. The
reduction of complex systems is essential in forcing the arbitrarily complicated
behavior to be susceptible to analysis. The separation of a system into fast and
slow time scales affords a reduction that is particularly attractive as the
complexity of the high-dimensional behavior is retained through the patching
together of fast and slow structures. Such a reduction forms the context for
much of Jones' proposed work. In recent work with Burns, Jones has uncovered a
mechanism for the stabilization of surprising resonant motions involving the
slow variation of certain parameters. This has been applied to explain the
spin/orbit resonance of Mercury, and a general theory is envisaged which will be
adaptable to many other problems of resonance, particularly in the context of
planetary motions. In physical systems with spatial dependence, information is
transported in a fixed direction by travelling waves. Jones will further develop
his techniques for determining the stability of such waves, thus offering a
discriminant to assess their physical observability. It is anticipated that the
methods will be extended to cover the case of optical pulses, which will help in
determining the feasible methods for multiple pulse transmission in nonlinear
optical fibers. Nonlinear optics offers a particularly fruitful area of
application as optical processes occur on a very fast time scale. The transition
between different phases of materials, the sharpness of which reflects a fast
spatial scale, can occur in exotic patterns. Techniques will be developed, based
on the stability theory for travelling waves, for determining the underlying
mechanisms for such pattern format ion.