* 9403475
* Improving Software Quality through Instrumented Formal      Technical Review
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1995,05/31/2000
* Philip Johnson, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 05/31/2000
* USD 161,754.00

Formal technical review (FTR) encompasses a range of structured, collaborative
methods employing technical personnel to improve the quality of a software
development artifact. Research shows that FTR, when appropriately practiced,
provides significant benefits. However, research also shows that FTR introduces
substantial new overhead, and that its cost-effectiveness is easily compromised
by a variety of group process obstacles. In addition, current FTR practice is
difficult and costly to investigate effectively, and thus many important
questions about its nature and comparative effectiveness remain unanswered. This
project uses CSRS, a client-server, instrumented, collaborative software review
system to investigate issues in research and practice of FTR. Using CSRS,
controlled empirical studies provide insight into factors (such as the presence
or absence of meetings) influencing the cost-effectiveness of review. The
project is also enhancing CSRS to support its public release and use in case-
study research in industrial settings. These efforts provide insight into
technology transfer issues arising in the shift from manual to computer-
supported software review. They also support evaluation of novel forms of FTR
made possible by computer support, such as software review involving 20 or more
participants, and software review where participants are geographically
distributed.