* 9403750
* Mathematical Sciences: Applied Dynamics of Near Integrable  Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1996
* Gregor Kovacic, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1996
* USD 40,000.00

9403750 Kovacic This proposal describes intended research concerning irregular
dynamical behavior in two classes of physical systems. The first class will be
mechanical systems described by ordinary differential equations. The proposed
work will show the existence of special trajectories, called homoclinic orbits,
that connect equilibrium positions to each other in an infinite amount of time.
These trajectories will consist of a sequence of slow and fast stretches
following one another, and may be responsible for irregular behavior of nearby
trajectories, and thus of the mechanical systems under investigation. One such
system describes irregular beats in the amplitudes of two coupled mathematical
pendula. The second class of physical systems under investigation is laser
optics. The proposed research will investigate the occurrence of irregular
dynamics of soliton-like optical pulses in the Maxwell-Bloch partial
differential equations describing ring lasers. These dynamics will result in
intermittent blinking, on a very short time scale, of the laser output. Both
analytical and computational methods will be used in the course of this
research. This proposal describes intended research in two problem areas
concerning near-integrable dynamical systems. The first proposed area concerns
multi-bump orbits homoclinic to resonance bands. The work proposed here will
utilize the Melnikov method, geometric singular perturbation theory, and the
exchange lemma to describe new classes of such orbits as well as new techniques
that can be used to find these orbits in concrete physical problems. Multi-bump
orbits homoclinic to resonance bands consist of a succession of fast bumps
interspersed with segments on which trajectories move very slowly in time.
Besides these theoretical studies, a computational verification and
investigations of physically interesting examples that may exhibit the
phenomenon of orbits homoclinic to resonance bands are also proposed. The second
propos ed are concerns chaotic dynamics in the near-integrable regime of the
Maxwell-Bloch partial differential equations describing samples of lasing
material in a ring cavity. These dynamics may be present due to the existence of
space-dependent homoclinic orbits in the corresponding infinite-dimensional
phase space. The existence of these homoclinic orbits and chaotic dynamics will
be ascertained with the use of a combination of numerical and analytical
techniques. The numerical techniques will include simulations using split-step
and pseudo-spectral methods, as well as calculations of various diagnostics such
as power spectra, Lyapunov exponents, and Lyapunov attractor dimension. The
analytical techniques will include the subharmonic Melnikov method, perturbation
theory, Floquet theory, invariant manifold theory, inverse spectral theory, and
the homoclinic Melnikov method for near-integrable partial differential
equations.