* 9403820
* Mathematical Sciences:  Research on Stochastic Processes    and Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Paul Dupuis, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 07/31/1997
* USD 83,000.00

This research is divided into two parts. The first part considers problems from
the theory of large deviations. This theory seeks to estimate and characterize
rare events in stochastic systems. The focus of the work is on extending some
recently developed methods. In this new approach the large deviation problem is
recast in terms of the limiting behavior of a sequence of stochastic variational
problems. A problem of particular interest is the analysis of large deviation
properties of queuing systems. The second part of the proposal discusses the
development of stochastic process models for what are called "interacting users
of a resource system." These models describe situations in which there are a
large number of users of a finite set of resources. Examples occur in economics,
finance and transportation. The goals of the work are development of the models,
limit theorems, and model simplification. This research is divided into two
parts. The first part considers problems from the theory of large deviations.
This theory seeks to estimate and characterize rare events in stochastic
systems. Such rare events can play a critical role in determining the
performance of many systems modeled by stochastic processes. A problem of
compelling interest is the analysis of large deviation properties of queuing
systems, and in particular those that arise in communication systems. At the
same time, large deviation theory is thought to have great potential in the
analysis and design of high speed networks (including ATM networks). The focus
of the work is on extending some recently developed methods that can handle this
difficult class of problems. The second part of the research involves the
development of stochastic process models for what we call "interacting users of
a resource system." These models describe situations in which there are a large
number of users of a finite set of resources. Examples occur in economics,
finance and transportation. Such dynamical models are needed t o predict how the
population of users would adapt to changes in the environment. The main goal of
this part of the proposal is the development of the models and model
simplification.