* 9403770
* International Collegial Ties in Science:  The United States in Comparative Perspective
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Thomas Schott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1997
* USD 85,000.00

9403770 Schott International Collegial Ties in Science and Engineering. The
United States in comparative perspective. The project will explore global
patterns of collegial ties among research scientists, and engineers specifically
the ties to and from the world's centers. U.S. researchers' ties to local and
foreign colleagues will be compared with the international ties of researchers
in other countries, especially in France, Japan, and Mexico. U.S. researchers'
attraction of ties from scientists and engineers around the world will be
compared with the ties attracted by researchers in Japan and Western Europe.
Ties will be examined as vary overtime, across disciplines, and across cohorts
of scientists. Analyses use indicators of the networks of influence and
collaboration derived from the scientific literature and a questionnaire survey
of about 1,049 scientists in the United States, France, Japan, Mexico and other
countries (about 60% of the interviews have been completed in previous
projects). The questionnaire taps a researcher's education, career, travel,
assessment of contributions made around the world, and ties with local and
foreign colleagues. The study will also tap scientists' and engineers'
perceptions and experiences of barriers to formation of ties with foreign peers.
The project will contribute to knowledge of the international dynamics of
collegial networks in science, especially the ties to and from the centers. The
knowledge about the U.S. participation in North American and worldwide networks
may be of use in shaping U.S. policies international cooperation. ***