* 9403780
* Computer Simulation of Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1997
* William Hase, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 12/31/1997
* USD 302,000.00

9403780 Hase Wayne State Univ. This project in the theory of chemical dynamics
is supported by the NSF Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program. The
investigator extends his broad, ongoing study of transition state theory,
classical trajectory calculations, SN2 reactions, RRKM theory of unimolecular
reactions, solvent effects, dynamics of gas-surface interactions, and further
development and application of the VENUS computer program. This project
emphasizes direct dynamics (thereby avoiding the problem of fitting the global
potential energy surface) and the treatment of quantum mechanical zero point
energy effects in a classical mechanical formalism. VENUS is a computer program,
used by theoretical chemists at various institutions, to predict the rates of
chemical reactions in gases, liquids, and at gas-surface interfaces using
detailed knowledge of the intermolecular forces for the specific molecules in
the chemical system. The underlying theoretical principles and computational
methods have been continuously developed over many years by numerous scientists
with major contributions coming from the principle investigator's own research
group. This project attempts to compute the trajectories of atoms in the course
of a chemical reaction without prior knowledge of the potential energy surface
(a mathematical function expressing the energy of any given geometical
arrangement of atoms). Instead, the instantaneous energy, and the associated
interatomic forces, are recomputed at each step along the reaction path.
Improved computational methods need to be developed before such computations
become generally practical.