* 9403830
* International Conference:  Solid-&amp;gt;Solid Phase               Transformations in Inorganic Materials '94 to be held at    Nemacolin Woodlands Resort, July 14-22, 1994
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1995
* William Soffa, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 05/31/1995
* USD 5,000.00

9403830 Soffa This grant supports the Solid-Solid Phase Transformations in
Organic Materials Conference to be held near Pittsburgh, PA, July 14-22, 1994.
The requested funds are $10,000 to support graduate student participation. This
international conference examines the subject of solid -&gt; solid phase
transformations from both the theoretical and experimental viewpoints in
metallic, ceramic and mineral systems. The technical program includes 160
presentations, 12 invited talks, and 4 plenary lectures. Focus groups are formed
to discuss (1) mathematical approaches; (2) teaching; (3) first principal
calculations; (4) elastic effects during coarsening; (5) plastic deformation
effects. Over 200 people are expected to attend, including several NSF
scientists and scientists from other countries. %%% Solid state phase
transformations affect the properties of materials used in industrial
applications. A key to improving materials is understanding the nature and
effects of these transformations. The conference provides scientists and
engineers involved in practical applications of materials an opportunity to
familiarize themselves with new developments in the field. ***