* 9403739
* SGER: Verification and Refinement of a Novel HPLC Method for the Determination of Fe(II) in Aerosols, Rainwater and Seawater
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Gordon Wallace, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 06/30/1995
* USD 49,996.00

ZHUANG 9403739 This project is preliminary work in support of proposed research
on the redox chemistry and availability of iron to phytoplankton which will be
submitted to NSF. The ability to reliably quantify Fe(II) in aerosols,
rainwater, and seawater is one of the most important elements in further
understanding the biogeochemical cycling of iron in both atmospheric and aqueous
environments. We have developed a high performance liquid chromatographic method
that has enabled us to determine ultratrace amounts of iron(II) in aerosols,
rainwater, seawater {Yi et al., 1992}. The Fe(II) concentration in remote marine
aerosols and rainwater has been determined for the first time {Zhuang et
al.,1992a}. This novel method is the first to use HPLC to separate and determine
the iron redox species. While many experts in this field have noted that these
previous studies have contributed new knowledge on iron chemistry in the
atmosphere and in seawater, others have argued that because Fe(II) in seawater
is known to be thermodynamically unstable and difficult to measure, our new
method may be inaccurate. Despite publication in the peer-reviewed journals, the
methodology continues to be the subject of some controversy. Development of this
new method for the measurement of Fe(II) is still exploratory, and it will
potentially have great impact on environmental chemistry, specifically, on
chemical oceanography. We propose to verify and refine this highly sensitive and
specific method. We will focus on addressing the questions raised by reviewers
in our previous proposal and further clarify our new findings. The objectives of
this study are: 1) to rigorously verify and refine as needed our newly developed
method using HPLC with a UV/visible detector to determine Fe(II) in aerosols,
rainwater, and seawater, 2) to demonstrate the capability of the method to
measure Fe(II) in surface seawater collected from a variety of coastal
environments, 3) to determine directly the residence time of Fe(II) in
artificial and natural surface seawater collected in coastal waters.