* 9403212
* International Postdoctoral Fellows:  An International       Perspective on the Creation and Use of Design Criteria
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1994,03/31/1996
* Karen Lee Hansen, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 03/31/1996
* USD 29,450.00

9403212 Hansen This award is under the International Junior Investigator and
Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Karen L. Hansen to work with Professor Iain A. MacLeod of
Strathclyde University in Glasgow. Dr. Hansen proposes to study existing
approaches to the development of design criteria by clients, engineers, and
architects within a European context; create a framework for a computerized
design criteria knowledge base, including a method for checking design criteria
against completed design; and form a basis for the development of a
comprehensive research program on methodology for the creation and use of design
criteria. The benefits of creating a knowledge-based computer system will be a
formalization of knowledge acquisition methods used by European firms,
identification of the content of design criteria used by them, dissemination of
this information to the European and U.S. building industry, and improved
methodology for handling requirements leading to higher quality design output.
***