* 9403884
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems in Structured      Populations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Horst Thieme, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1998
* USD 90,000.00

9403884 Thieme The investigator studies the interplay of intrinsic population
structures and population development via differential equations models. The
structures of interest are induced by individual characteristics like
(chronological or class) age, size, location etc. A particular goal is to
identify those structures the introduction of which into a previously
unstructured model changes the dynamical behavior of the model solutions.
Specifically, he examines the influence of class age and chronological age on
models of endemic diseases, the impact of body size structure on populations of
zoo-plankton, and evolutionary aspects in structured metapopulation models.
Mathematically, the introduction of population structure typically converts
small systems of ordinary differential equations into large systems of ODEs or
into integral, integro-differential, functional differential or partial
differential equations. These equations are studied as evolution equations
(dynamical systems) in an appropriate Banach space, which typically is infinite
dimensional or has a large finite dimension. The study uses methods of linear
and nonlinear functional analysis and dynamical systems theory. While
establishing existence and uniqueness is a necessary and often not trivial step,
the focus is on studying the qualitative behavior of solutions addressing
stability, damped and undamped oscillations, persistence, and permanence. In
order to interpret, forecast, manage and control the dynamics of microbial,
plant, animal and human populations it is necessary to understand the
interaction between inherent population structures (as given by age, body size,
location etc.) and population development. The investigator develops
mathematical concepts and tools to formulate and analyze appropriate models for
this interdependence. Particular points of interests are how population
structure affects stability, resilience, persistence and extinction of
populations; fu rther, how to interpret population data in terms of individual
well-being. The latter is relevant, e.g., for the use of micro-organisms in
testing detergents. Important examples of structured populations are structured
metapopulations. Many populations live in a patchy environment, leading to the
formation of local populations that often go extinct and are recolonized by
individuals immigrating from other local populations. The number of populations
forming metapopulations of the above kind increases because the formerly
continuous habitats of many species are fragmented. Metapopulation dynamics are
important issues in conservation biology and re-establishment of naturally
extinct species.