* 9403901
* Mathematical Sciences: Systems of PDEs: Viscosity Solutions and Optimal Control Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Suzanne Lenhart, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* John Lagnese
* 07/31/1996
* USD 34,294.00

This is a multi-faceted investigation whose primary focus is the application of
partial differential equations and their optimal control to problems in
mechanics,population dynamics, mathematical ecology and mathematical physiology.
Among the problems to be investigated are bilinear control of Kirchhoff plate
equations;viscosity solutions of systems of systems of degenerate parabolic
partial differential equations that arise in population dynamics; optimal
control of a system of ordinary differential equations which models the
interaction of the immune system with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
with the goal of devising an optimal scheduling procedure for chemotherapy
treatments; and optimal control of a model for bioremediation of hazardous waste
using the input pumping levels of nutrients as the control variable. This
project is jointly funded by the Applied Mathematics Program and the Classical
Analysis Program. This is a multi-faceted investigation whose primary focus is
the application of partial differential equations and their optimal control to
problems in mechanics, population dynamics, mathematical ecology and
mathematical physiology. Among the specific problems to be investigated are (1)
the bilinear optimal control of plate equations, with applications to control of
elastic structures; (2) an analysis of systems of partial differential systems
which model population dynamics, with applications to competitive and
cooperative scenarios in social, political, military, and environmental
situations; (3) optimal control of chemotherapy treatment scheduling in a model
which describes the interaction of the immune system with the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) with the goal of reducing viral replication rates;
and (4) optimal control of hazardous waste disposal through the process of
bioremediation in which the control variable is the delivery pattern of the
essential nutrients that optimizes the efficiency of the bioremediation process.
Th is project is jointly funded by the Applied Mathematics Program and the
Classical Analysis Program.