* 9403832
* Novel Transformations in Metals and Alloys at High Pressures and Temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 07/31/1997
* USD 275,835.00

9403832 Vohra The central goal of this research is to investigate the stability
of novel phases in technologically important metals and alloys subjected to
extreme conditions of temperatures and pressures. This research is carried out
at the High Pressure Laboratory at the University of Alabama at Birmingham and
the National High Pressure Beam Lines at the CHESS and NSLS Synchrotron
Facilities. Metals and alloy samples are studied at high pressure/high
temperatures in diamond anvil cell devices and probed by x-ray diffraction and
laser spectroscopic methods. The fundamental aspects are the profound changes in
the bonding in metals by compression, and the technological potential is in
retaining these new modifications at ambient conditions. The focus of this
research is the prototype classes of metals and alloys with different initial
bonding configurations. In f-electron systems, the focus is on the cerium-
thorium alloy system. Here the motivation is to understand the f- delocalization
under pressure in rare earths and actinide metals. In d-electron systems, the
focus is on molybdenum-ruthenium and titanium-vanadium alloy systems to
investigate phase transformations predicted from theoretical considerations and
quenching novel phases at ambient conditions. Synthetic diamonds have shown
great potential as anvils in diamond cell devices due to lack of stress induced
fluorescence as compared to natural diamonds. Development of synthetic diamond
anvil technology for high pressure/high temperature research is continued. The
research facilities supported by this grant have been utilized in the past
during the summer in the research projects for undergraduates in the Alliance
for Minority Participation (AMP) program in Alabama. Training of undergraduate
and graduate students in metallurgical transformations, synchrotron based
research, and fundamental understanding of phase changes in metals and alloys
continues to be the primary mission. %%% This grant e xplores metallurgy phase
stability at high pressures and temperatures of potentially important
technological materials. ***