* 9403252
* PRF/J: Evolution of Canopy Architecture in the Maple genus, Acer: A Phylogenetic Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* David Ackerly, MA Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Richard F. Dame
* 06/30/1998
* USD 69,600.00

9403252 Ackerly Other functional and comparative studies have dealt with intra-
and interspecific variation of various plant characters, but use of phylogeny
reconstruction to investigate evolution and coadaptation among aspects of canopy
design is novel. Four components comprise this project: a) using material from
living collections (botanical gardens), a DNA - based phylogeny will be
generated for 30 to 40 North American and Asian species of maple (Acer, of which
there are more than a hundred species altogether), b) a broad survey of
interspecific variation in canopy architecture will be conducted, c)
intraspecific variation in populations of six eastern North American species are
to be studied, and d) methods of phylogenetic comparative analysis will be
applied to test for correlated evolutionary change among suites of leaf and
canopy architectural traits. %%% The adaptive significance of tree canopy
architecture is a long - standing problem in plant ecology. Adoption of a
systematics methodology to the question is innovative, unique, and one that
certainly holds significant promise for environmental biology. The incorporation
of a molecular evolution aspect in the work also bolsters it. In addition to
benefits to fundamental scientific knowledge, potential spin - offs would
include the possibility that plant architecture attributes could be genetically
altered in the future, for horticultural / ornamental or other purposes. ***