* 9403371
* Mathematical Sciences:  Multivariate Polynomial Splines     for Function Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1998
* Charles Kooperberg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1998
* USD 60,000.00

There are numerous situations in which observed data is generated by some
(unknown) mechanism, where interest lies in estimating a function that is
related to a model for the data. Using polynomial splines, an unknown function
is modeled to be in a linear space. An algorithm employing stepwise addition and
stepwise deletion of basis functions makes it possible to determine this space
adaptively. The coefficients of the basis functions are estimated by the maximum
likelihood method. The problems that are discussed in this proposal are hazard
regression, including situations in which there are time-dependent covariates or
interval censored data; bivariate survival estimation; bivariate survival
regression; modeling of aftershocks of a major earthquake; polychotomous
regression and classification; rotation invariant regression and density
estimation. The primary aim of this project is to develop methodologies for the
estimation of unknown functions using polynomial splines in a variety of
problems. Polynomial splines are building stones that can be used to model
functions without making assumptions of their form. The problems that are
discussed in this proposal are: survival analysis, including situations in which
there are time-dependent explanatory variables, situations in which the survival
times are only known to be in an interval and situations in which more than one
survival time is measured for each unit; modeling of aftershocks of a major
earthquake; classification of observations based upon explanatory variables;
rotation invariant regression and density estimation. For each of the problems
that we propose, there are vast amounts of data whose improved analysis would be
of much scientific interest.