* 9403427
* Parallel Processors for Constraint Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Jacques Cohen, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 06/30/1997
* USD 196,808.00

The focus of this project is the development of compilers and interpreters for
Logic and Constraint Programming (CLP) languages executing on sequential and
parallel machines. Prolog is an example of such a language, and it offers the
users capabilities of solving problems in domains including reals, booleans and
strings. The four specific topics of the project are: (1) Constraint
Parallelism. Constraint solvers for several domains (including integers, reals
and booleans) are designed, implemented and analyzed on parallel machines. These
solvers are used to prototype constraint parallel Prolog systems; (2) Program
Analysis and Transformations. Tools for the analysis of parallel constraint and
logic programs are developed. Some of the techniques that are considered are
partial evaluation and abstract interpretation based global analysis; (3)
Extension of CLP. High-level, C-like languages based on constraints and interval
arithmetic are designed, implemented and analyzed. The possibility of
integrating, functional, set-theoretic and CLP languages in a single higher
order logic programming framework is also studied; and (4) Applications of
Parallel CLP. Several classes of parallel CLP applications are considered,
including genome parsing, combinatorial search problems (such as scheduling),
and optimization of non-linear constraint systems.