* 9403367
* International Postdoctoral Fellows:  Optimal Design for     Nonlinear Regression
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Timothy O'Brien, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/1996
* USD 18,450.00

9403367 O'Brien This award is under the International Junior Investigator and
Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a seven-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Timothy E. O'Brien of Washington State University to work with
Professor Dr. Friedrich Pukelsheim at the Institut fur Mathematik der
Universitat Augsburg on optimal design for nonlinear regression models. This
research will focus on several specific problems. First, development of a
theoretical framework will help researchers select among design procedures
available for nonlinear models. Second, extension of existing second- order and
Bayesian design procedures to accommodate the multi-response and/or
compartmental nonlinear models that face many researchers. Third, elevation of
compound design procedures for nonlinear models so that researchers can obtain
optimal designs even when they are unsure which model they should use. In
addition to enhancing the theoretical understanding of statistics, the results
of this work will furnish scientists in other fields with efficient tools to
accomplish their research. ***