* 9403454
* Mathematical Sciences:  Applications of Topology to Biology and Chemistry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* De Witt Sumners, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1998
* USD 138,000.00

9403454 Sumners The investigator and colleagues develop topological methods to
describe and compute the spatial configuration of macromolecules, and changes in
configuration due to chemical and biological agents. These issues arise in the
analysis of experimental data in molecular biology and synthetic polymer
chemistry. The applications include model building and theoretical proofs of the
structure and mechanism of enzymes that act on DNA, the quantization of
topological entanglement of molecules in random polymer systems, the development
of algorithms for the numerical computation and simulation of macromolecular
structure, and the implementation of these algorithms to create mathematical
data that one can compare with experimental data. In the topological approach to
enzymology, enzymes vital in cellular metabolism are reacted with circular DNA
substrate. A topological enzyme signature is observed in the family of DNA knots
and links produced by the reaction. One long-range goal of this research is the
development of a complete set of experimentally observable topological
parameters with which to describe and compute enzyme mechanism and the structure
of the active enzyme-DNA synaptic intermediate, allowing mathematical proof of
3-dimensional enzyme-DNA structure, and the ability to predict results of future
experiments. Many recent advances in 3-dimensional geometry and topology (such
as the Cyclic Surgery Theorem) are useful in the analysis of data from these
topological enzymology experiments. The results of this basic research project
have potential utility in biotechnology, rational drug design and the design and
manufacture of synthetic polymers. Before one can harness the manufacturing
power of bacterial cells, one must first understand what these cells are capable
of, and then how to control these processes. In order to combat viruses in human
disease, and to exploit the ability of viruses to control cellular processes,
one must understand at a fundamental level what viruses are doing. An integral
part of this understanding process is the study of the spatial configuration of
large flexible molecules. For example, the 3-dimensional shape of cellular DNA,
RNA and proteins is crucially important to their biological function. Cellular
DNA is highly twisted and convoluted, and for information retrieval and cell
viability, some geometric and topological features must be introduced, and
others quickly removed. Some enzymes maintain the proper geometry and topology
of DNA in the cell by passing one strand of DNA through another via an enzyme-
bridged transient break in the DNA; this enzyme action plays a crucial role in
cell metabolism, including segregation of daughter chromosomes at the
termination of replication. Other enzymes break the DNA apart and recombine the
ends by exchanging them. These enzymes regulate the expression of specific
genes, mediate viral integration into and excision from the host genome, mediate
transposition and repair of DNA, and generate antibody and genetic diversity.
These enzymes perform incredible feats of topology at the molecular level; the
description and quantization of such enzyme action absolutely requires the
language and computational machinery of topology.