* 9403376
* Eleventh International Conference on the Application of     High Magnetic Fields in Semiconductor Physics; MIT;         August 8-12, 1994
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1995
* Don Heiman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1995
* USD 2,000.00

9403376 Heiman Technical abstract: The 11th Conference on the Application of
High Magnetic Fields in Semiconductor Physics will be held on the MIT campus
August 8-12, 1994. This is a satellite conference of the International
Conference on the Physics of Semiconductors taking place in Vancouver. The use
of high magnetic fields is an indispensable tool for probing new semiconductor
materials and structures, and has been useful in designing practical devices.
The meting will have impact in areas of research on electronic, magnetic and
photonic devices. It will bring together an outstanding international group of
who are at the forefront of scientific research and state of the art technology.
Non-technical abstract: The 11th Conference on the Application of High Magnetic
Fields in Semiconductor Physics will be held on the MIT campus August 8-12,
1994. This is a satellite conference of the International Conference on the
Physics of Semiconductors taking place in Vancouver. The use of high magnetic
fields is an indispensable tool for probing new semiconductor materials and
structures, and has been useful in designing practical devices. The meeting will
have impact in areas of research on electronic, magnetic and photonic devices.
It will bring together an outstanding international group of who are at the
forefront of scientific research and state of the art technology. ***