* 9403845
* Atomic-Scale Mechanisms of Heterogeneous Catalysis and the  Chemistry of Metallic Minerals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1999
* Robert Hamers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/1999
* USD 520,000.00

Hamers The use of scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) to study chemical
reactions has been hampered by the inability to a priori identify adsorbed
molecules and molecular fragments. The goal of this work is to overcome this
limitation by first studying a homologous series of unsaturated hydrocarbons,
their decomposition products, and some functionalized derivatives of these
molecules to develop an empirical basis set for molecular identification, and
then applying this knowledge to study the reaction chemistry of these
hydrocarbons on surfaces of Pd, platinum, and nickel both in the absence and in
the presence of "modifiers" such as sulfur, chlorine, and silicon. Studies will
be performed using a unique scanning tunneling microscope system which can image
surfaces at 77 Kelvin in ultrahigh vacuum, in conjunction with other techniques
including infrared spectroscopy, Auger, and low-energy electron diffraction. STM
will be used to provide atomic-resolution analysis of the identity and spatial
location of molecules and molecular fragments and to directly observe the
influence of steps, defects, and chemical inhomogeneities on the reactions of
small unsaturated hydrocarbons on metal surfaces, while FTIR will provide
information on the chemical functionalities present on the surface. A
statistical analysis of this spatial information will be used to quantitatively
describe the surface lateral chemical composition and to identify spatial
correlations between the positions of various surface species. By studying the
adsorption and decomposition of small hydrocarbons on metals, the adsorption of
chemical modifiers, and co-adsorption of molecules in the presence of modifiers,
we will achieve new insight into the nature of heterogeneous catalysis at
transition metal surfaces. %%% The explosive growth of scanning tunneling
microscopy as an atomic-resolution tool for probing the geometry and electronic
properties of surfaces brings with it exciting new opportunities to probe
materials chemistry at the atomic level. However, the use of STM to study
chemical reactions has been hampered by the inability to a priori identify
adsorbed molecules and molecular fragments. The goal of this work is to overcome
this limitation by first studying a homologous series of unsaturated
hydrocarbons, their decomposition products, and some functionalized derivatives
of these molecules to develop an empirical basis set for molecular
identification, and then applying this knowledge to study the reaction chemistry
of these hydrocarbons on surfaces of Pd, platinum, and nickel both in the
absence and in the presence of "modifiers" such as sulfur, chlorine, and
silicon. These studies will provide a fundamental basis of knowledge about the
appearance of various molecular fragments in the STM which can then be applied
to study the reaction chemistry of a wide range of molecular functionalities,
and will provide insight into how promoters and poisons modify the reactivity of
metals toward hydrocarbon species.