* 9403009
* Acquisition of a New Scientific Computer
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Natalie Holzwarth, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

Partial support is provided for the acquisition of a scientific computing system
for the Wake Forest University Physics and Chemistry departments. The primary
use of this facility would be to support the departments' research in
theoretical condensed matter physics, quantum chemistry, and quantum field
theory in curved space. At present these departments operate a system consisting
of two Convex C-120 vectorizing minisupercomputers. The proposed new system will
replace these obsolete computers with a cluster of the latest RISC superscalar
processors. The problems to be studied include: 1) density functional
investigation of surface reconstruction and of electron tunneling; 2) nonlinear
effects in the dynamics of structural phase transitions; 3) point defect
structures in solids; 4) effects of quantum fields on black hole spacetimes; and
5) quantum chemical investigation of atmospheric molecular species. The computer
configuration to be purchased is a cluster of Hewlett-Packard workstations,
configured into a Meta-system by Convex. The system consists of the following
hardware: four HP 9000/735 computational nodes each with 128 Megabytes of memory
and a 1 Gigabyte internal disk; 20 Gigabyte of external disk storage; an
additional HP 9000/735 with smaller memory and disk for system administration.
Convex packages the HP workstations into a single unit and provides software
that unifies the system operation and includes a library of highly optimized
scientific subroutines.