* 9403674
* Acquisition of a Dilution Refrigerator and High Field       Solenoid System for Millikelvin Scanning Probe Microscopy   Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Geoffrey Nunes, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1996
* USD 92,735.00

A dilution refrigerator and a high field solenoid system are requested for
application of scanning probe microscopy techniques to the study and
manipulation of disorder in quantum transport at millikelvin temperatures. The
coherence of the electron wavefunction at very low temperatures can make the
transport properties of such systems uniquely sensitive to the exact
distribution of defects and scattering centers in the sample. Experiments which
involve the measurement of some bulk property (e.g., conductivity) as a function
of some external variable (e.g. magnetic field) can only reveal information
about the net contribution of all the defects in the system. In contrast,
scanned probe microscopies offer a unique opportunity to investigate these
systems at the single defect level. The ability to probe and manipulate disorder
in small scale systems, in combination with more standard probes of transport
should provide: 1) important tests of the theoretical understanding of the role
that disorder plays in these systems, and 2) signific ant insight into such long
standing problems as 1/f noise and electromigration in small metal wires, and
the nature of two level tunneling centers in disordered materials. The extension
of a variety of scanned probe techniques to operation at very low temperatures
will also allow the spatially resolved investigation of such buried systems, as
the 2-dimensional electron gas in semiconductor heterostructures, and allow new
insights into transport in the integer and fractional quantum Hall effect
regimes. %%% Over the past decade, there has been great deal of interest and
activity in two areas of condensed matter physics: electrical transport in
nanometer scale devices and systems, and the study of surfaces with the scanning
tunneling microscope and related microscopies. These new tools have found wide
use in the study of the structure, and defects, on surfaces, study of complex
molecules and magnetic systems, and fabrication of very small st ructures
through the manipulation of single-atom-building blocks. This research, for
which a dilution refrigerator and a high field solenoid system are requested,
seeks to apply scanning probe microscopy techniques to the study and
manipulation of disorder in quantum transport at very low, millikelvin
temperatures. The aim is to probe the microscopic origins of the effects of
disorder on the bulk electronic properties of metals.