* 9403206
* RUI:  Avian Extinctions and Climatic Change in the          Pleistocene of Florida
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Steven Emslie, Western Colorado University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 12/31/1997
* USD 50,456.00

9403206 Emslie The project will develop a chronology of avian extinctions for
the Plio-Pleistocene of Florida using the exceptional fossil record of birds
from this region. Dozens of published and unpublished late Pliocene to late
Pleistocene (Blancan through Rancholabrean Land Mammal Ages, 2.4-0.010 Ma)
localities that include over 100 taxa of birds provide an excellent database
from which to establish this chronology. These avifaunas are located throughout
Florida, represent a diversity of depositional environments and provide
substantial information on the structure of terrestrial, wetland and
coastal/marine communities throughout this period. This chronology will be
supplemented with identification and description of seven additional avifaunas
that will add at least 10 undescribed extinct taxa to the fossil record of
Florida. Limited fieldwork at selected sites and newly discovered localities
will be completed to determine their age, recover additional fossil material and
collect paleoenvironmental data using paleomagnetic, strontium isotope,
radiocarbon and palynologic sampling. Avian extinction in the Plio-Pleistocene
will be investigated using FAUNMAP, a GIS-based computer program,, and digitized
land cover maps of Florida, to reconstruct avian distributions and habitats for
specific time intervals. Paleoenvironmental information will be drawn from
geological, paleontological and palynological data from over 50 vertebrate
localities. The maps generated from this program will be compared with the avian
chronology to develop and test hypotheses on avian extinctions and climatic
change. This research will be completed over a two year period in collaboration
with a geologist and paynologist. It will provide a thorough documentation of
Plio-Pleistocene avian diversity and extinction in one geographic region of
North America and will be the first application of the FAUNMAP system with
fossil birds. Results of this investigation will be applicable to current global
warming and its potential impact on vertebrate communities.