* 9403920
* Trophic Interactions of Ambush Predator Dinoflagellates in  Estuarine Microbial Food Webs
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1994,02/28/1998
* JoAnn Burkholder, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1998
* USD 399,987.00

BURKHOLDER 9403920 The diverse heterotrophic dinoflagellates include free-
living estuarine species that demonstrate "ambush predator" behavior toward
algal, protozoan, or fish prey. This behavioral pattern is widespread; thus far,
it has been reported from the Mediterranean Sea, the Gulf of Mexico, and the
western Atlantic. Within the past two years, a new genus of ambush predator
dinoflagellate, Pfiesteria (nov. gen.) has been discovered, with known species
having a complex life cycle that includes at least 15 stages. Among these stages
are persistent amoeboid heterotrophs and ephemeral "phantom-like" flagellates
that are common in eutrophic mid-Atlantic and Gulf Coast estuaries, and likely
are widespread throughout warm temperate and subtropical waters. The ubiquitous
occurrence and abundance of these stages in the water column and sediments,
their voracious phagotrophy on bacterial, algal, and microfaunal prey, and their
lethality to fish point to a major role of ambush predator dinoflagellates in
the structure and function of estuarine food webs. This project is to
experimentally examine the nutritional ecology and trophic interactions of
abundant stages of Pfiesteria piscimorte (nov. gen. et sp.) as a representative
toxic ambush predator, toward determining the role of these organisms -- in
their many forms -- within estuarine food webs. This project will: (1) examine
saprotrophic nutrition of the biflagellate and amoeboid forms on stimulatory
secretions of finfish prey; (2) characterize phagotrophic interactions between
Pfiesteria (nov. gen.) and bacterial, algal and microfaunal prey; and (3)
determine the influence of the biflagellate and amoeboid stages on
representative microbial predators. The insights gained from this research will
alter general paradigms about the role of dinoflagellates in the structure and
function of food webs n eutrophic warm temperate estuaries.