* 9403510
* Glycolytic Enzyme Dynamics in Living Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Leonard Pagliaro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1995
* USD 75,730.00

9403510 Pagliaro Much of modern biology is based on the study of cellular
organization in fixed specimens or in dilute aqueous solutions. While this
approach has been very valuable in the past, it has its limitation when one
approaches the organization of the cytoplasm. The goal of this proposal is to
study the organization and behavior of several glycolytic enzymes in living
cells. These enzymes are believed to exist freely dissolved in cytoplasm, but
much recent evidence suggests that they may exist partially in the solid state.
During the first year of the project efforts will be focused on continued
studies of the enzymes aldolase and triose phosphate isomerase. These enzymes
are believed to interact with each other and with the actin cytoskeleton, either
directly or indirectly. The intracellular distribution and mobility of each of
these enzymes will be compared using fluorescence ratio imaging and fluorescence
redistribution after photobleaching and the interaction of these enzymes in
vitro and in vivo will be characterized extensively. Specific antibodies will be
used against aldolase, cloned mutant aldolase, and fluorescence resonance energy
transfer to probe the interactions between these enzymes both in vitro and in
living mammalian fibroblasts. The significance of the work is three-fold. First,
it is clear that many reactions generally treated as occurring in soluble phase
may have some structural basis. Characterizing and understanding the cellular
organization of these reactions is one of the important challenges remaining for
biochemical pathways. Second, molecular organization of biochemical pathways may
provide a link between biochemical logic and three dimensional cytoplasmic
organization. Identifying the rules by which nature has optimized biochemical
reactions may allow genetic manipulations to improve quality or efficiency of
animals, microbes and plants. %%% Understanding the cellular organization of
metabolic processes i s a basic requirement in our undestanding of life. The
work proposed here to investigate the dynamics of glycolytic enzymes in living
cells will eventually provide new tools for investigating other processes.
Understanding the spatial and temporal organization of the cytoplasm is a basic
requirement for future genetic engineering experiments in animals,
microorganisms and plants. ***