* 9403431
* Density Functional Theory of the Electronic Structure of    Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Robert Parr, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 05/31/1997
* USD 246,000.00

This project, supported by the NSF Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
Program, continues research by Robert Parr in the related areas of density
functional theory (DFT), and the theoretical formulation of Ralph Pearson's
concept of hard and soft acids and bases (HSAB). In one aspect of this work the
Kohn-Sham orbitals are determined directly from a given electron density. A
major goal is the development of an improved exchange-correlation DFT
functional. To this end, a mathematical analysis of analytic properties of local
and non-local functionals, such as cusp conditions and coordinate scaling
conditions, will be carried out. Density functional theory provides an
alternative to ab initio solution of the Schroedinger equation for the
computation of the electronic structure of mater. The history of DFT dates back
to work by Thomas, Fermi, and Dirac in the 1920's in the earliest days of
quantum theory. In the past two decades, DFT calculations have been widely
applied to predict the electronic properties of metals and other crystals, but
only in recent years have DFT calculations become sufficiently accurate to
permit general application to molecules. This advance, made possible by the
development of new exchange-correlation functionals, reduces computation time
for large molecules by at least a factor of ten. The present project, with its
emphasis on analysis of fundamental mathematical aspects, is just one of several
ongoing research projects which seek to develop even more accurate functionals.
Many scientists anticipate that new DFT methods will one day replace the much
more expensive ab initio calculations in about 80% of all applications of
molecular quantum theory. If true, this will constitute a major advance in our
ability to design new materials.