* 9403892
* Davidon's Collinear Scaling Algorithms that Extend Quasi-Newton Methods for Optimization
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Kuruppu Ariyawansa, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1995
* USD 36,000.00

9403892 Ariyawansa This project will develop and computationally test variants
of Davidon's collinear scaling algorithms that extend quasi-Newton methods.
These algorithms would be based on local approximations that interpolate
objective function values and gradients at suitable iterates. They would be
designed to have finite termination on conic functions, and to be invariant
under collinear scalings. The development of such algorithms would begin with
the recent new derivation of Davidon's collinear scaling algorithms by the
principal investigator. The computational experiments would use standard test
problems as well as test instances derived from suitable potential functions
used in interior point methods. The proposed project would thus attempt to
assess in an unbiased manner whether algorithms that utilize the full potential
offered by Davidon's new scalings and approximations would have practical
performance improvements. If the computational experiments indicate that
algorithms with Davidon's new scalings and approximationscan improve performance
in optimizing potential functions, then it would indicate a hitherto unexplored
way of developing better interior point algorithms. Since interior point methods
have wide applicability, this work can reveal research opportunities that would
make significant advancements in optimization algorithms. ***