* 9403871
* Mathematical Sciences: Waves and Stability in Nonlinear     Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Robert Pego, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1998
* USD 92,400.00

9403871 Pego Nonlinear waves play a significant role in systems of partial
differential equations of importance in science and engineering. A primary goal
of the proposed work is to develop effective methods for understanding the
stability properties of many such waves. The proposer and collaborators have
recently introduced some promising new methods for studying the stability of
simplified models of solitary water waves. We plan to extend these methods to
study waves in various systems of importance, including the full water wave
equations and simplified models of particle physics and phase transitions. A
second major topic of investigation will be the study of low velocity flow in
fluids near the liquid-gas critical point, both in zero-G and 1-G conditions.
High compressibility and anomalous physical properties characterize this regime,
and several phenomena have been observed in experiments in spacecraft and on
earth which are unexplained or only partly explained. The proposed stability
analyses involve the use and further development of several mathematical tools,
including the Evans function, and Krein's perturbation determinant. Both are
analytic functions whose zeros correspond to eigenvalues or resonance poles. The
use of linear stability analysis to prove nonlinear stability will be further
developed for solitary waves of dispersive equations. Also, a new way of
reformulating Hamiltonian systems, so that constraints become conserved
quantities, will be investigated for: water waves, flexure of cables in zero-G,
and anisotropic materials that are `stiff' in one direction. Recent developments
in applied mathematics regarding `zero-Mach number flows' in combustion will be
adapted and extended for studying near-critical pure fluids.