* 9403760
* Collection of Mutant Types of Drosophila Melanogaster
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1999
* Thomas Kaufman, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,775,316.00

Abstract BIR9403760 The Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center collects,
maintains, and distributes genetic stocks of the fly, Drosophila melanogaster.
The sophisticated genetic tools developed in Drosophila over the past 80 years
make this insect a powerful model organisms for biological research. The
collection currently consists of over 5,300 different genetic stocks including
visible, lethal and sterile mutations (about 30% of the collection), chromosome
aberrations (about 36% of the total), and marked transposon insertions (about
34% of holdings). An electronic database is maintained and distributed, allowing
users full access to up-to- date information about stocks available from the
collection, and center scientists are available to provide advice on the use of
these materials. The center is heavily used, with close to 16,000 stocks
expected to be shipped during 1993. Over 99% of stocks are used by academia-
based researchers, about 76% of these within the US and the remaining 24% spread
among 33 countries. This resource preserves valuable research materials for the
future, promotes effective use of these tools today, assures that documented
strains are readily available to all qualified users, and relieves individual
researchers and their grants of the burden of providing large numbers of stocks
to colleagues. This award is jointly supported with the National Center for
Research Resouces, the National Institute of General Medical Sciences, and the
National Eye Institute of the National Institutes of Health.