* 9403456
* Charge Distribution Probe for the Measurement of Surface    Charges, Internal Electric Fields and Related Fundamental   Properties
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Friedemann Freund, Phytron Instruments Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 276,091.00

The main objective of the Phase II SBIR award is to develop a Fringe Field
Charge Distribution Probe (FF-CDP) that is capable of performing measurements
with moderate to high spatial resolution and extremely good long-term stability.
Electric and electronic properties of insulators are difficult to measure by
conventional methods which apply metal contacts to the insulator surfaces. This
new technique has shown great potential. It allows one to measure, contact-free
under minimum perturbation conditions, previously unmeasureable fundamental
properties of materials, especially of materials with very low charge carrier
concentrations. The technique relies on the dielectric polarization in an
electric field gradient. By deconvoluting the various components of the
dielectric polarization, bulk and surface contributions can be separated. Thus,
unique information is obtained about surface charges, their sign and density as
well as their associated internal fields. This method is sensitive to changes in
the bulk polarization, due to structural changes, to phase transitions, and to
defects that generate mobile charges. By applying a static electric field
gradient and measuring the response as function of time, processes with long
relaxation times, of the order of seconds to hours, can be assessed. Such
processes are often due to charge carriers with low drift mobilities, which may
play an important part in determining the long-term stability of insulators,
ferroelectrics and other components of semiconductor devices.