* 9403479
* SGER: Overbank Sedimentation During the Upper Mississippi   River Flood, 1993
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Basil Gomez, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1995
* USD 22,000.00

9403479 GOMEZ Overbank sedimentation caused by major floods is an important, but
not well understood process. In order for there to be a testing of existing
models and the construction of new models, it is necessary to collect better
data. The upper Mississippi River floods of the summer of 1993 provide a special
opportunity to collect such data. This Small Grants for Exploratory Research
project is designed to collect systemmatic samples of overbank sedimentation
from unleveed areas of the floodplain as well as an area which was inundated
following a levee breach. Samples will be collected from two sites which will
enable the investigators to map variations in the thickness and particle size
distribution of overbank deposits associated with the flood. These data will
enable the investigators to determine the relationship of floodplain topography
and vegetation to observed patterns of scour and deposition and to compare
patterns of erosion and sedimentation on the leveed and unleveed parts of the
floodplain. Data will be organized in a geographic information system in order
to facilitate further research. This project will provide a timely and unusual
data set and analysis that can be used to test the integrity of existing
sedimentation models and that will likely lead to new understanding of the
process of sedimentation. ***