* 9403744
* Third International Workshop on Computational Electronics;  May 18-20, 1994 in Portland, Oregon
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Stephen Goodnick, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 08/31/1995
* USD 8,590.00

9403744 Goodnick The International Workshop on Computational Electronics will be
held at the Benson Hotel, Portland, Oregon on May 18, 19, and 20, 1993. The
workshop will cover all aspects of advanced simulation of electronic transport
in semiconductors and semiconductor devices, particularly those which use large
computational resources. The major topics will include: 1) Advances in 2-D and
3-D standard simulations (drift- diffusion, hydrodynamic equations) 2) Particle
simulation methods (Monte Carlo, molecular dynamics, cellular automaton) 3)
Simulation of optical processes, optoelectronic and electro-optic devices (i.e.
inclusion of Maxwell's equations) 4) Quantum transport quantum devices 5) High
performance computing for computational electronics (parallelization,
vectorization, improved numerical algorithms) The workshop is intended to be an
international forum for the discussion on the current trends and the future
directions of computational electronics. The emphasis of the contributions will
be on interdisciplinary aspects of Computational Electronics, encompassing
Applied Physics, Engineering and Applied Mathematics. Active participation of
graduate students, including student poster papers, is strongly encouraged. The
Workshop is scheduled a few days before the 1994 Microwave Theory and Techniques
(MTT) Symposium, to facilitate attendance of international speakers to both
events. ***