* 9403924
* Mathematical Science: Nonlinear Control Theory: Topics      Related to Stabilizability, Observability and Realizability
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Yuan Wang, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1997
* USD 68,604.00

9403924 Wang/Lin Two major areas within nonlinear control theory will be pursued
in this investigation. The first is related to stability and stabilizability of
control systems, and the second to observability and reachability. Within the
area of stability, the research program will rely upon the integration of three
closely related topics with the ultimate goal of developing an understanding of
the effect of disturbances on control design. The first topic focuses on the
analysis of the stability of general dynamical systems through an analysis of
the structure of reachable sets and their prolongations, so that a converse
Lyapunov function for general dynamical systems can be developed. The second
topic concerns so-called input-to-state stability, and the third topic concerns
the development of universal formulae for designing explicit stabilizing
feedback laws. The main goal in the second major area of this investigation is
to analyze the relationship between different representations of systems.
Attention will be focused on clarifying the connections between different
notions and results related to observability which have been developed within
the frameworks of differential algebra and differential geometry. Also to be
investigated are conditions under which a state space system admits integral
input/output equations. Roughly speaking, control theory concerns itself with
changing the behavior of dynamical systems so as to meet desired performance
objectives. The analysis and design of control systems play fundamental roles in
manufacturing automation and many other applications. The main issues addressed
in this research deal with the problem of stability of control systems subject
to disturbances, that is, with the question of how to assure that the quantities
of interest ultimately behave in an appropriate manner regardless of the
specific nature of the disturbances acting on the system, and with
identification of systems, that is, with the questi on of how to obtain models
of the system, or "plant", on the basis of data obtained from observations of
its operation. ***