* 9403308
* PRF/J: The Role of Limiting Resources in Controlling        Mutualistic and Parasitic Effects of Mycorrhizae
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Nancy Johnson, NM Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Richard F. Dame
* 11/30/1997
* USD 69,600.00

9403308 Johnson This research will ascertain what factors regulate mycorrhizal
effectivity in relation to mutualistic or parasitic relationships with their
host plants. To be tested is the hypothesis that enrichment of a limiting soil
resource causes mycorrhizal plants to allocate less carbon to root exudates,
giving a selective advantage to parasitic forms of vesicular - arbuscular
mycorrhizal (VAM) fungi. Fieldwork will be conducted on 24 fertilized,
irrigated, and control plots at two NSF Long Term Ecological Research (LTER)
sites (Minnesota's Cedar Creek Natural History Area and Sevilleta in New
Mexico). %%% VAM fungi, relatively better studied in agricultural systems, are
poorly known in natural ecological communities and ecosystems despite their
ubiquitousness in soils. Nevertheless even in managed agricultural settings,
these fungi are still largely regarded as "black boxes" in comparison to our
knowledge of other components of agroecosystems. A more thorough understanding
of VAM biology and ecology is likely to lead to improved practices by ranchers
and farmers with regard to successful mycorrhizal inoculation programs, while a
more comprehensive appreciation of natural mycorrhizal biodiversity will
undoubtedly lead to as yet unforeseen improvements in managed agricultural and
forest systems. ***