* 9403198
* Dissertation Research:  Power and Status:  Enslaved African-Americans on the Hermitage Plantation, 1830-1860
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1996
* Randall McGuire, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1996
* USD 6,145.00

Under the direction of Dr. Randall McGuire, Mr. Brian Thomas will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze material from the historic period
site of the Hermitage Plantation in Tennessee. This was the home of Andrew
Jackson. The work itself will involve analyzing artifacts and faunal remains
recovered from three slave cabins which are located at varying distances from
the main plantation house. Historic documents indicate that status differences
existed not only between "masters" and "slaves", but also among the latter
group. Differences in job were related to both social and economic status.
Social position was reflected in residential distance as well. Given the fairly
controlled context, it will be possible to examine different classes of
artifacts - ceramics, personal belongings, faunal and floral remains - and
determine how well power and status relations are reflected in their
distribution across the site. This research is important for several reasons.
Much anthropological archaeology is directed at the reconstruction of past
social systems and the examination of status differentiation. Mr. Thomas'
provides a context to evaluate analytic assumptions which anthropologists widely
hold and to test the efficacy of specific techniques which are used in social
reconstruction. It will also assist in the training of a promising young
scientist.