* 9404283
* Mathematical Sciences:  Inverse Problems for Hyperbolic     Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* William Symes, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 64,959.00

9404283 Symes This project will focus on inverse problems arising in geophysics,
in particular, the determination or estimation of the index of refraction, or
wave velocity, of a medium from measurements made at or near the surface of the
body. The field equations for such problems are hyperbolic, or are closely
related to hyperbolic systems. Several key mathematical questions will be
investigated, each with substantial practical implications: 1) global estimates
for a linearized inverse problem for the wave equation in the presence of
caustics; 2) the relation between nonsmooth propagation of singularities and
linearization; 3) design of objective functions to give quasiconvex optimization
formulations of inverse problems; and 4) accommodation of attenuation and
dispersion; for example, inverse problems in viscoelasticity. The remote sensing
techniques of pure and applied geophysics use measurements of an acoustic or
electromagnetic field near the earth's surface to infer the internal structure
of the earth. These fields are modeled by the solutions of some appropriate
field equations in a domain representing a portion of the earth. The
coefficients of these equations represent distributed physical parameters such
as conductivity, stiffness, density, etc. Thus remote sensing techniques pose
inverse problems: to estimate coefficients of field equations in the interior of
a domain from measurements of fields near the boundary. This research concerns
models of those experimental designs and parameter ranges which cause the probe
fields to consist of propagating waves.