* 9404925
* Characterization of Reaction Centers with Altered Donor     Oxidation Potentials
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1998
* James Allen, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9404925 Allen The goal of this project is to understand the process by which
biological systems can convert light energy into chemical energy with an
efficiency near unity. The initial photochemical process in photosynthetic
organisms occurs in a pigment-protein complex called the reaction center. The
photochemical process is initiated by light absorption that excites a
bacteriochlorophyll dimer and starts the transfer of electrons and protons that
will be used to generate energy rich compounds. A critical feature of these
electron transfer processes is the relationship between the rate and driving
force. We propose measuring the process after we have significantly altered the
driving force by making specific changes in the energy levels of the
bacteriochlorophyll dimer. We plan to use a wide range of techniques ranging
from femotosecond transient absorption spectroscopy and electron nuclear
paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy to molecular biology. The understanding of
the electron transfer processes in this complex should be useful for other
biological systems, such as respiratory and electron transfer chains and redox
enzymes. %%% The goal of this research is to understand the function of
biological systems at a molecular level. Fundamental to all biological processes
is the use of energy to create energy rich compounds. These research seeks to
understand how biological organisms efficiently convert light into chemical
energy. Our approach is to study the complex called the reaction center, that is
involved in the initial steps of this conversion process. We alter the complex
by use of molecular biology and then apply physical techniques to characterize
how the function has changed. More specifically, we make changes that alter the
driving force for the reaction and then measure how the rate of the reaction
changes. Although the study is applied to a specific complex, we anticipate that
the results will be general and applicable to other biological systems. ***