* 9404968
* Indices for Sorting Compounds by Connectivity, Constitution and Stereochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1994,08/31/1997
* James Salvador, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 08/31/1997
* USD 143,000.00

James Salvador is funded by a Minority Research Initiation grant from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to perform research in the
general area of graph theory applied to databases of chemical structural
information. Salvador will use generalizations of the matching polynomial as a
method of sorting and/or comparing lists of structural data in connection tables
or line notations. Compact topological indices will be used as descriptors to
distinguish chemical structures by connectivity, constitution, stereochemistry,
or complete three dimensional structures. These indices and Chemical Abstract
CAS-Registry Numbers will permit retrieval of chemical information on chemical
compounds, their isomers and isomorphs by simply drawing out a query on a
computer screen. Retrieval of chemical information from large databases such as
those maintained by Chemical Abstracts is a difficult problem because chemical
structures are three dimensional entities. A number of techniques are being
developed to encode three dimensional information in numerical indices which can
be used to access such databases. Many of the techniques proposed to date do not
uniquely encode this information, and they result in a many to one relationship
between indices and structures. Salvador's research shows promise as a method
for providing unique coding of three dimensional structural information.