* 9404840
* Eneolithic Archaeology of Podgoritsa
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1998
* Ruth Tringham, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 01/31/1998
* USD 113,372.00

Tringham With National Science Foundation support Dr. Ruth Tringham and her
collaborators will conduct three seasons of field research at the archaeological
site of Podgoritsa in Northeast Bulgaria. Dating to the Neolithic period, this
"tell" or habitation mound was occupied from ca. 5000-4500 BC. Prior work
indicates that this period spans the interval when agriculture was introduced
into Eastern Europe. The mound, because it consists of a stratified series of
household areas which preserve abundant cultural remains, provides an excellent
potential window into how human populations adapted over this period. The
research team will conduct a general regional survey and focus, in particular on
the geographic distribution of important resources such as flint which was used
to produce stone tools. The area around the tell will be intensively sampled
through surface collection and sub-surface soil probing. Finally extensive mound
areas will be excavated to expose house remains and collect cultural materials.
These latter will be analyzed by a team of specialists. The significance of the
Podgoritsa project lies at two levels. First it will provide important new
information on the culture history of Eastern Europe and help to document the
expansion of settled village life. However the research will also address
questions of general theoretical interest for the study of agricultural
societies and these involve population growth and expansion, the social
consequences of sedentism, the intensification of production and the role of the
household as an organizing social and economic unit. The work will also aid the
development of archaeology in Eastern Europe and help to forge stronger
scientific ties between Bulgaria and the United States.