* 9404878
* Regulation of Hairy Expression During Leg Imaginal Disc     Development
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Teresa Orenic, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 09/30/1998
* USD 375,000.00

The long term objective of the research proposed is to understand how the
precise arrays of different cell types within an organism are generated. The
question will be addressed by utilizing the legs of the Drosophila melanogaster
adult as a model system. The leg bristle pattern is established in part through
the functions of two genes 'hairy' and 'achaete'. In most leg segments, achaete
is expressed in eight longitudinal stripes corresponding to the primordia of the
bristle rows. 'Hairy' is expressed in four longitudinal stripes located between
every other pair of achaete stripes and corresponding to the primordia of
bristleless cuticle. The periodic expression of 'achaete' is established in part
through the function of 'hairy' which represses 'achaete' expression within its
domains of expression and defines one boundary of each 'achaete' longitudinal
stripe. Since 'hairy' is expressed in a spatially restricted pattern that is
required for the patterning of two different pattern elements, bristleless and
bristled cuticle, a study of the regulation of 'hairy' expression should provide
insight into the mechanisms by which leg pattern is generated. We will
investigate both cis- and trans-regulatory mechanisms involved in the production
of the 'hairy' leg longitudinal stripes of expression. The cis-regulatory
elements that gorvern expression of the 'hairy' leg longitudinal stripes of
expression will be located by both transgenic and genetic approaches. This
region will be dissected to identify the minimal elements necessary for
producing the 'hairy' leg stripes and to determine whether the 'hairy' leg
longitudinal stripes are regulated independently or in concert. A comparative
analysis of the 'hairy' leg cis- regulatory elements from Drosophila
melanogaster and Drosophila virilis will be performed to identify conserved
regions that may correspond to binding sites for trans- regulatory proteins. The
potential function of these sequences will be tested by a mutational analysis.
The possible roles of the segment polarity genes in patterning 'hairy' leg
expression will be investigated by monitoring 'hairy' expression in: a) leg
discs homozygous mutant for adult viable or temperature-sensitive allele segment
polarity alleles, b) leg discs mosaic for null segment polarity alleles produced
by FLP mediated recombination, c) leg discs misexpressing certain segment
polarity genes. In addition a comparison of the 'hairy' leg stripes of
expression with segment polarity gene expression will be performed. In summary,
a study of the the genetic regulation of 'hairy' in the leg disc should be an
excellent opportunity to learn how periodicity is generated in a cellular field
and for comparison of the mechanisms for generation of striped expression in two
different developmental fields.