* 9404718
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Tectonoclimatic          Interpretation of Alluvial-Fan Development in Death Valley, California
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1996
* Ronald Dorn, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 04/30/1996
* USD 6,999.00

9404718 DORN Alluvial fans are semi-conical landforms comprised of stream
deposits and debris-flow materials. Alluvial fans generally form where canyons
exit mountain ranges. Although fans may be found in other environments, they
usually are associated with drylands. Although considerable attention has
focused on the processes that produce alluvial fans, full understanding has not
yet been achieved regarding the ways that different environmental factors
influence their development. Both tectonic and climatic forces have been
identified as playing important roles, although research has been inconclusive
regarding which are the most important factors, how the influences of different
factors can be identified and distinguished from each other. This doctoral
dissertation research project will focus on analyses of varnish layering from
rocks gathered in selected sites on alluvial fans in Death Valley, California.
The layers in rock varnish, which are analogous to stratigraphic deposits, will
be analyzed through the use of high-powered light microscopes, back-scatter
electron microscopes, and electron microprobes in order to correlate and date
the timing of events producing the varnishes. Once calibrated, information from
these analyses will be used to record paleoclimate changes in Death Valley as
well as to associate different fans in the area. Spatial generalization of this
information will be undertaken using data from the SPOT and Landsat TM
satellites. This research will make a number of important contributions. It will
add to knowledge of the degree to which climatic and tectonic factors affect
alluvial fan development. It will make methodological contributions by
establishing interpretation of rock-varnish layering as a tool for correlating
alluvial fans. The project will yield a new rock-varnish record of paleoclimatic
changes for the Death Valley region, and it will result in a map of Quaternary
alluvial fans in the region. As a doctoral d issertation improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career.