* 9404762
* Study of the Healing of the Fault Zone Ruptured in the      1992 Landers, California Earthquake by Monitoring Fault     Zone Trapped Waves
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Keiiti Aki, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Whitcomb
* 06/30/1998
* USD 216,233.00

9404762 Li This research is to study the postseismic healing of the fault zone
ruptured in the M=7.4 Landers earthquake of 1992 by monitoring propagation
characteristics of fault zone trapped waves using portable high-capability
seismometers. Previous work showed evidence for seismic guided waves trapped
within the fault zone of the Landers earthquake. Based on trapped mode data, it
resolved a low velocity, high-attenuation layer with a width of 180 m along the
rupture plane. This layer extends from the surface to a depth of at least 10 km
in the seismogenic zone. It was also found that the width of this layer varies
vertically and laterally along the fault zone, and it becomes very narrow at the
fault bend. Observations and simulation of fault zone trapped waves show that
the amplitudes and frequency contents of these waves are very sensitive to the
velocity structure and properties of the fault zone. Therefore, the subsurface
fault variability in space and time can be detected through monitoring minor
changes in amplitude and dispersion characteristics of fault zone trapped waves.
Results from this study should advance understanding of fault zone structure,
rheology and constitutive relations, the transition from quasistatic nucleation
to dynamic rupture, and the models and mechanisms for earthquake recurrence.
This research is a component of the National Earthquake Hazard Reduction
Program. *** ??