* 9404128
* Mathematical Sciences:  Applications of Infinite Dimensional Nonsmooth Analysis to Optimization and Control
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Boris Mordukhovich, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1998
* USD 118,919.00

9404128 Mordukhovich/Ioffe This project is concerned with developing effective
methods of infinite dimensional nonsmooth analysis and their applications to
various problems in optimization and control theory. The main focus is on basic
tools and calculus for generalized differentiation of nonsmooth mappings in
Banach spaces, differential characterizations of openness, regularity, and
related properties of infinite dimensional multifunctions, as well as on a broad
spectrum of applications of nonsmooth analysis to optimal control of
differential equations and inclusions, distributed parameter systems, and
stability and sensitivity questions in constrained optimization and control
theory. Nonsmooth analysis is concerned with the development of a calculus
suitable for the analysis of functions which do not have the necessary
smoothness properties that allow application of the standard calculus of
variations. This investigation is largely motivated by important applications of
nonsmooth calculus and variational analysis to problems arising in optimization
and control of manufacturing systems. In particular, this work is related to
minimax design of dynamical systems under uncertain conditions, stability of
optimal solutions under parameter perturbations, and robust control of
constrained distributed parameter systems. ***