* 9404267
* Mathematical Sciences:  Statistical Problems in Genetics    and Molecular Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Terence Speed, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 162,000.00

The project's general aim is to bring the tools and techniques of modern
statistics to bear on a variety of problems from genetics and molecular biology.
The specific objectives of this project are (i) to develop a suitable
statistical model and method of analysis for determining which of a given set of
DNA markers come from the same chromosome, based on data obtained from scoring
hybrid cell lines; (ii) to extend and refine statistical methods designed to
ascertain overlap of cloned DNA fragments; (iii) to develop accurate statistical
methods for recognizing the resemblance of a new protein to a known structure or
structural motif, on the basis of its amino acid sequence; (iv) to extend the
theory of linear invariants for use in general phylogenetic inference; (v) to
derive statistical models for the evolution of viral genomes; and (vi) to
develop a statistical model for the evolution of certain repetitive DNA elements
in human populations. The aim of this project is to develop and use statistical
methods for analysing a variety of forms of molecular genetic data. Included in
the scope will be data collected on individuals, on single chromosomes, on small
cloned DNA fragments, on amino acid sequences of proteins, and on DNA sequences
of genes. Such data invariably exhibits some form of randomness, arising from
its manner of collection, the location of the DNA in the genome, and the
evolutionary history of the molecules. Statistical methods are needed to cope
with this randomness, and to permit inferences to be made concerning questions
such as the relative or absolute location of genetic or other markers on the
chromosomes, and the nature of the evolution of the genes or genomes.