* 9404157
* Mathematical Sciences:  Numerical Methods for Hyperbolic    Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Shi Jin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1997
* USD 61,500.00

9404157 Jin Numerical methods for hyperbolic systems with inhomogeneities and
general conservation laws will be studied, involving three main projects: I.
continuing the study and development of under-resolved numerical schemes for
hyperbolic systems with relaxations, with applications in phase transition
modeling and kinetic theory of rarefied gas dynamics; II. continuing the
development, analysis and application of the relaxation schemes for general
conservation laws; III. studying the fluid dynamic limits of some kinetic
schemes for the compressible Euler equations. These projects, if successfully
carried out, will put various numerical approaches for general conservation laws
into perspective, and provide new numerical tools for solving problems related
to conservation laws. Systems of conservation laws are among the most important
and difficult physical problems that mathematicians, physicists and engineers
have been investigating. These problems arise from, for example, fluid dynamics,
rarefied gas dynamics, and phase transitions. The important physical quantities,
such as mass, momentum and energy, are governed by systems of nonlinear partial
differential equations. For most of these problems it is impossible to find the
exact solutions, and the qualitative behavior of the solutions is exceedingly
hard to obtain by mathematical analysis. Thus, numerical simulation has been
playing a critical role in studying these problems. Successful numerical
simulations to these problems require not only modern advanced computing
equipment, but also numerical methods that work correctly, accurately and
efficiently. The goal of the proposed research is to develop robust numerical
methods, to analyze their behavior, and moreover, to apply them to explore the
interesting yet challenging physical problems that are described by systems of
conservation laws.