* 9404693
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Role of Interface in   High Temperature Deformation
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Terence Langdon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 10/31/1996
* USD 23,844.00

9404693 Langdon This award supports the foreign travel expenses for Professor
Terence G. Langdon, Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the
University of Southern California, to enable him to make two visits, each of
three months duration, in 1994 and 1995, to conduct collaborative research with
Professor Minoru Nemoto of the Kyoto University Faculty of Engineering. The
research program is designed to focus on the role of interface phenomena in
determining the type and extent of polycrystalline plasticity at elevated
temperatures. Two areas have been identified for the initial stages of this
research. Work will be conducted on the importance of grain boundaries in the
deformation of metallic alloys with very small grain sizes. These materials have
superplastic capabilities, but the precise roles of the interfaces are not yet
understood. The researchers will also investigate the nature and significance of
the interfaces in metallic composites between there inforcement and the matrix
using an aluminum-based alloy. This collaborative effort combines the mechanical
testing expertise of Dr. Langdon and his colleagues at USC with high resolution
electron microscopy work at Kyoto University where Dr. Nemoto serves as the
Director of the High Voltage Electron Microscope Laboratory. The research will
expose both teams of investigators to new and important areas and therefore will
serve to strengthen the research activity in both locations. The award is funded
under the auspices of the Center for Global Partnership (CGP) of the Japan
Foundation under the NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program. ***