* 9404354
* Effect of Network Parameters on the Properties of           Polycyanurate Thermosetting Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Sindee Simon, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1997
* USD 156,000.00

Dicyanate ester/polycyanurate thermosetting polymers are a relatively new class
of high-performance materials used in electronic and composite applications,
because of their excellent dielectric properties. This research program will
investigate the effect of network parameters on the properties of these
materials. A series of oligomers of bisphenol A dicyanate (trimer, pentamer,
etc.) will be synthesized, and conversion- versus-property relationships will be
compared with that of the monomer. Since the relationships between conversion of
cyanate and network parameters will differ when different size oligomers are
reacted, and since the structure at full conversion is identical for the
different oligomers, the effects of network parameters can be determined. This
novel approach overcomes complications generally encountered when studying the
effects of network parameters in thermosetting systems that arise when the
structure of the repeat unit is charged. The properties examined will include
the glass-transition temperature and the volume. The conversion at gelation for
the reaction of the various oligomers will yield information concerning the
magnitude of ring formation in the reaction. Experimental techniques will
include differential scanning calorimetry, dilatometry, nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, high-performance liquid chromatography, and gel
permeation chromatography. %%% This work will help our understanding of the
origins of free volume in the glassy state. This is particularly important for
dicyanate ester materials since moisture absorption, which is related to free
volume, appears to adversely affect their thermal stability. The proposed work
is also important for the optimization of thermosetting properties and for the
development of models which predict the time and temperature dependence of
glassy thermosetting materials of potential use in composite materials.