* 9404055
* Mechanisms of Integrin Function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Susan Zusman, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1997
* USD 310,000.00

The long term goal is to examine the mechanisms through which integrins function
during development. Drosophila is a model system for examining the functions of
integrins since combined classical and molecular genetic techniques can be used
to address the roles of integrins in a complex developing organism. The cellular
molecules that associate with integrins, determine their genetic regulation and
their potential roles in developmental signal transduction pathways will be
identified and characterized. Experimentally, the functional significance of two
highly conserved regions of the beta subunit of the Drosophila position specific
integrin family, which is encoded by the lehthal(1)myospheroid (mys) gene will
be determined. One region is derived from alternate splicing of mys and is
thought to be in or near a region required for ligand binding and alpha/beta
dimerization. Previous studies indicated that both alternate forms of the
position specific integrin family contributed to embryonic development. The
alternate forms of position specific integrin family may influence binding to
particular ligands or alpha subunits during specific embryonic processes. The
functional significance of the small and highly conserved cytoplasmic domain of
the position specific integrin family is also addressed in this proposal. This
region is associated with the cytoskeleton and intracellular communication. The
experiments in this proposal will address the following questions: 1) Which
embryonic processes require the position specific integrins? 2) Which of these
processes can function normally with a particular form of the position specific
integrin family? 3) Where are the alternative mRNAs of mys and the alternative
forms of the integrins found in the developing embryo? 4) Do particular forms of
the position specific integrin family influence cell spreading on specific
matrix molecules and influence dimerization with alpha subunits? 5) Which
regions of the cy toplasmic domain of the integrins affect developmental
processes? 6) What are the molecules that associate with the position specific
integrins? These questions will be answered using molecular, genetic and
cellular techniques.