* 9404641
* Mathematical Sciences: Transformations of Linear Systems:   Classification and Orbit Closure
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Joyce O'Halloran, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9404641 O'Halloran Feedback and equivalence are transformations of linear
systems of differential or difference equations which may be viewed as algebraic
group actions on varieties. For a given algebraic group action, two basic
questions are classification (a method for determining whether or not two
elements are in the same orbit) and orbit closure (a description of the elements
in the topological closure of an orbit). The main purpose of this research is to
solve the classification problem for the output feedback action on the space of
state space systems, using methods from algebraic geometry, algebraic geometry
software, and linear algebra. For the action of the full feedback group on the
space of generalized state space systems, a classification has been established;
this project will solve the orbit closure problem in this setting. The principle
behind many automated systems, from aircraft control systems to thermostat
regulated heating systems, is that of control by feedback, in which current
information about the device and its environment is used as input in order to
effect necessary adjustments. "State feedback" refers to the situation in which
full information is available; when only partial information is available,
adjustments are made based on "output feedback." "High gain feedback" occurs
when reiteration of feedback causes an evolution of the system in which feedback
input is playing a progressively larger role. This research focuses on
mathematical models of feedback control systems, in which two major projects
will be pursued. The first is to determine which mathematical models of control
systems can be obtained from a given one by applying output feedback, thus
reflecting the range of situations that could arise in a physical system when
output feedback is utilized. The second project addresses the identification of
those mathematical models of control systems which can be obtained from a given
one when high gain state feedb ack is applied. ***