* 9404706
* Mathematical Sciences:  Collaborative Research on Iterative Methods for Image Restoration
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Lothar Reichel, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1998
* USD 72,000.00

Reichel The investigator and his colleague undertake collaborative studies of
numerical methods for image processing. The aim of the project is to develop and
analyze new fast algorithms for computing an estimate of an original image from
a degraded image that has been subjected to noise and blur. Depending on the
point of view, two philosophically different approaches to image restoration
result: i) in algebraic restoration one views the problem as a linear, possibly
ill-conditioned, system of equations, and ii) in stochastic restoration one
regards it as a problem of estimating a vector under random disturbances. The
project develops numerical methods for both approaches. Either approach yields
linear systems of equations that have a structure that can be used in the
development and analysis of efficient algorithms for image restoration. The
structure depends on the assumptions made on the image and the noise. The
matrices in these systems are typically quite large; orders of a million are
common. The computational work, even with efficient methods, is therefore quite
demanding. Because many applications require real-time image restoration, the
development of algorithms for parallel computers is important. The proposed
research focuses on the development of iterative methods that lend themselves
well to implementation on multiprocessors. The central problem of image
restoration is the estimation of the original image, given a version of the
image degraded by noise and blur. When the image is of a star observed from
earth, the blur may be due to the atmosphere and the noise can stem from
transmission of the signal. Several different approaches to image restoration
are available. They all give rise to large systems of equations; a million
equations are common. The system of equations has a structure, which depends on
the assumptions made on the image and on the statistical properties of the
noise. The purpose of the project is to develop new algorithms for the
restoration of images. These algorithms are designed so that they use the
structure of the system of equations in order to reduce the computational work.
They are moreover suitable for use on parallel computers. The latter is
important due to the large amount of computations required.