* 9404436
* Mathematical Sciences: Computed Tomography and Sampling
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Adel Faridani, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1997
* USD 58,000.00

9404436 Faridani Tomography produces the reconstruction of a generalized density
function f from a large number of its line integrals. Beyond its initial use in
medical imaging, it has found a growing number of scientific and industrial
applications. Ordinary tomography is not local; the standard formulas for
reconstruction at a single point require measurements at all lines within some
plane containing the point. Local tomography produces the reconstruction of a
linear combination of functions related to f. This reconstruction is local; for
reconstruction at a point, attenuation measurements are needed only along lines
very close to that point. This makes it possible to reconstruct a region of
interest within a large object without having to scan the whole object. The term
computed tomography describes a class of methods for imaging the interior of
opaque objects. Characteristic of these methods is that the image is computed
from a large number of indirect measurements. Mathematically, the image
represents some density function, and the measurements are line integrals of
this function. A well-known example is CAT scans. Here the density function is
the x-ray absorption coefficient, and the measurements are obtained by recording
the attenuation of thin x-ray beams traversing the patient. Beyond its original
application in medical imaging, computed tomography has found a growing number
of scientific and industrial applications. The research involves applications of
tomography in areas such as medical imaging (imaging the coronary arterial
tree), biological research (imaging the fine structure of tissue using the
emerging technology of high-resolution Micro-CT scanners), and quantum optics.
Part of this research project concerns the technique of `local tomography'.
While ordinary tomography requires scanning the whole object, local tomography
allows for scanning only a region of interest. Local tomography is of practical
interest sin ce it requires less expensive scanning equipment, reduces x-ray
exposure, and makes it possible to image objects too large to be scanned in
their entirety. At present, local tomography allows one to identify the shapes
of different features, but does not produce the correct density differences. The
goal is to develop a method which allows reconstruction of density differences.
This will further increase the usefulness of local tomography for many
applications. Furthermore, questions of optimal sampling, resolution, and
reconstruction algorithms in three-dimensional local tomography will be
investigated in collaboration with researchers at the Mayo Clinic, who are
building a high-resolution Micro-CT scanner. The second part of this research
continues work in Shannon sampling theory and its application to computed
tomography. Shannon sampling theory is of fundamental importance in signal
processing. The aliasing error for sampling non-bandlimited functions on non-
equidistant but periodic sampling sets will be investigated, and more general
classes of sampling sets will be studied. The results will be applied to
computed tomography, resulting in error estimates and new efficient sampling
schemes. The deeper understanding of optimal sampling and reconstruction
algorithms thus obtained will allow to fully exploit the capabilities of current
tomographic scanners and have implications for the design of future equipment.