* 9404037
* The Role of Cauliflower in Specifying Floral Meristem       Identity in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Martin Yanofsky, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1997
* USD 360,000.00

After floral induction, the first step in the development of flowers is the
generation of floral meristems. At least three genes, CAULIFLOWER, APETALA1, and
LEAFY, are necessary for the specification of floral meristem identity in
Arabidopsis. This investigator has recently isolated the CAULIFLOWER and
APETALA1 genes. This proposal describes a combined genetic and molecular
approach for determining how CAULIFLOWER interacts with other genes to promote
flowering. The investigator proposes to isolate and characterize an allelic
series of cal mutants and analyze the resulting phenotypes by scanning electron
microscopy. The transcriptional regulation of CAULIFLOWER will be investigated
by determining the spatial and temporal pattern of expression in a variety of
mutant backgrounds. Additional studies will determine if the CAULIFLOWER protein
interacts directly with APETALA1, and will identify the DNA sequences to which
CAULIFLOWER specifically binds. Further studies will investigate the cis- and
trans-acting factors needed to promote floral meristem-specific expression of
CAL, and will determine the molecular basis for the functional redundancy of CAL
and AP1. These studies will be integrated into efforts to understand the role of
APETALA1 and should lead to significant contributions towards understanding the
genetic and molecular control of floral meristem specification. The cauliflower
phenotype in Arabidopsis is strikingly similar to the anomalous inflorescence
structures produced in the dinner table cauliflower, Brassica oleracea. Since
Arabidopsis and Brassica are closely related plant species, and since the
phenotypes of these mutants is similar, the investigator will use the cloned CAL
and AP1 genes to investigate the molecular basis of the cauliflower phenotype.
Finally, since the cauliflower phenotype has been described in plants that are
distantly related to Arabidopsis, and since the CAULIFLOWER gene has not been
isolated from any other plant s pecies, the characterization of this gene should
yield significant insights into its role in diverse plant systems.