* 9404070
* Mathematical Sciences:  Homoclinic and Heteroclinic         Bifurcations:  Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Bo Deng, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 67,000.00

9404070 Deng The traditional role of the applied mathematician is to take a real
system and find out what its properties are. However, the properties of the
specific system cannot be discovered unless one knows what the possibilities
are, and the possibilities are often revealed only by the general abstract
theory. Practice and theory progress best hand-in-hand. Three projects are
proposed in this proposal. They all deal with basic mechanisms by which complex
and chaotic structures arise in real systems. The theoretical results are useful
in giving better understanding to experimental and numerical results from a
system of chemical reaction, insulin secretion in pancreatic beta cells, and
electrical pulses along nerve axon. They are also important in guiding future
experiments and practical applications of these systems. Three projects are
proposed. The first project concerns a type of degenerate heteroclinic loop
bifurcation with application to the existence of pulsing waves in a two-phase
flow through a packed column. The second project concerns the orbit-flip
homoclinic bifurcation in the Rinzel-Terman model for the electrical activity of
pancreatic beta cells. The bifurcation is related to the transition from
continuous spiking to intermittent spiking of the membrane potential. The third
project concerns strategy and numerical technique for locating bifurcation
values of a diffusion parameter in a system of bistable reaction diffusion
equations. These values are such so that a heteroclinic loop corresponding to
traveling front and back waves changes its twist type, which often signals the
generation of chaotic dynamics.