* 9404344
* Mathematical Sciences:  Sequential Imputations and Gibbs    Sampling:  Combinations, Comparisons, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Jun Liu, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sallie Keller-McNulty
* 07/31/1997
* USD 55,900.00

Liu 9404344 The method of sequential imputation (henceforth, SI) introduced in
Kong, Liu and Wong (1994) is a special way of conducting multiple imputations in
treating missing data problems and has shown potential in providing efficient
computational methods for some difficult problems in genetic linkage analysis
(e.g., Kong et. al. 1993; Irwin, Cox and Kong 1993). The method is generally
applicable when the corresponding complete data (Bayesian) predictive
distributions are easy and is especially useful when data are collected
sequentially. The Gibbs sampler is a recently popular tool for sampling from the
Bayesian posterior distributions to facilitate inference. The proposed research
targets at comparing the relative merits of the two methods and combining the
two methods in some applications. In the first project, the SI method is applied
to attack the blind deconvolution problem in digital communication, where it is
assumed that the observed signals are an unknown (thus blind) linear combination
of discrete input signals. A new computationally efficient algorithm for blind
signal restorations results from combining the Gibbs sampler and the SI method.
The second project is concerned with nonparametric hierarchical Bayesian
analysis. Both the Gibbs sampler and the SI are applied to conduct sensitivity
analysis and hierarchical analysis. In doing these, some theoretical
understanding of the mathematical properties of a Dirichlet process is
necessary. As an application, the Bayesian nonparametric method and the SI
procedure are also proposed to address the problem of estimating human
fecundability, or the per-cycle probability of a recognizable conception. The
third project contains some ideas on how to use multiply imputed data sets more
efficiently. A "split sampling" method is proposed to hybrid the jointly imputed
complete data and then to adjust by using importance weights. This will result
in a more efficient estimator, called "cross-match" estimate, of the quantity of
interest. T he proposed research targets at comparing two novel Monte Carlo
simulation methods, the sequential imputation and the Gibbs sampler, for
Bayesian statistical analysis, and applying the two methods to several important
problems. The first problem to attack is one in digital comunication, called
"blind deconvolution." It has many applications in, for example, seismology,
underwater acoustics, and multipoint network. We plan to use a complete
probabilistic model to describe the system and apply the aforementioned Monte
Carlo methods to overcome computational difficulties. Another application is the
estimation of human fecundability, or the per-cycle probability of a
recognizable conception. As there is considerable variability among couples in
their waiting times to pregnancy, previous work has focused on parametric models
to account for this heterogeneity and to estimate the population distribution of
fecundability. We propose an alternative approach that does not require that the
distribution follow a particular parametric form. One of the major difficulty in
our approach is computational. The new Monte Carlo methods can be suitably
applied. This type of "Bayesian nonparametric problem" has long been a topic for
theoretical statisticians. Recent development of novel Monte Carlo methods in
computation boomed its applicability. Our final project contains some ideas on
how to use Monte Carlo samples more efficiently. It has long been recognized
that our computational ability is directly linked to our theoretical thinking.
The new computational methods presents us many interesting theoretical
questions. We plan to study some of these questions, one of which is concerned
with the relative efficiencies and mathematical properties of the two methods,
another is concerned with how we can make better use of the samples obtained
from Monte Carlo simulations.