* 9404682
* Remote Sensing of the Vertical Ozone Profile Using A        Tunable CO2 Sideband Laser Heterdyne Spectrometer
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Peter Cheo, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/1996
* USD 199,944.00

A continuously tunable and very compact mid-infrared (9-12 um) CO2 sideband
laser spectrometer was developed under prior a NSF grant (ATM-9011067). This
instrument has been used to obtain accurate data on absorption line positions,
line strengths, line width and frequency shift of NH3 molecules. The application
of this laser for remote sensing of stratospheric ozone (O3) and HNO3 will be
investigated in this project. Development of the technique will also be extended
to other stratospheric molecules such as CF2Cl2 (Frcon-12). This two year year
research program will obtain quantitative vertical concentration profiles of
these species by conducting the field measurements using a heterodyne radiometer
with the tunable sideband CO2 laser as a local oscillator. The field
measurements will be analyzed by using existing models and comparing them with
existing vertical profiles. A parallel study will be performed to measure the
critical line shape parameters for O2 under controlled laboratory conditions. In
this effort, the tunable sideband laser spectrometer will provide direct
absorption measurements under simulated stratospheric conditions with sufficient
resolution to obtain the desired spectroscopic line parameters. In the first
year, a heterodyne radiometer system consisting of a solar- tracker, optical
combiner, a local oscillator, a photomixer, RF filter band and signal processor
will be designed, assembled and calibrated. In particular, noise characteristics
of the sideband laser will be studied by heterodyining with blackbody radiation
and potential methods to reduce the amplitude and phase noise will be explored.
The goal is to approach short-noise- limited performance and thereby achieve
maximum signal to noise ratio for the heterodyne system. In parallel, a system
for delivering and analyzing gas mixtures will be constructed and calibrated.
During the second year, laboratory absorption measurements of O2, HNO3 and
CF2Cl2 will be perfo rmed with extremely high resolution (+0.00001 cm-) under
stratospheric conditions to obtain accurate correlations between line shape
parameters and analyte concentrations. Field measurements will be conducted and
analyzed simultaneously utilizing the newly acquired line shape parameters. A
model which yields an accurate vertical ozone concentration profile between 15
to 50 km will be developed. The ultimate application for the model lies in the
interpretation of the dynamics and chemistry related to the stratospheric ozone
layer.