* 9404912
* Computational Methods for Global Analysis of Connecting     Orbits:  Development of Algorithms and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Mark Friedman, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1997
* USD 60,000.00

Friedman Homoclinic and heteroclinic orbits, also referred as connecting orbits,
are orbits of infinite period connecting fixed points of a system of autonomous
ordinary differential equations. Appearance and disappearance of a homoclinic
orbit can lead to creation or destruction of periodic orbits. Bifurcations of
codimension 2 of homoclinic orbits can play the role of organizing centers for
the interesting dynamics. Existence of a structurally unstable connecting orbit
can lead to bifurcations associated with the birth or death of a strange
attractor. Connecting orbits often arise as traveling wave solutions of
parabolic and hyperbolic PDEs. Recently Doedel and the investigator developed
and analyzed an accurate, robust, and systematic method for computing branches
of connecting orbits in the case that the solution approaches the equilibria
exponentially as well as in the case of center manifolds, and considered some
applications. The investigator extends these results in several directions: 1)
Generalizing the algorithm for locating starting connecting orbits, 2) Improving
detection of bifurcations on a branch and selecting specific branches, 3)
Locating multi-hump homoclinic orbits. 4) Qualitative global error analysis of
orbits for the discretized problem and Adaptive choice of the truncating
interval using a posteriori error estimates, 5) Computation of connecting orbits
in a Banach space. Applications include: The completion of the investigation of
the bifurcations of connecting orbits in the sine-Gordon equation and the
Hodgkin&amp;ndash;Huxley equations. Bifurcations of traveling wave solutions in
the FitzHugh-Nagumo equations and its generalization: a heteroclinic loop
bifurcation, searching for twisting points. Computational investigation of
orbits homoclinic to resonance bands. Bifurcations of connecting orbits in an
electronic circuit. Bifurcation curves in dynamical systems with discrete time.
Bifurcation of heteroclinic orbits in a Bana ch space, with applications to the
phase field model of solidification phenomena. Connecting orbits are of special
significance in a variety of applications. They have been shown to underlie the
phenomena of intermittency in fluid mechanics, "bursting" phenomena in
mathematical biology, chaotic behavior of electrical circuits, chaotic behavior
of lasers as well as light pulses in fiber optics applications, chaotic behavior
in structural mechanics and in a variety of chemical reactions. The need is
therefore paramount for the development of software for global analysis of
connecting orbits. The investigator extends the results obtained under prior NSF
support on development of robust numerical algorithms for global analysis of
connecting orbits and incorporates the resulting algorithms into AUTO, a well
known continuation computer program, to make them more accessible to a wider
scientific community. The investigator also considers various applications that
are of independent interest, and that will also be used to test and refine the
developed algorithms. The final goal is to create an integrated interactive
system that incorporates various starting procedures and continuation methods.