* 9404698
* 1994 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Ribosome Synthesis       Conference, September 28, 1994-October 2, 1994
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1995
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 06/30/1995
* USD 5,000.00

9404698 Grodzicker Ribosome synthesis involves the regulation of numerous
processes, encompass1ng transcription by all three RNA polymerases, RNA
processing, translation, RNA-protein interaction, and nucleocytoplasmic
transport. In addition, the synthesis of ribosomal components is coordinated and
balanced with the production of many other cell constituents. The regulation of
ribosome synthesis also impacts on virtually every other cellular component,
responding to regulatory networks which control cell growth, proliferation, and
development. Modern genetic and biochemical methodologies have greatly increased
our knowledge about many aspects of ribosome biogenesis. These include the
eukaryotic rRNA gene transcription machinery, rRNA maturation and an emerging
family of nucleolar snRNAs that likely are involved in rRNA processing and/or
ribosome assembly. Recent studies are also revealing unexpected alternative
roles for ribosomal proteins outside of the ribosome and the unexpected
nucleolar localization of other known proteins. Thus, molecular mechanisms that
govern ribosome biogenesis are being elucidated, but many key elements of how
this regulation occurs and how these processes are integrated remain largely
uncharacterized. The objective of the "Ribosome Synthesis" meeting is to bring
together researchers working on these various aspects of ribosome synthesis and
nucleolar function in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Participation of and
presentations by graduate students, postdocs, and young independent
investigators will be encouraged. The funds requested in this proposal will
enable a greater number of these individuals to attend, especially young
investigators who have not yet received independent funding. We hope that the
integration of all aspects of ribosome synthesis will encourage the exchange of
ideas, the focusing of models, and in general the advance of the field. %%%
Ribosome synthesis involves the regulation of numerous processes, encompass1ng
transcr iption by all three RNA polymerases, RNA processing, translation, RNA-
protein interaction, and nucleo-cytoplasmic transport. In addition, the
synthesis of ribosomal components is coordinated and balanced with the
production of many other cell constituents. The regulation of ribosome synthesis
also impacts on virtually every other cellular component, responding to
regulatory networks which control cell growth, proliferation, and development.
Modern genetic and biochemical methodologies have greatly increased our
knowledge about many aspects of ribosome biogenesis. These include the
eukaryotic rE~NA gene transcription machinery, rRNA maturation and an emerging
family of nucleolar snRNAs that likely are involved in rRNA processing andlor
ribosome assembly. Recent studies are also revealing unexpected alternative
roles for ribosomal proteins outside of the ribosome and the unexpected
nucleolar localization of other known proteins. Thus, molecular mechanisms that
govern ribosome biogenesis are being elucidated, but many key elements of how
this regulation occurs and how these processes are integrated remain largely
uncharacterized. The objective of the "Ribosome Synthesis" meeting is to bring
together researchers working on these various aspects of ribosome synthesis and
nucleolar function in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Participation of and
presentations by graduate students, postdocs, and young independent
investigators will be encouraged. The funds requested in this proposal will
enable a greater number of these individuals to attend, especially young
investigators who have not yet received independent funding. We hope that the
integration of all aspects of ribosome synthesis will encourage the exchange of
ideas, the focusin~ of models, and in general the advance of the field. ***