* 9404905
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Constraint Methods and   Inference Engines for Expert Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Ken McAloon, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1996
* USD 22,884.00

9404905 McAloon This award provides funds to permit Drs. Kenneth McAloon and
Carol Tretkoff, Department of Computer and Information Science, Brooklyn College
of The City University of New York, to pursue with Dr. Geun Sik Jo, Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, Inha University, Korea, for 24 months, a
program of cooperative research on constraint methods and inference engines for
expert systems. The goal of this collaboration is to build a new kind of
programming tool for formulating and controlling the solution of complex
operations research and artificial intelligence applications. This project has
three immediate aims: (1) developing new algorithmic and logical control
strategies using 2LP (Linear Programming and Logic Programming), MIP-Prolog
(Mixed Integer Programming in Prolog), and related systems, (2) linking rule-
based programming and constraint-based programming to achieve new advances in
expert systems technology, (3) making the underlying logical and mathematical
compilation more efficient, and (4) exploiting the knowledge representation
power of constraint programming to make this technology more broadly applicable
and usable. The proposed research is at the confluence of several disciplines:
constraint logic programming, operations research, artificial intelligence,
mathematical logic, and distributed computing. This research will emphasize
increasing both the modeling power and the computational power of this
technology in order to include more varied and more challenging applications.
The collaborators have considerable complementary research experience in the
field of their proposed project. This project is relevant to the objectives of
the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean particip ation in the
project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
This project adds an international cooperative dimension to the PI's research
under NSF Grant No. CCR-9115603. ***