* 9404156
* Studies of the Free-Radical Retrograde-Precipitation        Polymerization Process
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1994,02/28/1998
* Gerard Caneba, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 02/28/1998
* USD 183,585.00

Abstract - Caneba - 9404156 Understanding and control of commercial-scale
polymerization reaction processes is important in the production of high-quality
polymer products. Free-radical polymerization processes sometimes have
temperature and molecular weight control problems. The PI is planning to study
the physico-chemical and product material aspects of a free-radical
precipitation polymerization reaction system wherein phase separation occurs as
the temperature and molecular weight increase. This is in contrast with
conventional precipitation polymerization processes that involve phase
separation as the temperature decreases. The PI calls this new process "free-
radical retrograde precipitation polymerization (FRRPP). This process has the
potential to produce "designer" molecules with specific end groups and a narrow,
tightly controlled molecular weight distribution as well as block copolymers, at
lower pressures, which makes the process economically attractive. In order to
obtain a fundamental understanding of the FRRPP process, the PI plans to: (1) do
gel effect modeling of the FRRPP system; (2) do in-situ pulsed NMR experiments
during polymerization; (3) develop a ternary phase diagram of the polymer-
monomer-solvent system through diode-array light scattering and pulsed NMR
methods; and (4) determine the kinetic coefficients through batch polymerization
and ESR experiments. These kinetic studies will be carried out through
measurements of conversion, molecular weight distribution as well as radical
concentrations versus reaction time.