* 9404389
* Mathematical Sciences:  RUI:  Uniform Asymptotic            Approximations for Special Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Timothy Dunster, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 08/31/1997
* USD 60,500.00

9404389 Dunster Uniform asymptotic approximations are to be derived for a number
of special functions, which will be more general than previous results and
include explicit error bounds. The functions to be studied will include Mathieu,
Legendre, Jacobi, and spheroidal functions, for the cases where the parameters
or the independent variables are too large. The general theory of a coalescing
turning point and simple pole as developed by the principal; investigator will
be applied to these functions. In the case of Mathieu functions the principal
investigator will extend the asymptotic results that were obtained earlier to
larger parameter regimes, and to use these to investigate the distribution of
the eigenvalues. In addition, it is proposed to derive new representations for
solutions of second-order linear differential equations with a large parameter,
and the Riemann zeta function of large argument, using convergent factorial
series and exponentially-improved asymptotic expansions. The expansion of
special functions and their properties plays an important role in explicit
solutions of many of the equations of applied mathematics. This project deals
with asymptotic approximation that includes error bounds. Error bounds are
especially useful in numerical computations. Potential applications of these new
results include tunneling in wave physics, elasticity, high-frequency
scattering, and various problems in quantum mechanics. ***