* 9404332
* Structure and Role of D-Amino Acid Transaminase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* James Manning, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 07/31/1996
* USD 180,000.00

Manning 9404332 Studies on the mechanism and stereochemistry of an enzyme that
makes D-glutamate in bacteria will be continued. This enzyme, D-amino acid
transaminase (DAT), is a target for thedesign of novel antibacterial agents
since it is present in bacterial cells but not in the mammalian cells. Site-
directed mutagenesis studies at the active site Lys that binds cofactor PLP
suggest the presence of an alternate base for catalysis since these mutant
(attenuated) enzymes retain intrinsic catalytic activity. The proposed studies
will build on these findings. If the optimal base in the wild-type enzyme is
replaced, then the results indicate that the alternate catalytic base can assume
some of its function but with a reduced degree of efficiency. This alternate
base has been identified as Lys-267 and the recent solution of the structure of
the enzyme shows that it is indeed adjacent to the active site.The recent
elucidation of the structure of this enzyme by our collaborator, Dagmar Ringe,
has suggested many other candidate sites for site-directed mutagenesis. These
include side chains that bind substrates, cofactor PLP, subunit contacts, or in
catalysis. The mutant enzymes will be evaluated by multiple criteria in order to
establish the role of the replaced sites. Studies on the identity of the natural
endogenous amine that is released from the active site by substrates will be
continued and any role in catalysis will be explored. Mechanistic studies on the
slow inactivation of the enzyme by normal substrates will focus on the structure
of the inactive enzyme with a fragment of substrate attached. The alternate
catalytic base, Lys-267, which is operative in the active site mutant enzymes,
has been shown to be required for the slow inactivation by normal substrates. On
the other hand, when the active site Lys that binds PLP in the wild-type enzyme
is replaced by Gln or Asn, these mutant enzymes are still inactivated by normal
substrates. Hence, the active-site Ly s is not required for this inactivation.
These studies will be expanded. The process of re-activation at mildly acidic pH
will be studied. The structure of pseudo-substrates with the enzyme will also be
evaluated by x-ray diffraction techniques. A general assay for D-amino acids
employing DAT is being developed. The procedure can quantitate all of the
D-amino acids except D-proline. The pool of D-amino acids needed for bacterial
peptidoglycan synthesis will be determined after exposure of bacteria to suicide
substrates of DAT. Studies on the anti-bacterial effects of ~-keto acids in
gram-positive and gram-negative strains will be continued. %%% The enzyme
D-amino acid transaminase is being studied with a dual objective. First, its
mechanism will be elucidated in order to understand how it stereochemically
prefers the D-isomers of amino acids rather than the L-isomers, which occur in
humans. This goal is being addressed using the methods of recombinant DNA
technology. Recent studies in our laboratory have provide evidence for a second
catalytic base at the entrance of the active site of the enzyme. These studies
will be continued in order to show how this enzyme works in the bacterial cell
by providing the cells with the essential D-amino acids. The second objective is
that with this information we hope to synthesize inhibitors for this enzyme that
could be useful antibiotics, especially towards penicillin-resistant
microorganisms. Since the enzyme occurs in bacteria but not in humans, this
inherent selectivity could be advantageous. ***