* 9404380
* Mathematical Sciences:  Computation, Control, Optimization  and Vibration Analysis of Shell Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Goong Chen, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 99,000.00

9404380 Chen/Zhou This research will focus on (1) the formulation of boundary
integral equations and development of boundary element schemes and software for
dynamic shell equations; (2) the analysis of vibration eigenfrequencies and
damping rates of dynamic shell equations; (3) the study of qualitative stability
properties of shells when damping is present; (4) structural shape control and
optimization, for several thin or shallow circular cylindrical, conical, and
spherical shell models. Shells are known to have advantageous structural
properties. Under suitable design, even very thin shells can support large
loads. They are therefore widely used in aircraft and ship structures where
light weight is essential. In other cases, such as pressure-vessels, roofs and
domes, the combined strength and enclosing properties of shells are utilized.
Mathematically, shells are described by coupled systems of partial differential
equations of higher order. This research is directed towards (1) computing the
deformation and stress distribution of shells in aerospace, civil and maritime
structures (in particular, with efficiency greatly surpassing the traditional
finite element method); (2) providing feedback designs of control systems that
can stabilize dynamic shell motion; (3) analyzing and simulating ``smart
structure control'' of shells such as the automatic tuning of the radius of
curvature of a spherical shell in a deformable mirror.