* 9404895
* State Measurements for Power System Monitoring and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Miroslav Begovic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Vijay Vittal
* 08/31/1998
* USD 104,887.00

9404895 Begovic The objective of the proposed research is to explore the
opportunities for applications which utilize a new generation of computer-based
monitoring and transient recording devices in power systems, such as phasor
measurements units (PMUs). Their ability to quickly assess the elements of the
power system state vector during the disturbances may be used for monitoring and
control of the system state and enhancement of its stability. The main practical
obstacle in implementation is their cost, which restricts their widespread use.
Often times, only a small number of measurement sites may be chosen according to
certain criteria relative to the objective of the intended application. The
intensive communication requirement also creates a practical limit on the number
of devices that may be used -- even the modern communication networks would have
difficulty with the abundance of data generated by the PMUs. The efficient local
processing and extraction of essential information from PMU data before they are
sent to a central location are important objectives of the proposed research;
monitoring and control applications for tracking and enhancement of system
stability with restricted resources are also a focal point. Recognizing the
timeliness and potential benefits of the proposed work, Georgia Power Company
and ESEERCO have committed modest, but much needed resources and equipment in
token of their support. This will enable the investigator to test some of the
proposed algorithms and techniques on actual data. ***