* 9404580
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Continuum Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Bernard Coleman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 90,000.00

9404580 Coleman A study will be made of the governing equations of a nonlinear
theory of the dynamics of elastic rods that is complete to within an error of
order 2 in a rod's thickness, curvature, twist, and stretch. As the theory does
not presuppose that displacements and rotations are small, its governing
equations are not linear. Recent numerical experiments have indicated that these
equations are approximately but not completely integrable in the sense of the
theory of solitons. As a first step toward the development of a theory of the
vibrations of structures whose elements obey the nonlinear theory, information
will be sought about the qualitative properties of solutions for boundary data
appropriate to such single elements as cantilever beams. Other problems under
investigation in rod theory bear on issues that arise in theories of the
tertiary structure of DNA molecules. To have a theory of the dynamics of rods
that accounts for internal dissipation, the theory of elastic rods will be
generalized to one appropriate to nonlinear viscoelastic materials. In a
separate area of research, a study will be made of the role of nonlinear effects
in the theory of the stability of solid bodies against changes of shape caused
by surface diffusion. Recent research has shown that a familiar result in the
linearized thery of the stability of circular cylinders against surface
diffusion, to the effect that a cylinder is stable against all sinusoidal
perturbations of wavelength less than the circumference of the unperturbed
cylinder, must be modified when nonlinear terms in the governing equations are
taken into account.The research to be performed under the project on the
mechanics of rods is expected to have implications for the design of methods of
controlling the vibration of structures, for understanding factors that affect
the stability of motions of helicopter rotor blades, for obtaining an
understanding of the phenomenon of supercoiling in DNA, and for finding the
mechanisms of the action of the enzymes called topoisomerases. The work on the
stability of bodies against surface diffusion bears on several important
problems concerning the durability of ohmic conductors in micro-electronic
devices and the design of micro-electromechanical devices.