* 9404114
* Mathematical Sciences:  Theory of Statistical Estimation    and Stochastic Models for Ion Channels
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Lucien Le Cam, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 07/31/1998
* USD 96,000.00

Sodium channels are large proteins that traverse the membranes of nerves. They
are responsible for controlling the motion of sodium ions into the nerve cell
and thereby play a major role in generation of nerve signals. With adequate,
sophisticated, apparatus, one can take recordings of the successive passages of
a ionic channel into open or closed position. Stochastic models have been
suggested to explain the pattern of open and closed periods. They contain a
number of adjustable parameters, which can be varied to obtain a good fit to
experimental data. The methods of fit used up to now require extensive computer
use. Also, they are unstable. We intend to taylor to this problem a simpler
method described in 1990 by L. Le Cam and G.L. Yang The problem of assessing the
uncertainty in the fitted equations is part of a general problem on which we are
making some progress. The project has two parts. One is a detailed study of
certain integrals that occur naturally in the evaluation of the performance of
statistical estimates when one uses quadratic los functions. The integrals
involve a denominator that is a convex combination of the probability measures
attached to the experiment. One will study how the integrals vary when these
convex combinations change. The second part is about statistical procedures to
be used for the study of sodium channel in nerves. Various stochastic models for
the functioning of these channels have been proposed. Standard statistical
analyses proceed through the method of maximum likelihood, which, in this case
is computationally cumbersome and unstable. Another procedure, due to Le Cam, is
just as efficient and computationally much simpler. It is proposed to taylor it
to the sodium channels situation and study what it can achieve there.