* 9404086
* Mathematical Sciences: Structure of Vorticity and Magnetic  Fields in Turbulence
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* W. Stephen Childress, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1998
* USD 159,950.00

9404086 Childress This research will be concerned with structure of the
vorticity and magnetic fields in complex flows, in the limit of vanishing
dissipation. The work is an outgrowth of kinematic studies of fast dynamos, or
dynamos which operate in the limit of infinite magnetic Reynolds number. We
propose further work on this problem, involving models and asymptotic techniques
developed in the previous studies, which link the dynamo action to a combination
of stretching and folding of field lines. We shall also extend the scope of our
work to include dynamical self-consistency of motions producing a fast dynamo.
In an new direction, we shall apply the Lagrangian techniques of kinematic fast
dynamo theory to the structure of vorticity in fully-developed turbulence. The
new feature here is the use of pulsed Lagrangian maps of the vorticity field
which conserved energy locally. We shall study a class of ``eddy structure''
models to understand how the Kolmogorov cascade responds to various boundary
conditions and driving mechanisms. These models may provide a useful tool for
pin-pointing the form of eddy structure in the inertial range. The primary
motivation of this work is an understanding of astrophysical turbulence and the
associated magnetic fields of the cosmos. Dissipation, such as is introduced in
ordinary fluids by viscosity, for example, is essentially absent in these
enormous systems. The convection zone of the Sun is a nearby system of this
kind, where turbulence and magnetic fields commingle. Our aim is to understand
the connection between the fluid flow, the turbulence itself, and certain
fields, magnetic and vortical, embedded in it. These two fields are quite
different in their dynamics, but they share certain geometrical features which
emerge in the analysis of models. We intend to exploit these connections and
bring to bear mathematical tools developed for the simpler magnetic problem, in
the hope of understanding uncovering important f eatures of the physical
structure of vorticity in fully developed turbulence. ***