* 9404305
* Mathematical Sciences:  Using Inference from Simulation     to Improve Efficiency of Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Andrew Gelman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1997
* USD 45,000.00

9404305 Gelman Iterative simulation methods such as the Gibbs sampler and
Metropolis' algorithm have recently become popular tools in statistical
analysis, especially in the calculation of posterior distributions arising in
Bayesian inference. We consider methods for using the output from parallel runs
of iterative simulation to perform inference about the target distribution and
the transition probabilities. These inferences can then be used to adaptively
alter the simulation algorithm to speed convergence. Developing and evaluating
these methods involves four research objectives. First, conjectures in the
mathematical theory of Markov chain simulation--notably on the generality of
some results so far established for the normal distribution--need to be tested.
Second, specific adaptive algorithms must be developed, with care taken that
adaptive altering of the transition probabilities does not violate the
conditions for convergence. Third, the methods of inference from iterative
simulations work most effectively when based on parallel simulations; we plan to
set up an asynchronous parallel processing setup, in which the independently
running parallel processes would send results to a single central processor that
would be continually performing inference about the target distribution and
periodically send commands outward to alter the transition rules. Fourth, the
methods are intended to be applied to speed the computation of posterior
distributions in applied Bayesian hierarchical models. Computer simulations of
random walks have become increasingly useful in many areas of science and
statistics. The methods we are studying to speed the computations, based on
basic mathematical and statistical ideas, were inspired by statistical
computation for a variety of applications, including forecasting Presidential
elections, analyzing nonresponse in sample surveys, searching for the factors
that influence high radon levels in homes, and modeling the flow of toxic
chemicals in the body. All of these problems have been attacked with random walk
computer simulations; improvements in computation speed will allow us and others
to fit more complicated and accurate mathematical models.