* 9404852
* RUI:  Genetics of Yeast Virus Double-Stranded RNA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Peter Russell, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 315,500.00

9404852 Russell The long-term objective of this project is to understand the
genetic control of the establishment of infection and the in vivo replication of
yeast double-stranded RNA viruses. The research will define the important cis-
acting viral sequences and the trans-acting host yeast genes necessary and
sufficient for establishing an infection and for in vivo replication of the L-A
and M1 double-stranded RNA viruses of yeast. Replicon systems for analyzing the
molecular details of viral infection and replication will be developed.
Properties of successful replicons will be compared with the properties of
natural L-A and M1 viruses. The 5' and 3' sequence requirements for and sequence
context effects on infection replication and translation will be identified. %%%
The research will contribute to our knowledge of the genetics and molecular
biology of the viral life cycle, and of viral/host interactions in yeast. The
genetic tractability of yeast makes it possible to define interactions between
host genes and viral functions. By contrast, in mammalian systems, the
difficulty of doing genetics makes such detailed studies of host-virus
interactions very challenging if not impossible. The knowledge obtained in this
research may be generalized to other viral systems, including those of
agricultural and environmental significance; in particular, newly-identified
yeast genes involved specifically in the virus life cycle will facilitate
searches for similar genes in other systems. ***