* 9404676
* Associative Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2001
* Robert Rescorla, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* stephen vessey
* 08/31/2001
* USD 459,759.00

The goal of the proposed research is to expand our knowledge of the elementary
learning processes of Pavlovian conditioning and instrumental training. These
learning processes are fundamental not only to much of animal behavior but also
to human normal and pathological functioning. Instrumental learning, which
involves learning about the consequences of one's actions, is commonly
conceptualized as having three component elements: a behavioral response (R), an
outcome (O) of that response, and a stimulus (S) in the presence of which the
response produces that outcome. Prior work from this and other laboratories has
identified the development of associations among each of the pairs of these
elements as contributing to behavior. Thus, organisms learn associations of the
form R- O, S-O, and S-R, and each contributes to behavior. But they also acquire
more hierarchical structures of the form S-(R- O), in which a stimulus activates
an association between R and O. The development of the techniques of transfer
and devaluation has allowed the separate measurement of these associations. The
devaluation technique involves the changing of the value of an outcome after it
has been earned by a response. Such devaluation of the outcome produces
substantial and immediate depression of the value of both stimuli and responses
that have led to that outcome, thus allowing measurement of both R-O and S-O
associations. The transfer technique involves the ability of a stimulus trained
with one behavior to transfer to the control of another behavior based on their
sharing a common outcome. It therefore allows one to detect both the S-O and R-O
association. Recent evidence suggests that these associations show amazing
persistence even when they no longer accurately reflect the consequences of
responding, as in extinction. The present research project will use the
devaluation and transfer techniques, together with others to be developed, to
measure the persistence of those a ssociations. It will explore the possibility
that associations with goals persist but are suppressed by superimposed
inhibitory associations not involving the outcomes. This research will also
explore the fate of hierarchical associations. Similar procedures will also be
applied to Pavlovian conditioning, which involves the learning of relations
between two stimuli in the world. New results suggest that there, too,
previously learned associations persist when conditions change. Moreover, there
too hierarchical modulatory structures seem to contribute to performance. These
studies will influence our thinking about elementary associative learning
processes. They will particularly illuminate the process of extinction, a
process important in many implications for understanding learning at the neural
level.