* 9404871
* RUI:  Anomalous Codeposition of Nickel-Iron and Nickel-Zinc Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Thomas Harris, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 12/31/1997
* USD 215,361.00

9404871 Harris This research is an experimental examination of anomalous
codeposition in two different systems, nickel-iron and nickel-zinc. There are
several reasons for choosing these particular systems: 1) to determine the
mechanism of anomalous deposition; 2) the systems have nickel in common, but the
alloys produced when nickel is combined with iron and zinc have different
properties; 3) both systems are of importance commercially. Experiments
critically test the models or theories of anomalous codeposition. The project
starts with the production of alloy deposits within a test matrix that includes
the following variables: less noble metal concentration in the solution, pH,
current density, and temperature. The deposits produced in these experiments are
characterized with respect to their composition, morphology, microstructure and
crystalline phase content. These tests identify conditions under which anomalous
codeposition does not occur, as well as regimes of anomalous codeposition that
are sufficiently dissimilar to suggest different mechanisms. Two additional
issues will be examined later in the project. First, hypophosphite, which is
able to eliminate anomalous codeposition (at least in the nickel-iron system),
will be used as a probe for testing the various anomalous codeposition
mechanisms. Secondly, the role of hydrogen, which has been discounted in the
nickel-iron system but cannot be ignored with nickel-zinc, will be examined
using the electrochemical hydrogen permeation technique. %%% This work should
assist in the further refinement of the commercial production and utilization of
electrodeposited alloys. Permalloy electrodeposition technology has played an
integral role in the evolution of the hard disk drive, and further improvements
are limited by our present understanding of the electrochemical processing of
this materials. Also, a better understanding of the nickel-zinc system should
enhance its utilization as a corrosion- re sistant coating for steel sheet used
in automobiles and other applications. ***