* 9404327
* Mathematical Sciences:  Modeling & Statistical Analysis of  Multivariate, Rank, & Mental Test Data, with Social Science Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1998
* William Stout, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 02/28/1998
* USD 120,000.00

Various improvements in Stout's statistical dimensionality assessment procedure
DIMTEST are proposed. In particular, adapting the procedure for partial-credit
scoring of items is proposed. Improvements in the DIMTEST large sample theory
are proposed. The incorporation of modern nonparametric regression techniques is
proposed. Use of more sophisticated versions of cluster analysis is proposed in
order to improve the capability of DIMTEST to confirm simple structure. The
development of two estimators of the amount of lack of unidimensionality is also
proposed. Various improvements in Shealy and Stout's statistical test bias
detection procedure SIBTEST are proposed. In particular, adapting the procedure
for partial-credit item scoring is proposed. Work on the development of a
version of SIBTEST to handle crossing bias is to be continued. The development
of a large sample theory for SIBTEST and crossing SIBTEST is proposed. It is
proposed that psychological construct validity theory be applied to enable
educational practioners to use SIBTEST to distinguish between mere differential
item functioning and actual test unfairness. It is proposed that computational
likelihood-based algorithms be developed for parameter estimation in the unified
cognitive diagnostic model of Dibello and Stout. It is proposed that the truth
of Holland's Dutch Identity two parameters per item conjecture be investigated.
Work is proposed on the psychometric modeling and statistical analysis of mental
test data. This research promises to be of great value in improving the
manufacture and scoring of standardized tests and in carrying out cognitive
diagnoses for educational remediation purposes. It also should contribute to the
advancement of the theory of mental test modeling. Special emphasis is placed
upon the statistical assessment of latent ability dimensionality (that is, the
number of abilities influencing test performance), the statistical assessment of
simple structure (clumps of test items such that items within eac h clump
measure a similar configuration of basic latent abilities), the modeling and
statistical assessment of mental test bias (i.e. test unfairness), and the
modeling and statistical diagnosis of examinee cognitive attribute knowledge
states.