* 9404728
* U.S.-Chile:  Scientific Basis for Modeling Snow Distributionand Melt in Alpine Catchments of the Chilean Andes
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1996
* Roger Bales, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 10/31/1996
* USD 22,308.00

9404728 Bales This Americas Program award will support a collaborative research
project between Dr. Roger Bales, University of Arizona, and Dr. Fernando A.
Escobar, Direccion General de Aguas, Chile. The goal of the research is to
understand the linkages between the processes controlling snow accumulation and
melt in alpine catchments of the Chilean Andes. This understanding is critical
to developing a predictive ability to describe the response of a basin to inputs
of water and energy, and to changes in this input. A spatially distributed
energy-`alance model of snowmelt runoff will be developed and will be evaluated
for its forecasting capabilities and its sensitivity to parameters and data
errors. Seasonally snow-covered areas of the Earth's mountain ranges are
important components of the global hydrologic cycle and are sensitive indicators
of climatic change. Snowmelt runoff in these areas accounts for the major source
of the runoff for stream flow and ground-water recharge over wide areas of the
mid-latitudes. It is therefore important to understand the processes controlling
this runoff in order to model stream flow for water supply and flood prediction
purposes. A long-term result of this project will be the firm establishment of
cooperation between the two research teams and the incorporation of Andean
basins to system of study sites located around the globe. ***