* 9404771
* Genetic Analysis of Long Distance Enhancer - Promoter       Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1997
* David Weisbrot, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1997
* USD 352,000.00

9404771 Abstract Clues to the mechanisms of long distance activation have come
from the gypsy retrotransposon of Drosophila. Several naturally- occurring
mutations are gypsy insertions into gene control regions. The unique feature of
these mutations is that the enhancers that are promoter-distal to gypsy do not
activate transcription while enhancers promoter-proximal to gypsy still
function. This position-dependent blocking of enhancers by gypsy is suppressed
by mutations in the suppressor of Hairy-wing su(Hw) gene. The su(Hw) gene
encodes a zinc finger protein (SUHW) that binds to gypsy DNA. Only the SUHW-
binding region of gypsy is required to block enhancers, demonstrating that SUHW
is the enhancer-blocking agent. SUHW can be used, therefore, to investigate
enhancer- promoter interactions. It is postulated that SUHW interacts with the
factors that support long distance interactions between enhancer-binding factors
and the promoter. Gypsy insertion alleles of cut partially suppressed by leaky
su(Hw) alleles have intermediate cut wing phenotypes. Mutations in other genes
that modulate these intermediate phenotypes will be generated and mapped. Both
dominant suppressor and enhancer mutations that are not su(Hw) or cut alleles
have been isolated in preliminary experiments. These mutations will be tested
for the ability to modulate other SUHW-blocked transcription enhancers. Genes
that modulate the activity of more than one gypsy-blocked enhancer without
affecting expression of su(Hw) will be cloned after generating breakpoint or P
element insertion alleles. The effects of the mutations on gypsy insertion
allele phenotypes, additional phenotypes associated with the mutations, and the
identities of the encoded products will be used to assess the roles of the genes
in long distance activation and to formulate molecular models. %%% Many genes in
higher eukaryotic organisms contain control regions with multiple enhancers that
activate transcription in dif ferent tissues and stages of development. In some
cases, enhancers are many kilobases away from the promotor. The ability to
activate over such long distances is not an intrinsic property of the activator
proteins and promoters. We will characterize this phenomenon in the fruit fly,
Drosophila, by finding appropriate mutants and analyzing their effects on long
distance activation of genes. ***