* 9404818
* Heme Biosynthesis in the Bradyrhizobium japonicum/Soybean   Symbiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Mark O'Brian, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9404818 O'Brian Bradyrhizobium japonicum is the bacterial endosymbiont of
soybean (Glycine max) that functions as a nitrogen-fixing organelle within cells
of a specialized plant organ called a root nodule. Many interactions occur
between the two symbionts for the initiation, development and maintenance of
nodules. The broad objective of this work is to understand how leguminous plants
communicate with their bacterial partners to regulate metabolic processes
essential for symbiosis. In particular, we are elucidating the interactive
events between B. japonicum and soybean that control heme synthesis in root
nodules. The demand for heme increases in both organisms as the respective cell
types differentiate in nodules, and the corresponding heme proteins are an
essential feature of symbiotic nitrogen fixation. Preliminary work indicates
that the plant host is directly involved in bacterial heme synthesis in nodules,
and other data have implicated B. japonicum as the source for soybean hemoglobin
heme. The two aforesaid hypotheses are being tested by i) Constructing and
characterizing B. japonicum mutants defective in uptake of the heme precursor
delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA). It is possible that bacterial heme can be
synthesized from soybean-derived ALA in nodules, and the tenability of this
mechanism will be tested by the acquisition and characterization of ALA uptake
mutants. ii) Bacterial heme synthesis from plant ALA infers that B. japonicum
ALA dehydratase is the first essential bacterial enzyme for heme formation in
nodules, and analysis of mutants bears out that prediction. Therefore, the
regulation of hemB. the gene encoding ALA dehydratase will be examined. iii)
Determining whether B. japonicum can provide the heme prosthetic group of
soybean leghemoglobin by construction and characterization of a temperature-
sensitive ferrochelatase mutant. The mutant will allow normal nodule development
at a permissive temperature, but will permit the inactivation of bacterial heme
synt hesis in those nodules. %%% This work will increase our understanding of an
important step in soybean and other legume growth. ***