* 9404513
* Mathematical Sciences:  RUI:  Applications of Wavelet       Analysis to Neural Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Hrushikesh Mhaskar, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 03/31/1998
* USD 60,000.00

The investigator studies the approximation capabilities of afeedforward neural
network for approximating functions in different function classes in terms of
the activation function used, the number of layers, and the number of neurons.
Particular emphasis is placed on dimension-independent bounds and localized
approximation by networks. In particular, the research establishes strong
connections between the theory of wavelets and neural networks. Applications to
the construction of universal time series predictors and pattern classifiers
also are studied. The project connects the theory of wavelets with that of
neural networks. Both of these theories have numerous applications in such areas
as data compression, prediction of time series, target classification, pattern
recognition, and signal processing. Both topics of study have therefore
flourished during the recent past, for the most part, independently of each
other. There do exist certain similarities between the two theories stemming
from the fact that they both deal with mathematically similar processes of
approximation. The investigator explores these similarities further. In
particular, he studies the inherent capabilities and limitations of universal
mapping networks and develops efficient training paradigms. A remarkable feature
of the networks to be studied is the ease with which the same network can be
trained and retrained to perform a variety of tasks using a theoretically
guaranteed minimal number of neurons.