* 9404701
* (RPG) Hydrological Impacts of Alternative Wetland           Management in Headwaters of Nation's Rivers:                GIS Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1995
* Tatiana Nawrocki, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 11/30/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9404701 Nawrocki The comparison of wetland hydrological functions in headwaters
of the Mississippi (USA) and the Volga (Russia) could provide us with credible
information how alternative management strategies impact runoff, peak flow and
water quality under changing climate. The macro scale "field experiment" in both
areas, having close natural similarity, is already on the way. Wetland
conservation vs drainage is now the prevailing policy in Upper Mississippi
basin. Economic problems in Russia do not let this policy to become a priority.
Peat mining, reservoir construction on lowlands and drainage for farming and
private gardening are common. The project will focus on problems, how the extent
and positioning of wetlands affect runoff and peak flow; what is the role of
wetlands for diffuse pollution prevention and sediment deposition; what are the
relationships between distribution of wetlands, other land uses and flood risk,
water quality under variable climate conditions; how to determine criteria for
wetland conservation in headwaters, ensuring environmental sustainability and
multiobjective resources use. Assessments of wetland functions will be based on
hydrological models, GIS and remote sensing. Integrated comparative analysis of
representative watersheds in both basins will be performed. Procedures for
scaling information from local to regional level will be developed. The
objectives of the research planning stage (1 year) are to conduct feasibility
studies of available hydrological models, and their sensitivity analysis; to
select the methodology for wetland impact assessment, combining modeling and
GIS; to implement the search and analysis of scattered multi disciplinary
sources of data; to develop procedures to fill the detected data gaps and to
convert heterogeneous formats into a set of input data, compatible with the
selected methodology; to prepare the subsequent research proposal for the full
scale project. The full scale project (3 years) will be aimed at the development
of a multi layered hierarchical base of GIS data for headwater watersheds of the
Mississippi and the Volga; comparative analysis of wetland impacts on hydrology
of the rivers; obtaining the relationships between natural and human induced
factors of wetland functions under climate change and variable strategies of
wetland conservation; defining criteria and thresholds for wetland system
stability with regard to flood risk and water quality; outlining recommendations
for wetland management in the headwaters.