* 9404492
* Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotic/Singular Perturbation     Analysis of Dynamic Elastic-Plastic Crack Growth
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Walter Drugan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/1997
* USD 45,000.00

9404492 Drugan Previous attempts to obtain analytical solutions for the stress
and deformation fields near a dynamically propagating crack in elastic-plastic
material have employed the strong assumption that the fields admit variable-
separable near-tip solutions in the polar coordinates r, theta centered at the
tip. Comparisons of these results with an exact crack-line solution for Mode
III, and with detailed numerical finite element solutions, show that their
radius of validity is so small as to render them physically inapplicable. A new
analytical approach is proposed that avoids the overly restrictive separability
assumption. The approach combines asymptotic analysis of the governing equations
in distance r from the crack tip with a singular perturbation analysis in the
crack Mach number (crack growth speed/elastic shear wave speed) that utilizes
coordinate straining. Since the approach thus builds on quasi-static crack
growth solutions, it will make use of the recently-derived analytical family of
plane strain near-tip solutions, and also their analytical extension to very
large regions of validity, obtained by the proposer. While the research proposed
involves analyzing one of the simplest physically realistic elastic-plastic
material models for initial study, it is anticipated that the work will provide
a new mathematical tool for deriving analytical solutions for dynamic elastic-
plastic crack growth in more sophisticated materials models also The proposed
research seeks to develop analytical solutions, valid over a physically
significant size scale, for the stress and deformation fields near the tip of a
rapidly propagating crack in elastic-plastic materials such as ductile metals.
More generally, we seek to develop mathematical methods for finding such
solutions for rapid crack growth in general material types. These solutions will
provide a fundamental understanding of how the material near a rapidly
propagating crack tip behaves , and since this near-tip material region controls
whether and how the crack will grow, the solutions sought will serve as the
basis for analytical crack growth and stability criteria. We seek to predict,
among other things, how the material's resistance to crack growth is affected by
crack propagation speed. Dynamic fracture can occur when a cracked structural
component is loaded beyond the stability level, or when it is subjected to
impact loading, or when it experiences a thermal shock. Predictions of the
ensuing rapid crack growth, facilitated by the results anticipated from this
research, are crucial for accurate design and safety assessments.