* 9404702
* Protein-Protein and Protein-Bilayer Interactions in         Electron Transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1999
* Gordon Tollin, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/1999
* USD 400,000.00

9404702 Tollin The principal question being asked in this project is the
following: how do the properties of lipid bilayers modulate the protein-protein
interaction and electron transfer processes which occur between integral and
peripheral membrane redox proteins during their functioning as components of the
respiratory and photosynthetic energy transduction systems? Experiments
addressing this question will utilize reconstituted proteolipid systems in which
the lipid and protein compositions can be readily varied. The lipid bilayer
properties to be investigated are: i. fatty acid composition, which determines
the fluidity of the membrane interior; ii. head group identity, which modulates
electrical charge, hydration, curvature free energy, lateral mobility and other
surface physicochemical properties; iii. presence of specific components such as
cardiolipin and glycolipids. The protein systems to be studied include the
integral membrane proteins cytochrome c oxidase (bovine heart) and cytochrome f
(spinach), and their physiological electron transfer partners, the peripheral
membrane proteins cytochrome c (bovine heart) and plastocyanin (spinach). Our
approach is multifaceted, utilizing a unique combination of kinetic,
thermodynamic and structural techniques. Protein-protein complex formation and
electron transfer will be characterized by measurements of transient kinetics
using laser flash photolysis and by electrochemistry at lipid bilayer-modified
electrodes; structural features of the proteolipid systems (packing density and
film thickness) and protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions will be
investigated using surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy. %%% *** In this
research program, we wish to determine how the lipid components of biological
membranes modulate the properties of the proteins which participate in the
principal energy conversion processes occurring in biology, i.e. photosynthesis
in green plants (which converts sunlight into f ood energy in the form of
carbohydrate) and respiration in animals (which converts stored carbohydrate
into biologically available energy). We will change the following properties of
the lipid component and determine how these changes affect protein-protein
interactions and electron transfer reactions: fatty acid composition (which
modulates membrane fluidity), lipid head group structure (which modulates
surface electrical charge), and the presence or absence of specific types of
lipids (galactolipids and cardiolipin) which are unique components of the
biological membranes associated with photosynthesis and respiration. The
following properties of the protein-lipid systems will be studied: the rates of
protein-protein electron transfer reactions, the intrinsic ability of proteins
to accept and donate electrons, and the structural changes induced in the lipid-
protein systems by varying the lipid properties noted above. These studies will
not only be of fundamental interest for increasing our understanding of these
crucially important biological processes, but will also have important
implication for the development of future technologies such as molecular
electronic devices, biosensors for medical diagnosis, and energy conversion
devices based upon biological models. ***