* 9404906
* Mathematical Sciences:  Innovative Statistical Methods for  Biological Life Spans and Oldest-Old Mortality
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Jane-Ling Wang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 86,310.00

We investigate mortality of the oldest-old by means of nonparametric hazard
function estimation based on smoothing techniques for lifetables. Two-
dimensional smoothing methods for Lexis diagrams will be developed allowing to
predict the survival of demographic cohorts, employing kernel and locally
weighted least squares smoothers. Male-female comparisons and changes in the
level of mortality will be investigated with change-point techniques. Stochastic
process models for samples of lifetables and associated inference will be
introduced. It is planned to analyze various biological and demographic data
sets with these methods, in particular a huge set of data on the survival of
medflies. In this interdisciplinary project, newly developed nonparametric
statistical techniques will be applied to approach a complex of biological and
demographic qu estions about longevity and mortality of the oldest segment of
the population. These questions focus on whether mortality is decreasing for the
oldest segment or is invariably increasing with age, how sex differences affect
changes in mortality, and to what degree one can predict future mortality and
life expectation from current trends. The importance of these problems derives
from their potential impact on social planning for the future as well as on the
biology of aging. Attacking these problems requires the development of new
statistical methods and the innovative application of existing statistical
methods to analyze current biological experiments and demographic data