* 9404440
* Mathematical Sciences: Viscous Incompressible               Magnetohydrodynamics:  Analysis and Numerical Approximation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1994,09/30/1996
* Amnon Meir, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/1996
* USD 43,470.00

9404440 Schmidt Under the assumptions of the magnetohydrodynamic (or MHD)
approximation, the motion of a viscous, incompressible, electrically conducting
fluid is governed by the Navier-Stokes equations coupled to Maxwell's equations
for the magnetic field. The latter will in general transcend the region of
conducting fluid and, ideally, extend to all of space. Typically, both the
interior and exterior magnetic fields must be determined and suitably matched at
the interface separating the fluid from the solid material or vacuum outside.
Most prior mathematical work has been concerned with special situations where
boundary conditions for the magnetic field (or related quantities) are given on
the surface of the fluid region and the exterior field can be disregarded. In
the general case, little is known beyond basic existence and uniqueness results.
Even if the problem can be shown to be analytically well-posed, formidable
difficulties occur when trying to numerically approximate the solution. Major
drawbacks include the unbounded support of the magnetic field and the fact that
it exhibits jump discontinuities across interfaces separating media with
different magnetic properties. It is the goal of the proposed research to
develop general analytical and numerical methods tailored for the rigorous
treatment of increasingly complex problems of this kind, in stationary as well
as time-dependent situations. The numerical and computational feasibility of the
approach will be investigated and compared to that of alternative procedures. It
will then be studied to what extent the approach carries over to more complex
situations featuring many magnetically different media and nonsmooth geometries.
At later stages, some extended models of MHD will be considered, including non-
Newtonian fluids, Hall current plasmas, and thermally coupled flows. Another
long-term goal is the analytical and numerical investigation of MHD problems
involving free boundaries. Magnet ohydrodynamics (or MHD) is the theory of the
macroscopic interaction of electrically conducting fluids with a magnetic field.
It is of importance in connection with many engineering problems, such as
sustained plasma confinement for controlled thermonuclear fusion, liquid-metal
cooling of nuclear reactors, and electromagnetic casting of metals. It also
finds applications in geophysics and astronomy, where prominent examples are the
so-called dynamo problem, that is, the question of the origin of the Earth's
magnetic field in its liquid metal core, and the equilibrium and stability of
magnetic stars in their own gravitational fields. The difficulties addressed by
this research are most pronounced in models describing typical applications in
engineering, such as the magnetic shaping of liquid metals or induction
manufacturing of specialized materials, where one encounters fairly complicated
geometries with several conducting fluids and current-carrying solid conductors
interacting at a distance via the universal magnetic field.