* 9404722
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Indigenous Agroforestry and Industrial Timber Plantations in West Kalimantan, Indonesia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1995
* Gillian Hart, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1995
* USD 3,950.00

9404722 HART-MAYER International attention has focused on the crisis of
deforestation in Southeast Asia, and highlighted efforts to conserve ancient
rain forests in the wake of commercial logging, new settlements, and
agricultural land clearing along the region's forest frontiers. The Indonesian
state and timber companies are responding to calls for a more sustainable forest
use by superimposing timber plantations on landscapes that indigenous
communities have long managed according to distinctive agroforestry traditions.
The Indonesian government asserts that timber plantations protect ecological
values by reducing pressure to log natural forests, generate rural development
through plantation employment, and promote urban development around wood
processing facilities. Environmentalists counter that timber plantations destroy
the biological diversity of native ecosystems and displace, emiserate, and
victimize both local communities and migrants brought in for plantation work.
This study will investigate the complex transformations taking place in the
vicinity of expanding plantations, their effects on local populations' own uses
of land and forest resources, and the changing ecological conditions of the land
and forests themselves. The research will involve intensive interviews with
villagers, community leaders, business people, and other affected individuals
located around and within an Indonesian timber plantation. A survey of past and
present land uses will also be conducted and detailed maps will be constructed
in the field using a hand-held global positioning system (GPS) to identify
locations accurately. The GPS will also be used to construct vegetation and land
use transects to describe village agroforestry strategies. This research will
contribute to both theoretical and practical understandings of the tension
between commercial interests, state policy, and indigenous populations over the
preservation of biological sensitive regions. It wi ll add to our theoretical
understanding of political ecology, social institutions, and frontier
development. It will further provide valuable insights into the specific
situation in Indonesia, one of the world's most important tropical forest
regions. As a doctoral dissertation research improvement award, this project
will also provide strong support to enable a promising student to establish an
independent research career.