* 9404358
* Mathematical Sciences: Unique Continuation, Regularity of   Solutions to Linear and Nonlinear Equations of Nonelliptic  Type, Symmetry for PDE's
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Nicola Garofalo, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 142,500.00

9404358 Garofalo This award supports mathematical research on problems arising
in the field of partial differential equations. The work is concerned with three
main projects. The first concerns unique continuation for a class of subelliptic
operators modelled on the Baouendi-Grushin operator and absence of embedded
eigenvalues for such operators, or for the sub-Laplacian on the Heisenberg group
or, in general, on a nilpotent homogeneous Lie group. The second line of
investigation will study optimal regularity of solutions of nonlinear
subelliptic equations which arise as Euler equations of the Sobolev functional
in the nonquadratic case, isoperimetric and Sobolev inequalities, reactions
between harmonic and surface measure for Lipschitz domains on the Heisenberg
group and Wieners criterion of Kolmogorov's equation. Work will also be done on
symmetry for partial differential equations and the Pompieu problem, on a
conjecture of DeGiorgi connected with flow by mean curvature, extremal functions
in the Sobolev or the isoperimetric inequality for the Baouendi-Grushin operator
or the sub-Laplacian on the Heisenberg and the generalized torsion problem.
Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical modeling of the
physical world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much to create the
equations as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative information about the
solutions. This may include answers to questions about uniqueness, smoothness
and growth. In addition, analysis often develops methods for approximation of
solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these approximations. ***