* 9404823
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Health Seeking Behavior     of Rural Women in India with Sexual Diseases
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Surinder Bhardwaj, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1995
* USD 9,873.00

9404823 BHARDWAJ Sexual diseases such as gonorrhea, syphilis, chlamydia, and
herpes have received mounting worldwide attention due to the large number of
people affected. In particular. AIDS, largely restricted earlier to homosexuals,
is of great concern since it is spreading rapidly into heterosexual populations
and presents an especially serious threat to women. In societies such as India,
women are more susceptible than men to contracting sexual diseases since their
access to information is limited by lack of education and ignorance about sexual
practices and preventive measures. Unlike their counterparts in the western
world who have sufficient access to information and medical services, rural
women in India have insufficient knowledge about sexual diseases. Recognizing
that spatial relations are gendered and that the geographic spaces of women
differ in different places, this research project focuses on identifying those
factors, especially those related to understanding the connection between
context and gender roles, that affect the construction and use of social
networks by rural Indian women who have a sexual disease. The study will involve
samples of women from three districts in Haryana, India, taken over a nine month
period. Personal interviews with infected women and health care providers will
provide the empirical base for a statistical analysis which will define social
networks and attempt to explain the structure, and variation in the structure,
of those networks. This project will provide significant new insights into a
very important problem facing developing countries. It will expand our
understanding of both the delivery of medical services in developing areas and
the role of patriarchy in shaping the way in which rural women seek and use
medical help. Thus, this study will contribute to a richer theoretical
understanding of medical geography, development studies, and gender as well as
providing new perspectives of immediate practi cal importance in dealing with
these growing medical problems. As a doctoral dissertation research improvement
award, this project will also provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career. ***