* 9404716
* Size- and Conformation-Specific Infrared Spectroscopy of    Inter-and Intra-molecular Hydrogen Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Timothy Zwier, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 10/31/1997
* USD 356,825.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. T. S. Zwier of Purdue University will investigate the properties of gas-
phase solute-solvent clusters by resonant ion-dip infrared spectroscopy and
fluorescence-dip infrared spectroscopy. These studies concern the solvent
structure in complexes involving aromatic molecules, conformers of biomolecules,
and intramolecular H-atom tunneling. Among the several systems to be
investigated are those of water, methyl alcohol, chloroform, hydrogen chloride,
methane, and acetylene as the solvent species for benzene. Additional studies
focus on the conformations of aromatic amino acids, their analogs, and their
solvent-containing clusters, and on tropolone and several of its derivatives in
which the H-atom tunneling reactions of the intramolecularly hydrogen-bonded
hydrogen atoms play a role. Weak intramolecular and intermolecular interactions
that involve a hydrogen atom are known as hydrogen-bonding forces. These play a
significant role in defining the shape and conformation of especially large
biomolecules and the association of molecules into cluster aggregates. Gas phase
clusters provide an important testing ground for theories aimed at understanding
the hydrogen bond and its consequences. The importance and complexity of water
and the alcohols has prompted much experimental and theoretical work on their
gas phase clusters. Experimental data on the variations of cluster properties
with cluster size are sparse and are needed to test theoretical models. In the
condensed phase the interaction between solute and solvent must consider both
the disruption of the solvent's structure imposed by the solute molecule and
site-specific attractions and repulsions between solvent and solute molecules.
The present research will serve to obtain a better understanding of these
problems in physical chemistry.