* 9404408
* Variable Selection and Related Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Edward George, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 08/31/1997
* USD 75,000.00

The proposed research will develop and evaluate variable selection procedures
for multiple regression and related problems. Both the Bayesian and the
frequentist points of view will be considered. From the Bayesian perspective,
the focus will be on stochastic search variable selection methods which use a
hierarchical mixture model to guide variable selection. These methods will
include a procedure for fast Bayes variable selection to handle hundreds of
variables at once, a procedure for variable selection in generalized linear
models, a procedure for variable selection across exchangeable regressions, and
a procedure for performing simultaneous variable selection and outlier removal.
From the frequentist perspective, the focus will be on a new criterion for
evaluating selection criteria called risk inflation. This research will entail
the application and generalization of risk inflation to a broad set of model
selection problems which includes generalized linear models, order selection
procedures for time series models, and change-point selection for estimation in
change-point problems. Risk inflation will also be used to gauge the bias of
using variable selection procedures in conjunction with heuristic search
methods. A new class of variable selection procedures which use adaptive
dimensionality penalties will also be developed. One of the main goals of modern
statistical methods is to provide statistical models which relate input
variables to outputs of interest. For example, such models are used to predict
and explain annual crop production in agriculture, interest rates in business
and economics, cancer incidence in medicine, and crime rates in sociology. A key
component in building such models is the selection of input variables which
contain strong predictive and explanatory information. This component is
especially important because of the recent proliferation of large databases
containing vast numbers of potential input variables. The propos ed research
will provide powerful new methods for selecting such input variables for a wide
variety of model building situations.