* 9404908
* Postdoctoral Research Associate in                          Experimental Science
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Robert Futrelle, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 10/31/1996
* USD 46,200.00

9404908 Futrelle The full text of the scientific literature is becoming more and
more available in electronic form. Techniques will be developed for machine
learning of the syntactic and semantic structures in scientific text.
Unsupervised learning, which has been successful in discovering syntactic and
semantic word classes, will be extended to more complex tasks. Supervised
learning will be used to set the unsupervised results in the standard context of
parts of speech (noun, adjective, verb), structures (noun and verb phrases,
prepositional phrases) and relations (coreference, apposition, prepositional
phrase attachment). The character-stream-based approach used in past corpus
studies will be replaced by an object-oriented database approach, which will
integrate smoothly with case-based techniques already developed. The database
approach makes it possible to build information-rich indexes as new relations
are discovered. The indexes, in turn, make further analyses more flexible and
efficient. The research will use the electronic forms of the journals of the
American Society for Microbiology. The result of the research will be to
introduce a collection of powerful and flexible new techniques to analyze
complex text and extract the basic conceptual content from it. The content can
then serve as the basis for building powerful information retrieval systems. ***