* 9404806
* Ultrafast Dynamics of Polymer Laser Microchemistry and      Energy Transfer
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Dana Dlott, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/1997
* USD 357,000.00

Dlott The goal of this research is a better understanding of the fundamental
mechanisms by which a short intense laser pulse modifies the properties of a
micrometer scale spot on a polymer thin film. The processes which will be
studied are laser surface ablation and laser photopolymerization. Microchemistry
processes are widely used in photomicrolithography, electronics, and many other
high technology industries, but due to the complicated nature of the laser-
material interaction and the diversity and complexity of the materials used
therein, are poorly understood at a fundamental level. Specific practical
applications discussed here include laser ablation, microimage formation, laser
assisted material transfer, and shock-based methods involving fast compression,
shearing and smashing. The intent of this work is to go beyond the current level
of understanding these processes at a technical level to develop a detailed
molecular level understanding. %%% The goal of this research is a better
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms by which a short intense laser pulse
modifies the properties of a micrometer scale spot on a polymer thin film. The
processes which will be studied are laser surface ablation and laser
photopolymerization. Microchemistry processes are widely used in
photomicrolithography, electronics, and many other high technology industries,
but due to the complicated nature of the laser-material interaction and the
diversity and complexity of the materials used therein, are poorly understood at
a fundamental level.