* 9404320
* U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research:  Design and Development of a Generic Scheduling Engine
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1995
* Michael Pinedo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 10/31/1995
* USD 19,270.00

9404320 Pinedo This Americas Program award will fund Dr. Michael Pinedo,
Columbia University, in a joint collaboration with Dr. Miguel Nussbaum,
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, to design and develop a modular,
flexible, general purpose scheduling environment. The aim of the project is to
refine and extend a variety of known theoretical results and algorithms for
scheduling problems, and develop techniques for combining the procedures into
one framework suitable for implementation. The resulting framework will then be
incorporated into an interactive, object-oriented system. The research is based
on problem decomposition; i.e., dividing the scheduling problem into a number of
sub- problems and then aggregating the results obtained into a comprehensive
global solution of the original problem. The project will be a significant
contribution to scheduling education, as well as industrial practice. During the
last decade many industries have attempted to develop, design and implement
scheduling systems for their operations, but have not always been successful
because the systems were not sufficiently flexible, and not able to adapt easily
to changing objectives and constraints. The development of a tool to classify
and successfully decompose any scheduling problem will be of great benefit to
users of scheduling models. The collaboration will profit from the complementary
strengths of both scientists and institutions. Columbia University has an
established record in scheduling theory and applications, while Universidad
Catolica has extensive experience in the design and development of scheduling
systems. ***