* 9404658
* Upgrade of Hardware, Computer and Peripheral Equipment      Electron Microprobe Laboratory, University of Oklahoma
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* David London, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 08/31/1996
* USD 41,485.00

9404658 London This award provides 55 per cent of the funding required for the
upgrade of an electron microprobe system at the School of Geology and Geophysics
at the University of Oklahoma. The University is committed to providing the
remaining funds necessary for the equipment upgrade, which will consist of
modern computer automation of stage movement and analytical functions,
installation of x-ray diffracting composite detectors for analysis of light
elements, and a sputter coater for carbon coating of non conducting specimens.
The upgraded system is needed to meet the needs of a diverse user base at the
University of Oklahoma who rely on the electron microprobe for chemical
microanalysis of geological and other material samples. Specific projects
needing the capabilities of a modernized electron microprobe include: (1)
quantitative spatial analysis of the organic, mineral, and trace elemental
constituents of coals, including a quantitative assessment of the correlation
among maceral composition, optical reflectance, and back scattered electron
signal intensity, (2) spatial analysis of rocks forming reservoir rocks for
hydrocarbon and water, and (3) microscale studies of minerals grown from late-
stage magmatic fluids and gases. *** 9405805 Craig This award provides 75% of
the funds required for the acquisition of a microscope system for use with
transmitted and reflected light to be used in the rare gas isotope laboratory,
Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California, San Diego.
The University is committed to providing the remaining funds necessary for the
acquisition. The microscope system is mainly to be used by researchers working
with fluid, glass, and crystalline inclusions trapped in samples of basaltic
rocks that have been extruded from the Earth's mantle. The microscope is needed
for the location and identification of these small inclusions prior to
extraction of the rare gases (argon, helium, and neodymium) for isotopic
analysis. The researchers at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography are using
the isotopic content of the rare gases brought up from the mantle to understand
the geochemical evolution of the mantle. ***