* 9404947
* Algorithmic Analysis and Congestion Control of              Connection-Oriented Services in Large Scale Communication   Networks.
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1999
* Hisashi Kobayashi, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 02/28/1999
* USD 124,671.00

9404947 Kobayashi Network technologies have been progressing rapidly toward
faster and larger networks which are capable of providing integrated services.
These technical developments in turn require advances in analytic methodologies
that can be effectively used in the design and control of future networks such
as ATM-based B-ISDN, all-optical networks and wireless communication networks.
Emerging high-speed integrated communication services require us to analyze
network systems, in which information loss probabilities range from 10**-2
(e.g., call connection loss) to as small as 10**-10 (e.g., ATM cell loss). In
this proposed study we will develop a theoretical foundtion for evaluation and
control of connection-oriented services, which in particular will enable us to
handle this wide range of loss probabilities. We begin by generalizing the
product form solutions obtained for loss networks with fixed routing. Our
formulation encompasses a broad range of state-dependent call generation
patterns, different types of network services, and the whole range of traffic
levels. Using our experience in computational algorithms for closed queueing
network models, we will develop new practical methods for estimating loss
probabilities in connection-oriented services. In order to insure the accuracy
of approximate formulas, we will develop appropriate error bounds. A refinement
and a rigorous validation of the reduced load approximation method, also
referred to as the Erlang's fixed point method in the case of Poisson arrivals,
will be attempted for networks with state dependent arrivals. In parallel with
the above algorithmic and asymptotic methods, we will explore a model of
connection-oriented network services based on a multi-dimensional Ornstein-
Uhlenbeck diffusion process. The diffusion process approach will allow us not
only to evaluate more general types of networks (i.e., loss/queueing networks
not amenable to product form solutions) but also to obtain time-dependent, i.e.,
transient, solutions for network behavior. Finally, we will formulate and solve
network control policy problems such as call admission control and routing
decisions. ***