* 9404517
* Mathematical Sciences:  Mathematical Modeling of            Transductions of Somatosensory Stimuli
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Jonathan Bell, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1998
* USD 179,000.00

9404517 Bell The investigator and his colleagues undertake research to establish
a quantitative understanding of mechanotransduction in the mammalian tactile
system through modeling a skin receptor (Pacinian corpuscle_PC) and the skin.
They develop the mathematical approach for determining the transmission of
strain through the PC's capsule, its mechanical filter, and develop strain-
sensitive ionic channel models for the PC's nerve fiber. They extend previous
work to allow full three-dimensional deformation of the PC and to include inner
capsule structure. This will help further understand sources of distinctive
neural tuning and directional sensitivity characteristic of the PC. The
investigators also develop a continuum skin model to understand the filtering
contributions made by the skin. This includes incorporating the biphasic (fluid-
solid) character of the skin. Cooperation from an experimental group complements
the theoretical efforts. The investigators study, through theoretical models
(but in cooperation with an experimental group), how mechanical stimuli at the
skin surface are transformed through skin and by a skin receptor into electrical
signals. This mechanical-to-electrical process (mechanotrans- duction) gives
output that is processed in the central nervous system and ultimately as
associated with our perception of touch. Mechanotransduction in general is a
fundamental physiological process that is central to such diverse functions as
hearing, digestion, balance, as well as touch. Through quantitative modeling of
skin receptors (specifically, Pacinian corpuscles) they developin an
understanding of the contribution of the mechanical vs the neural part of these
receptors (which is presently very difficult to accomplish experimentally);
hence, they are able to interpret changes due to aging and abnormalities. The
approach they take to modeling the skin as a biphasic (fluid-solid) material is
expected to be valuable in studying t he mechanics of other biphasic materials
not necessarily associated with biological tissues.