* 9404376
* Mathematical Sciences:  Mathematical Problems from Materials Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/2000
* Robert Kohn, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/2000
* USD 233,646.00

9404376 Kohn Coherent phase transformations lead to mixtures of different phases
or phase variants with characteristic fine scale structures. The modelling of
these microstructures is crucial for understanding macroscopic phenomena such as
shape-memory behavior and hysteresis, as well as microscopic phenomena such as
the morphology of twinning. In some situations the observed fine scale
structures and macroscopic effects can be explained on the basis of elastic
energy minimization. Mathematically, the essence of the matter is the
minimization of nonconvex elastic energies with "multi-well structure. This
project brings to bear a variety of tools, many of them relatively new,
including relaxation of variational problems, the translation method, Young
measure limits, H-measures, and singular perturbations. Energy minimizing
microstructures can be viewed as composite materials with extremal effective
behavior, so methods from homogenization and the analysis of composite materials
are also relevant. The goals of this project include developing new mathematical
tools, and also applying these tools to specific problems from materials
science. One objective is to understand why some shape-memory alloys maintain
their shape-memory behavior in polycrystalline form while others do not. Another
is to explain experimental observations concerning twinning and hysteresis in
single crystals of CuAlNi.