* 9404077
* A Long Deployment Benthic Chamber Sampler to "Piggyback" on a Bottom Transecting Free Vehicle
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1996
* Timothy Shaw, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 04/30/1996
* USD 79,432.00

9404077 SHAW Temporal variation in the particulate flux to the deep sediment
community drives variation in benthic respiration and the deposition of particle
bound nutrients and minor elements. Particulate flux can be measured on a near
continuous basis with sequencing sediment traps. However, particulate
decomposition and the resultant benthic flux of dissolved species has been
measured only for brief periods seasonally in the deep ocean. To address the
need for more frequent measurements, a bottom transecting free vehicle "Rover"
is being built to collect near continuous data on benthic community oxygen
utilization. Complimentary measurement of the benthic flux of nutrients and
minor elements will elucidate the relationship between productivity and burial
for particle bound species. This project involves building a long development
sampler to collect and preserve benthic chamber sampler which will "piggyback"
the "Rover". The sampler will be made up of the controller and a series of
syringe racks. Each rack will have the capability of collecting and preserving
18 chamber samples in duplicate. The controller will have the capacity to
collect from eight racks. Four racks will be built for this project allowing six
collections each for twelve emplacements of the benthic chamber over a six month
deployment. This sampling frequency will allow a greater understanding of the
seasonal variability of the biogeochemical cycling of nutrients and trace
elements at the sediment water interface.