* 9404782
* Macromolecular Crystallography Course, Cold Springs Harbor  Laboratory, NY (October, 1994, 1995, & 1996)
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* James Pflugrath, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1997
* USD 45,000.00

9404782 Pflugrath The training course in Macromolecular Crystallography will
train 16 students yearly in both the theoretical and the practical aspects of
macromolecular crystallography through lectures and actual experiments. With
this training, students are then prepared to use crystallographic techniques in
their own structural biological research. Such complete immersive training in
crystallography is unavailable elsewhere. Four principal instructors along with
about 12 additional speakers give numerous lectures that guide students through
laboratory experiments and computations which ultimately lead to the complete
structure determination of an actual protein - the 129 residue hen egg white
lysozyme. Specific experiments are performed in protein crystallization, heavy
atom derivatization, crystal mounting & freezing, space group determination,
diffraction data collection & analysis, phase determination by both multiple
isomorphous replacement & molecular replacement, Patterson & Fourier transform
calculation, solvent flattering, anomalous scattering, phase combination,
electron density map interpretation, restrained least squares refinement,
different Fourier analysis and presentation of results. The instructors also
present structures recently determined in their own laboratories with an
emphasis on the methods used. In addition, students are encouraged to bring
their own protein and data to try out the techniques and software available
during the course. The course curriculum is evaluated and updated annually in
order to remain abreast of the latest development in crystallography. ***