* 9404726
* End to End Modeling, Analysis and Parallel Simulation of    Integrated Network Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 04/30/1998
* USD 145,834.00

The research focuses on an important, so-far, unresolved issue of end-to-end
modeling, analysis, and parallel simulation of Broadband Integrated Service
Digital Network (B-ISDN) architectures. ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode) is the
multiplexing and switching techniques for the B- ISDN architecture. The end-to-
end models to predict performance measures such as delay and throughput in order
to design an accurate admission control protocol for ATM networks are
unsatisfactory. They are either computationally too expensive (And thus
impossible to perform on-line in real- time) or too simplistic and inaccurate.
There is considerable room for improvement in accuracy, without prohibitive
complexity. Also the concept of `Quality Service` (QoS) has been trivialized in
most analytical results to be just the cell loss probability. Consequently,
results, e.g., in call admission and call policing, are primarily judged by
their effectiveness concerning cell loss probability. The introduction of
additional measures (e.g., delay and delay jitter bounds) will further restrict
the set of possible admissible traffic mixtures, and as a result, the often-used
linear call admission method (and the related equivalent bandwidth definition)
becomes insufficient. Hence, other call admission techniques may very well be
needed. The effectiveness of the call admission algorithms can be investigated
while utilizing results from end-to-end models. There is a need to exploit the
special control features that can be provided by an ATM network, such as the
allocation of buffers to connections in intermediate nodes, or the re-
negotiation of the traffic descriptor or of the QoS during the lifetime of a
connection. In this project an analytical method based on Pade Approximation is
used to analyze the end-to-end model for ATM networks. Also a fast parallel
simulation approach is used as a complementary technique. Note that the methods
can also be used as general purpose performance evaluation tools and can be
applied to a larger set of modeling problems.