* 9404421
* Ultrathin Films:  Growth, Structure and Strains
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,10/31/1997
* Franco Jona, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/1997
* USD 292,000.00

9404421 Jona Technical abstract: Epitaxial and pseudomorphic ultrathin (5 to 10
layers) films of (mostly magnetic) metals grown on suitable substrates will be
studied with quantitative low energy electron diffraction (LEED). The goals are:
(1) to establish the conditions for successful growth; (2) to determine the
atomic structure of the bulk and of the surface of the films; and (3) to
determine the strains and the equilibrium phase of the films. Some of the
immediate projects are: stabilization of metastable phases (e.g. face center
cubic cobalt, face center and body center manganese, etc.); growth and
characterization of shear-strained iltrathin films; and expitaxy of metals
(particularly magnetic metals) on semiconductors. Interaction with theorists
doing first- principle total-energy calculations of both equilibrium and
pseudomorphic phases will be pursued. Non-technical abstract: For a number of
electronic, magnetic and optical applications, modern technology requires the
use of thinner crystalline films, some only five to ten atomic layers thick. In
order to understand the properties of these ultrathin films, the first piece of
information that one seeks is the atomic structure, i.e. the arrangement of the
atoms on the surface and in the interior of the films. The present project has
three main goals: (1) to establish procedures for preparing ultrathin films of
scientifically and technologically interesting materials; (2) to determine the
atomic structure of the surface and of the interior of the films; and (3) to
determine the state of strains in the films. Many chemical and physical
properties of ultrathin films depend on the atomic structure and the strains,
and it is expected that this project could lead to the production of films with
novel and useful properties for electronic and magnetic applications. ***