* 9404548
* Multiple-Pulse, Single-Shot Femtosecond Spectroscopy of     Condensed Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Keith Nelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 05/31/1998
* USD 460,300.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. Keith A. Nelson of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology will engage
in a series of continuing investigations in the field of optical control of
molecular and material behavior, including structural and chemical
rearrangements in condensed media. These studies rely on the use of multiple-
pulse femtosecond spectroscopy at visible, near-infrared or near-ultraviolet
wavelengths. Shaped femtosecond pulse sequences are to be used to drive large-
amplitude vibrations in crystal lattices to enable the spectroscopic observation
of far-from-equilibrium crystal geometries. Additional work will concentrate on
the development of an automated time-domain vibrational spectrometer, the
manipulation of electronic coherences to observe coherent wavepacket dynamics in
electronic levels accessible only through two-photon transitions, and other
topics. The initial stages of the research will be devoted to the implementation
of improved methods for the generation, characterization, and amplification of
complex femtosecond waveforms. Current forefront research in physical chemistry
includes the study of molecular processes at ultra-short time scales that
correspond to the period of one molecular vibration ( a few femtoseconds). These
investigations have the potential of providing methods for the control of
molecular reactions and other dynamical processes, as well as providing optical
analogs of the nuclear magnetic resonance technique to study condensed phase
optical spectroscopy.