* 9405712
* Methodological Training in Remote Sensing and GIS for       Comparative Study of Farming Strategies Among the Kofyar    and the Tiv of Nigeria
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Robert Netting, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/1995
* USD 39,985.00

9405712 Netting Thiq project supports the research and training of a cultural
anthropologist from the University of Arizona. As part of a project studying
peasant agricultural production in Nigeria, the investigator, a senior
professor, will study the use of Geographic Information Systems, mapping
software, and the analysis of remote sensing imagery at Indiana University. The
research questions involve explaining how peasant farmers exploited a newly
farmed region in Nigeria with traditional hoe farming technologies, what their
economic efficiencies are, and how they maintain food self-sufficiency as well
as market production. The learning process will rely mainly on analysis of three
Landsat scenes spanning a number of years using ERDAS (an imaging software),
three series of aerial photographs from 1963, 1972, and 1978, and ARCINFO (a GIS
program). The integration of ethnographic information with remote sensing is
still experimental and innovative, rather than routine, for social scientists.
The training will take place at the Center for Training and Research on Global
Environmental Change at Indiana University. This project is important because it
strengthens the scientific expertise of American social scientists in this new
technology at the same time that the training involves dealing with critically
important research questions involving food self-sufficiency in sub-Saharan
Africa.