* 9405738
* Cytoplasmic Gelation and Cell Movement in Dictyostelium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1999
* Marcus Fechheimer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1999
* USD 450,000.00

9405738 Fechheimer Cell movements such as phagocytosis, chemotaxis, and
cytokinesis require precise control of the assembl of actin filaments into
either randomly gelled networks or highly polarized bundles. Formation of these
cross-linked actin structures is mediated by actin cross-linking proteins. This
project focuses on the structure and function of the Dictyostelium 30,000 dalton
actin bundling protein, one of eight actin cross-linking proteins present in
Dictyostelium. The binding sites for actin and calcium ion, and the parameters
controlling the formation of either actin gels or bundles will be investigated.
The molecular mechanisms by which the 30 kD protein is recruited to the
phagocytic cup during ingestion of food, the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis,
and sites of cell to cell contact in developing cells will be investigated. The
function of the 30 kD protein in cell structure and movement in Dictyostelium
will be probed using gene disruption by homologous recombination to create cells
lacking the 30 kD actin bundling protein. This work will promote our
understanding of molecular mechanisms of cell movements essential to the growth
and division of eucaryotic cells. Significance also derives from probing the
apparent redundancy of function of actin cross-linkng proteins. %%% Cell
movements, such as phagocytosis, locomotion, cytokinesis, morphogenetic
transformations accompanying cellular differentiation are essential to the life
of eucaryotic organisms. Actin microfilaments contribute to the control of cell
shape and generation of mechanical force for cell movements. The properties of
actin in cells must be explained from the structure and chemistry of actin and
the properties of actin binding proteins. The conservation of actin binding
proteins throughout the eucaryotes provides strong evidence for the significance
of these proteins as regulators of actin utilization by cells. Studies of the
structures and functions of these protein s will provide important insights into
the control of cell shape and motility in eucaryotes. In addition, understanding
of the molecular basis for actin microfilament assembly and organized supra-
assembly is a critical prerequisite to the exploitation of cellular structures
and biomolecular machines by materials scientists and nanofabrication engineers.
***