* 9405461
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Reaction Kinetics and     Structural Relaxations in Polymer Networks by Dielectric    Measurements
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Jovan Mijovic, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 08/31/1997
* USD 13,450.00

9405461 Mijovic This award supports cooperative research between Jovan Mijovic,
Polytechnic University, Brooklyn, and Francesco Bellucci, University of Naples,
Italy. The subject of their research is dielectric studies of reactive polymers
and polymeric glasses. The collaboration takes advantage of the respective
strengths of the U.S. and Italian researchers. Dr. Mijovic's expertise is in the
areas of chemorheology of reactive systems and structural relaxations in the
glassy state. Dr. Bellucci's research has covered the fundamentals of transport
of water, gas, and ions through various media, and the use of electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy as a fundamental probe of dielectric polarization.
Current interest in dielectric properties of polymers reflects their growing use
in printed board circuitry, electronic interconnect devices, microwave
assemblies for radars, solid state batteries and fuel cells. The principal
objective of the proposed work is to investigate reactive systems from the
moment they are formulated, through their reactive stage, characterized by the
formation of a three- dimensional network, and during subsequent behavior of
these networks in the glassy state. The concept of monitoring the entire history
of the network response in a system of precisely defined chemical composition,
from its inception, has not been explored. A comprehensive picture of dielectric
properties of reactive systems is expected to emerge from this study. * * *