* 9405248
* Primary Electron Transfer Processes in Photosynthetic       Bacterial Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Dewey Holten, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1998
* USD 414,714.00

9405248 Holten The reaction center (RC) of photosynthetic organisms is the
membrane bound pigment-protein complex within which light energy is converted
into chemical energy via a series of fast and highly specific electron transfer
reactions. The overall process separates charge across the RC (and hence across
the membrane) with an essentially unity quantum yield. The ultimate goal of this
research is to arrive at a comprehensive understanding of this process at a
molecular level. To this end, transient absorption spectroscopic measurements
spanning the femtosecond to millisecond timescales as well as other
spectroscopic techniques will be used to directly identify and study the
intermediate states of charge separation and the rates of their formation and
decay. These studies will be carried out on both wild-type RCs and a wide
variety of mutant RCs in which one or more amino acids are changed using the
techniques of molecular biology. %%% This research has broad implications that
transcend photosynthesis reasch. The investigations will impact on the general
understanding of electron transfer. The RC is in many respects a mini-laboratory
for the investigation of this fundamental process in view of knowledge of the
structure of the RC and the ability to manipulate and investigate the charge
separation events in detail. The studies will also address the role of the
protein in the energy conversion process, and thus will impact on the important
area of how the interactions between amino acids and the imbedded cofactors
influence biological events. This work additionally forms the foundation for
understanding and developing efficient mechanisms for the capture and storage of
solar energy. Hence, this research is important not only for understanding a
natural process essential for life on earth, but also for gaining further
knowledge in areas of broad importance in biologyand chemistry. ***