* 9405431
* Changes in Sahel Land-Surface Characteristics and           Climate Variation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Yongkang Xue, Institute of Global Environment and Society
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1997
* USD 190,000.00

9405431 Xue The climate in the Sahel area of Africa has been dominated by
drought since the late 1960's. A number of studies have shown that the land
surface-atmosphere interaction in the sub-Sahara region is very strong and that
the land surface feedback may have played a role in the Sahel drought. However,
in most of these studies only simple surface models were used and the results
were never verified against observational data. Two comprehensive surface field
measurements (HAPEX-Sahel and SEBEX) were conducted in the Sahel during the past
five years. These data sets will be used to validate a simplified version of the
Simple Biosphere Model (SSiB) and to create vegetation data sets for GCM
boundary conditions. In the calibration study, special attention will be given
to the realistic simulation of co-existing vegetation covers, which is one of
the manifestations of surface heterogeneity. The sensitivity of the land-surface
scheme to vegetation and soil parameter values will be investigated. This
calibration will help us to improve the simulation of the hydrological cycle and
the surface energy budget. The coupled biosphere-atmosphere model will be used
to study the roles of the surface processes and atmospheric dynamics in
determining the variation in the climate and hydrology of the Sahel. To
understand the mechanisms of land surface feedback, we will divide the
vegetation and soil parameters into several groups. The effects of each group
and their combination on the simulated climate anomaly in the Sahel will be
examined. The effect of heterogeneity will also be investigated. Based on the
results of the above proposed studies, two multi-year numerical integrations
will be conducted. The long term integration will allow more stringent
statistical significance testing of the results. The results from the control
run will be used to analyze The simulation of the annual cycle of water and
energy balances in the sub-Sahara area. the anomaly run, in which the land
surface in the Sahel is assigned as a desertification area, will be used to
assess the effects of the desertification on the regional and global climate and
hydrology during all seasons. Since this July 25, 1994 sensitivity study is
based upon comprehensive observational data, its successful completion will help
us in realistically assessing the consequences of the desertification in the
regional as well as the global climate, in particular the Sahel drought.