* 9405257
* RUI:  Approaches to Somatic Immunoglobulin Diversification  in Vitro
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Richard Goldsby, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/1997
* USD 179,921.00

9405257 Goldsby Diversity is the hallmark of the antibody repertoire, and
somatic mutation generates significant diversity during secondary immune
responses in mice and humans. The V regions of genes encoding immunoglobulin in
B cells undergo rates of somatic mutation as high as one base per thousand per
generation. This is an extraordinary mutation rate and corresponds to the
introduction of one new immunoglobulin mutation for every two cell divisions.
The mechanism underlying hypermutation remains one of the major unsolved
problems of immunology. The availability of culture systems and cell lines that
would permit the observation and study of this phenomenon in vitro would provide
a significant expansion of our capacity to analyze this process. Because the
ileal Peyer's patch (IPP) of cattle contains more than one hundred million B
cells and is the site of massive, developmentally regulated, extensive, somatic
mutation of Ig genes, it has been chosen as a target tissue from which to
establish in vitro systems that somatically diversify immunoglobulin V genes. A
variety of approaches are planned to optimize the in vitro culture of IPP B
cells, including the addition of mitogens and cytokines, culture on outgrowths
of IPP follicular "stromal" cells and the culture of individual IPP follicles.
The assay for occurrence of somatic diversification of bovine lambda V genes
will employ RT-PCR and single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) as an
assay. The development of a system that supports the transfer of this process of
somatic immunoglobulin V gene diversification from tissue to tissue culture well
facilitate the analysis of the dell and molecular biology of immunoglobulin gene
diversification. %%% A major component of the mammalian immune response is the
ability to produce a vast array of antibodies that are capable of specifically
binding a wide range of foreign substances (antigens) and facilitating their
removal from the blood. The range of s pecificities that the antibodies of an
individual can recognize is termed the individual's antibody repertoire. The
molecular mechanism(s) by which the vast diversity of an organism's antibody
repertoire is generated remains one of the central questions of modern
immunology. One of the major mechanisms that generates antibody diversity is by
a rapid rate of mutation in the genes that encode the foreign antigen-binding
portions of antibody molecules. The overall objective of this project is to
develop cell culture systems that will support the continued diversification of
antibody genes. This research will take advantage of certain unique properties
of the development of the immune system in sheep and cattle which suggest that
this project should be feasible. If this research is successful, the
availability of this culture system will greatly facilitate the analysis of the
cellular and molecular mechanisms of immunoglobulin gene diversification. The
research will be done at an undergraduate institution and will directly involve
undergraduate students in this cutting edge problem. ***