* 9405254
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Democratisation and        the Production of New Political Geographies in Bulgaria,    1989-1994
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1995
* John Pickles, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1995
* USD 8,500.00

9405254 PICKLES This research will investigate the production of new political
geographies in contemporary Bulgaria as that nation undergoes its transition
from state socialism. Key to these new political geographies are the changing
relations between political institutions, actors, and interests operating at
different geographic scales (national/regional/local). This includes the
distribution of political powers between national, regional, and local levels of
governance. Also important for the new Bulgarian political geographies are the
different mechanisms which are being developed at different spatial scales for
apportioning, legitimizing, and utilizing political power. Utilizing
ethnographic research techniques this research program will develop a detailed
case study of local government change in Burgas obstina (county), Bulgaria. In-
depth interviews, focus groups, survey research, and archival sources will be
used in the research. This research will contribute new insights into the
democratization process in Eastern Europe and will add to the literature in both
geography and political science approaches to democratization. As a doctoral
dissertation research improvement award, this project will also provide support
to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.
***