* 9405746
* Regulation of Nur77 Gene in Apoptosis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Astar Winoto, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1997
* USD 288,609.00

Abstract 9405746 Apoptosis or programmed cell death is a general phenomenon
which occurs in the development of many cell types in many organisms. Anti-CD3
antibody (antibody specific for the T-cell receptor complex) can induced
apoptosis in mouse T cell hybridomas and immature T cells form the thymus but
not in mature T cells from the spleen. We recently showed that a high level of
protein and mRNA of an orphan steroid receptor Nur77 correlates with the
activation induced apoptosis of mouse T cell hybridomas and immature thymocytes.
Introduction of a dominant negative Nur77 into T cell hybridomas protected the
cells from activation induced apoptosis. Transcription of Nur77 gene reflects
the apoptotic state of the cells; a high level of Nur77 transcription is
observed in apoptotic T cell hybridomas, whereas only transient transcription of
Nur77 is detected in activated growing T cells. Glucocorticoid can rescue T cell
hybridomas from activation induced apoptosis and at the same time, represses the
induction of Nur77 gene transcription. This effect is manifested through a
calcium ionophore responsive element, which is also essential in maintaining a
high level of Nur77 transcription during apoptosis. In this project we plan: (1)
To characterize this Nur77 promoter element essential for the sustained
transcription during activation induced apoptosis and responsiveness to the
glucocorticoid suppressive effect; (2) To perform in vivo studies of the
relationship between Nur77 promoter and apoptosis using transgenic mice; (3) To
identify protein mediating the Nur77 responsiveness to calcium ionophore and
glucocorticoid suppressive effect (protein X) and (4) To assess the function of
the protein X identified above in apoptosis and in T Cell development. The
findings should significantly enhance our understanding of the apoptosis process
at the molecular level. *** Programmed cell death is a critical part of the
development of multicellular organisms. An unde rstanding of the genetic
regulation of this phenomenon will allow more insight into the developmental
process as well as, in a more practical sense, the disease process which results
when cells do not die as they should. This work, to characterize a promoter
element involved in such regulation and to assess the function of involved genes
should contribute to that insight. %%%