* 9405605
* Periodic Gene Expression in The Mitotic Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Timothy Burland, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1997
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract 9405605 The naturally synchronous plasmodium of physarium will be
utilized to isolate genes whose transcript levels peak during the last hour of
the mitotic cycle. The cDNAs will be prioritized for further analysis. For
practical simplicity, initial priority will go to genes present in single copy.
Among these, top priority will go to novel genes, as estimated by partial DNA
sequencing. The complete coding sequence will be obtained for one single-copy
plasmodium- specific gene and for one single-copy gene expressed in both amoeba
and plasmodial stages. A genomic clone will be obtained for each fully-sequenced
gene, and used to disrupt the gene in order to determine whether its function is
essential for viability. %%% The major periodic events of the mitotic cycle are
DNA replication and mitosis. They must be regulated so that they occur
alternately and only once per cycle. Many gene products involved in this
regulation have been identified, notably protein kinases, phosphatases and
cyclins. Regulation is achieved by periodic changes in the activities of these
molecules, which can be achieved at the level of transcription, mRNA stability,
protein stability, association with other proteins, and covalent modifications.
This proposal focusses on periodic transcription, which for some genes is
crucial for proper regulation of the mitotic cycle Many of the genes involved in
mitotic cycle regulation may not be identifiable by classical genetic methods.
This proposal uses an alternative method to identify novel genes that may be
involved in mitotic cycle regulation. cDNAs for genes whose transcript levels
peak during late G2 phase will be isolated, using the plasmodium of the protist
Physarum polyacephalum as a source of transcripts to template the cDNAs. The
plasmodium has a naturally synchronous mitotic cycle, so that changes in
transcript levels are readily detectable. Moreover, the plasmodium can be grown
to extra- ordinarily large mass, providing a sou rce of transcripts at
precisely-defined mitotic cycle stages that will be used to template cDNA
synthesis. mRNA from alternative mitotic cycle stages will be used for hybrid
subtractions to enrich the cDNA library for clones representing periodic
transcripts. Once periodic cDNAs are identified, their copy number will be
determined, and further analysis restricted to single-copy genes. Next, gene
expression will be studied both in the Physarum plasmodium and in the Physarum
amoeba a haploid uninucleate cell similar to an animal cell. The cDNAs will be
partially sequenced to determine which are likely to represent novel genes.
Then, one novel, gene that is expressed only in the plasmodium and another novel
gene that is expressed in both amoebal and plasmodial stages will be fully
sequenced to investigate their coding potential. The requirement of each of
these two genes will be tested by gene disruption. Success in this endeavor
would create a foundation for identifying other periodic genes that may be
involved in mitotic cycle control. For such genes, the special characteristics
of the Physarum cell types would provide a powerful system for analyzing their
role in the mitotic cycle and the timing and mechanism of their action. ***