* 9405001
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Conidiation in Neurospora
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/2000
* Charles Yanofsky, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 500,000.00

9405001 Yanofsky Asexual spore formation, conidiation, is a common strategy used
by fungi for their dispersal and survival, and for other purposes. Conidiation
in Neurospora crassa is an attractive developmental process that we are
analyzing at the molecular level. Our major objective is to determine the
molecular mechanisms responsible for multiple signal reception and sequential
gene expression. N. crassa is a well-characterized, haploid fungus that has been
used extensively in genetic analyses. We will identify and characterize the cis
elements, trans acting factors, and regulatory events that are responsible for
multiple-signal reception, sequential gene expression, and circadian rhythm
regulation, during conidiation, and the stages blocked in various mutants. We
have isolated genes that are transcriptionally activated during conidiation,
including two that are involved in carotenoid biosynthesis. Some of these genes
are also activated by carbon or nitrogen starvation, or by light. One gene we
are studying encodes the major coat protein of the conidium. The regulatory
regions of these genes will be used as targets for reguatory investigations. The
significance of the many common sites located in the upstream regions preceding
these genes will be examined. Regulatory sites will be identified by mutational
analysis, band shift assays, and other procedures, including promoter domain
swap analyses. Initially we will exploit two important findings. First, a 400 bp
DNA segment of the region preceding the gene con-10 appears to be responsible
for repression of this gene's expression during mycelial growth. Second,
mutations at a locus we have designated rco-1 (for regulation of conidiation)
result in high level mycelial expression of several conidiation genes, and block
normal conidial development. Thus sites and factors involved in mycelial
repression are now available for investigation. We have cloned rco-1 and have
found that it encodes a homolog of TUP1 of yeast, a master regula tory protein
that mediates repression of genes concerned with a variety of processes. We will
characterize rco-1 in vivo and in vitro, and attempt to determine the usptream
site(s) that respond to RCO1's presence. TUP1 does not appear to be a DNA-
binding protein. We will attempt to clone N. crassa's counterpart of the yeast
gene SSN6, since SSN6 functions in a heterodimer with TUP1. One of the other rco
genes we have mutated may encode this homolog. We have devised an effective
strategy for cloning aconidial genes. We will apply this strategy to clone
several known genes such as fluffy, fluffyoid, acon-2 and acon-3, which, when
mutated, block conidiation. We will isolate other classes of rco mutants using
different selections. We have prepared strains that will be used to identify
genes and sites that are responsible for light regulation and circadian control
of conidiation gene expression. %%% These investigations should permit
identification of regulatory molecules that mediate reception of the various
signals that control conidia development, and should allow us to determine the
regulatory mechanism(s) responsible for sequential gene expression and light-
dependent circadian control during this process. ***