* 9405247
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Reconstruction of Late     Quaternary Climate Patterns from Lacustrine, Aeolean, and   Alluvial Deposits of the Salt Basin in West Texas
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Donald Currey, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 06/30/1996
* USD 8,000.00

9405247 CURREY In order to better understand the possible direction and
consequences of future climate changes, geographers and other earth scientists
must first identify and understand the dynamics of climatic changes that have
occurred in the past. Paleoclimatic changes can be analyzed through examination
of the responses of geomorphic systems, records of which are preserved in
stratigraphic records and other characteristics of different landforms. This
doctoral dissertation research project will examine environmental change during
the late Quaternary Period in the Salt Basin of western Texas. Deposits from a
number of different sites in and near playa basins that once were lakebeds will
be gathered and analyzed using a variety of dating procedures. Stratigraphic
sections beneath the floor of the playa will be examined to identify materials
contained within lake sediments, thereby providing evidence of short-term
climatic shifts. Peripheral sections beside the playas contain evidence of
aeolian activity in gypsum dune deposits. Other features along the playa margin,
such as spits and beach ridges, permit interpretation of deep-water lacustrine
processes. Further away from the playas, landforms produced by wind and running
water record variability of formative environments. Among the research
techniques that will be used to analyze materials derived from sample sites are
thermoluminescence and optically simulated luminescence (TL/OSL) dating,
radiocarbon dating, and stable isotope rate analysis. This research will provide
valuable new insights about the chronology of climate and landscape change in
the southern Great Plains. In doing so, it will further the comprehensive
picture of environmental change in North America in the wake of the last major
glaciation, thereby advancing understandings of Earth system history, a major
facet of the U.S. Global Change Research Program. As a doctoral dissertation
improvement award, this award also will pr ovide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.