* 9405926
* Connections to netILLINOIS - Phase IV
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Joel L. Hartman, Bradley University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 05/31/1996
* USD 423,681.00

9405926 Hartman Bradley University with participation and support from major
educational institutions and industry, and a strong working partnership with
CICNet, the state of Illinois Central Management Services (CMS), and with
considerable networking experience within its member shop, has developed a
communications network known as netIllinois. NetIllinois request support to
provide Internet connection to thirteen (19) Illinois colleges and universities
(Blackburn College, Carl Sandburg, College, Danville Area Com. College, Illinois
College, Joliet Jr College, Kendall College, Kishwaukee College, Knowledge
Systems Institute, Lewis and Clark Com. College, MacMurray College, McKendree
College, North Park College, Rand Lake College, Rock Valley College, Sauk Valley
College, Shawnee College, Southeastern Illinois College, Trinity College, and
Triton College) The requested connections will support connectivity to
netIllinois, CICNET, NSFNET, and the greater Internet. It will also provide
access to state, regional, and national computing resources and databases; and
foster communication and collaboration among teachers, students, scholars, and
researchers at these institutions and their peers within the worldwide education
and research community. The network will provide a consistent statewide
architecture for NSFNET access for a broad variety of entities engaged in
education and research. This cooperative network will provide gateways to
regional, national, and international networks and will be consistent with their
standards. It will further the institutions' work in enhancing the state's
economic development through a well-educated workforce, accessible training
opportunities, and research and development partnerships. Another goal of the
network is to facilitate collaborative projects and sharing of resources between
institutions, including those outside the state.