* 9405063
* Tres Zapotes Archaeological Survey
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Christopher Pool, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1996
* USD 71,152.00

Pool With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Christopher Pool will conduct
one season of fieldwork at the archaeological site of Tres Zapotes located in
Veracruz, Mexico. Although only limited work has been done at this very
important Olmec site, evidence indicates that it was occupied for perhaps 1,500
years and thus it documents much of Olmec prehistory. It contains at least 25
carved stone monuments, one of which bears the second earliest date in
mesoamerica and thus sheds light on the rise of this calendric system. Still,
little is known about the site. No topographic map has been published, the
limits of the site remain undefined and the distribution of residential
occupation and craft production loci across the site are unknown. The
relationship of the site to other settlements and to resources in its hinterland
are also poorly understood. Dr. Pool's research will help to remedy this
situation. He will conduct an extensive survey of Tres Zapotes and produce a map
of both structures and concentrations of surface materials. Lithic, ceramic and
other cultural remains will be collected to reconstruct chronology and to
provide evidence of activities conducted. The Olmec constitute the first complex
culture in Mesoamerica which, either directly or indirectly, gave rise to later
groups such as the Maya. Much of the basic structure of prehistoric Mesoamerican
cultures derives from this source and thus an understanding of the development
of Olmec civilization is extremely important. Surprisingly little however is
known about the Olmec and Tres Zapotes, because of its long chronological span
and its wealth of material remains, may prove a crucial source of data. Dr. Pool
envisions this first season of field research as the base on which a long term
project will, hopefully, be built. The data he will produce will be of
importance to a large number of archaeologists. Because he will involve many
undergraduates in the project, it will also serve to educate st udents in
science and encourage them to pursue scientific careers.