* 9405202
* A Graphical Experiment Specification Interface: A Reasoning Support System and Generator for Behavioral Research
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Kimberly Rodgers, PSYCHOLOGY SOFTWARE TOOLS INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/1997
* USD 299,223.00

This research provides the foundation for the creation of a graphical reasoning
congruent interface for an experimental authoring system that provides a
powerful, flexible, reasoning- congruent tool for behavioral researchers in
academic, commercial and clinical settings. The six objectives of Phase II are:
tracking the reasoning of behavioral scientists implementing experimental
procedures in the Graphical Experiment Specification Interface (GESI);
determining the effectiveness of goal-tree prompted support of experimental
problem solving; investigating methods to support behavioral researchers'
ability to use, conceptualize the debug code; investigating debugging aids to
improve experimental generation efficiency and accuracy; determining the real
time accuracy of device handler based timing across platforms; and researching
and prototyping specialized hardware for refresh rate monitoring,
luminance/chromaticity measurement, and electronic tachistoscopic display. The
project will develop a prototype GESI interface and carry out extensive
behavioral experiments addressing the objectives above. The tests and revisions
of GESI will evolve a new approach to authoring behavioral research that is
expected to substantially improve the efficiency, flexibility and accuracy of
behavioral research. The results will provide the basis for a commercial
authoring system that is likely to impact thousands of laboratories world-wide
within a few years.