* 9405780
* The Genetic Basis of Sex Determination in The Homosporous   Fern Ceratopteris Richardii
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Jo Ann Banks, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1997
* USD 351,450.00

9405780 Banks The primary objective of this proposal is to use a genetic
approach to understand how antheridiogen and abscisic acid govern the sex of the
gametophyte of Ceratopteris. At least some key regulatory genes involved in sex
determination have been identified by generating and characterizing mutations
that alter the normal sexual phenotype. A hypothetical model of how these genes
interact in a regulatory hierarchy has been proposed. One objective of the
proposed research is to continue with the genetic, morphological genes and
physiological analysis of these mutants in order to understand the wild type
functions of these genes and to further test and modify the proposed model of
gene interaction. %%% Gametophytes of the fern Ceratopteris richardii are either
hermaphroditic or male. The primary sex-determining signal in this and many
other ferns is antheridiogen a gibberellin-like pheromone that is secreted by
the hermaphroditic gametophyte and promotes male development of other sexually
undetermined juvenile gametophytes. The plant hormone abscisic acid blocks the
antheridiogen response. How sex is determined in plants is an important
developmental question whose answer many ultimately have practical applications
in agriculture and plant breeding. The proposed studies will provide a basic
understanding of the genes involved in sex determination, and will also be of
value in understanding how plant cells are coordinated to maintain a single
sexual developmental fate, and how the sexual developmental fate of cells within
an organism can change to adapt to changes in the environment. ***