* 9405356
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Human Disturbance and Site Factors Influencing Spatial Patterns of Forest Regeneration
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1995
* Randall Schaetzl, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 10/31/1995
* USD 8,000.00

9405356 SCHAETZL Studies by geographers, ecologists, and other scientists of the
complex dynamics of human-environmental interaction have tended to focus on the
initial disturbance of natural systems, but increasing attention now is being
given to understanding how the processes through which human activities and
natural processes relate during subsequent periods. The regeneration of forest
areas that have been cleared is one topic for which these complex interactions
are especially apparent. This doctoral dissertation research project will
compare patterns of forest regeneration in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan,
where dense forests were cleared by logging and fires in the late 19th Century.
Some of these areas have experienced active regeneration, while others remain
"stump prairies" that essentially are devoid of trees. The project will focus
both on the factors that have influenced this differential regeneration and on
the impacts of vegetative patterns on current soil- development processes.
Following identification of patterns of forest composition before clearance
through examination of General Land Office survey records, contemporary stands
of homogeneous composition will be mapped using aerial photography. Field
observations will be made in a sample of sites of forest composition, soil
texture, soil fertility, and soil horizon development. These data will be
analyzed along with microclimatic data and information from historical sources
to identify the determine how various natural and human factors influenced
regeneration processes in different sites. Analyses of relationships between
vegetative patterns and soil-development processes will be undertaken through
observations of the movement of selected nutrients through the soil in different
locations. This project will provide valuable information about the importance
of specific natural and human factors in the ongoing dynamics of change in
forested regions, and it will address import ant questions regarding processes
that alter the composition and quality of soils. As a doctoral dissertation
improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.