* 9405179
* Determinants of mating type in the oomycete, Phytophthora   infestans
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Howard Judelson, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1998
* USD 285,000.00

9405179 Judelson Loci determing the A1 and A2 mating types (sexual compatibility
types) of the oomycete, Phytophthora infestans, will be genetically
characterized and isolated by mapbased (positional) cloning techniques. P.
infestans is a destructive plant pathogen and a good experimental system within
the oomycetes, an important but little-studied group of diploid lower eukaryotes
that include many economically significant pathogens of plants and animals. In
preliminary studies, polymorphic DNA markers linked to the A1 and A2 loci were
isolated and their pattern of segregation analyzed in three crosses. Those
results suggest that mating type is determined by single loci determining the A1
and A2 types. The mating type regions segregate in a novel pattern reminiscent
of balanced lethals, as only two of the four possible genotypes are observed in
viable progeny. This non-Mendelian phenomenon may possibly address one of the
complications of determining mating type in oomycete fungi, which are diploids,
by eliminating ambiguous genotypes from progeny inheriting alleles from both
parents. Also, long-range restriction mapping using the DNA markers suggests
that the region containing the mating type loci has been narrowed so far to a 90
kb region. In the present study, after completing the genetic and physical
characterization of the regions containing the mating type determinants, the
mating type loci will be isolated by chromosome walking. Complementation assays,
using reliable transformation procedures that I have developed for P. infestans,
will ultimately prove that the loci have been cloned. In addition, genes
regulated during mating will be isolated to enable the future dissection of the
regulation of the mating process. %%% The subject of this project, the analysis
of mating type in the fungus Phytophthora infestans, represents an opportunity
to study an important aspect of the biology of the oomycetes. The plant diseases
caused by oomycetes are widespread, highly destructive, a nd very difficult to
control. Therefore, the importance of developing expertise in manipulating
oomycetes can not be overstressed. In the long term, these studies may have
significant practical applications. If the factors which control mating can be
identified, it might be possible to control plant diseases caused by oomycetes
by engineering plant defenses to respond to the mating hormones, or by
stimulating the mating cycle which effectively turns off pathogenic growth in
heterothallic species. These studies may also lead to diagnostic markers for
population studies necessary to assess strategies for controlling disease.
Studies in P. infestans will naturally lead to an understanding of other
oomycetes as well. ***