* 9405492
* The Molecular Code for Cooperative Free Energy Transduction in Human Hemoglobin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Gary Ackers, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1997
* USD 335,000.00

9405492 Ackers Previous work under this grant achieved a breakthrough in this
problem by developing strategies that resolve the functional energetics of
hemoglobin tetramers in all ten states of hemesite ligation, using non-oxygen
ligands. This has opened the door to obtalning previously-inaccessible knowledge
regarding properties of the intermediate species and their roles in the
cooperative mechanism. Work using the 2 analog cyanomet indicates that: (a) the
hemoglobin molecule acts as a three-state molecular switch to control ligand
affinity; (b) the intermediate state has a quaternary T structure and has stored
energy through ligand-induced tertiary structure changes; (c) this free energy
of "tertiary constraint" pays for the early stage of cooperativity prior to the
quaternary T~R switch; (d) the T structure can accommodate tertiary constraint
in only one dimeric half-molecule, leading to a Symmetry Rule for the quaternary
transition: T~R switching occurs when each dimeric halfmolecule acquires ligated
hemesites. In current work, we are extending these studies to mutant hemoglobins
in order to map the structural pathways of free energy transduction and to
establish the connections with oxygen binding. We shall use multiple
combinations of altered amino acid residues and ligated hemesites to determine
contrlbutions of local residue energies to the quaternary T to R switch.
Parallel studies will test the correspondence between cyanomet ligation and
oxygenation. This research will use a combination of techniques, including
quantitative low temperature isoelectric focusing and high precision binding of
oxygen. The results from this research will serve as a model forstudying
"molecular codes" in other complex regulatory protein assemblies. %%% The goal
of this research program is to determine the molecular mechanism of cooperative
oxygenation in human hemoglobin. We are attempting to decipher the rules and
energetic driving forces whereby the ten molecular for ms (each with a
structurally-unique combination of ligated and unligated heme sites) respond to
the interactions with heme-site ligands and with small regulatory molecules
including protons, chloride ions, and 2,3- diphosphoglycerate. ***