* 9405469
* Luttinger Liquid and Chaotic Transport in Wet-etched        Ballistic Gallium Arsenide-Aluminum Gallium Arsenide        Transistors with Multiple Gates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Sean Washburn, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9405469 Washburn The Principal Investigator will employ interlaced or
overlapping gates to govern transmission of carriers into and out of tailored
cavities etched into ballistic heterostructures to study a new quantum transport
effects. The two main targets of the research are (1) Luttinger correlations
among carriers in wires at low carrier density and high magnetic field and (2)
chaotic response from specially designed cavities. In both cases gates will
cover the entire device to aid in screening by the electrostatic potentials and
to allow control over carrier concentration. Separate gates will control
transmission coefficients in the probes feeding and sensing the wires and
cavities. This will allow, for the first time, individual control over these two
critical parameters, which in turn will allow more detailed exploration of these
two new areas of transport physics. % % % % The Principal Investigator build new
kinds of ballistic electrical devices where the electrons travel in perfect,
disorder-free crystals and collide only with features created by the architects
of the devices. The devices will allow more complete control of the electrical
parameters than has been attempted before. The devices will be used to
understand two newly discovered electronic effects of current and fundamental
interest to the physics community. The first is a subtle way in which electrons
repel each other in the midst of a sea of electrons that is confined so that the
electrons cannot easily escape the repulsive forces. The second is the chaotic
motion of electrons in situations where irregular orbits are possible. ***