* 9405024
* Center for Clouds, Chemistry and Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1994,07/31/2002
* Veerabhadran Ramanathan, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/2002
* USD 13,477,751.00

Abstract ATM-9405024 Ramanathan, V. Scripps Institution of Oceanography, UCSD
Title: Center for Clouds, Chemistry and Climate (C4) NSF's Science and
Technology Center for Clouds, Chemistry and Climate (C4) was established to
develop theoretical, observational and modeling bases required to understand and
predict Earth's changing climate as affected by clouds, radiation and
atmospheric chemistry and their interactions, be these a result of natural
causes and/or human activities. Although clouds are believed to play a central
role in regulating radiative heating of the planet and in governing trace gase
transport, they are poorly understood. This uncertain role of clouds is a
primary reason for our inability to make accurate predictions of global warming.
The Center brings together research groups in the United States and Germany that
have made fundamental contributions in the areas of the greenhouse effect,
atmospheric chemistry, climate, and global change. The consortium of
universities (UCSD, University of Chicago, University of Maryland, Oregon State
University) and research laboratories (MPI, Mainz, Forschungszentrum Juelich,
NCAR, Boulder) that constitute C4 will conduct on joint airborne and shipbased
measurements, global model studies, and analyses of satellite data in order to
document and interpret processes related to climate and climate change. Through
its research programs, and the exchange of data and scientists, the Center will
reach out to mission agencies and national laboratories involved in global
change research. The Center will help nurture a new generation of scientists
capable of addressing fundamental problems in global change. The Center also
collaborates with SIO's Stephen Birch Aquarium-Museum to establish a multi-
disciplinary teacher training program. The Center is located on the SIO-UCSD
campus with Professor V. Ramanathan as Director. Professor Paul Crutzen,
Director of the Max-Planck Institut fur Chemie, Mainz, coordinat es European
collaborative activities with the Center. Dr. Diana Baxter, Education Curator at
the Aquarium-Museum oversees the K-12 global change education program. Mr. Hung
Nguyen, Assistant Director, coordinates outreach and education activities.