* 9405684
* Collaborative Research:  Pacific Coast Campanian--          Maastrichtian Chronostratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Peter Ward, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1997
* USD 78,131.00

9405684 Ward We propose to investigate the biostratigraphy, magnetostratigraphy,
and strontium isotope stratigraphy of the Upper Cretaceous Rosario Formation of
southern California and Baja California. It has long been known that
macrofossils are extremely abundant from various horizons of the Rosario
Formation. Nevertheless, there has been relatively little study to date
investigating the biostratigraphy of these sections, especially outcrops exposed
in Baja California. We have identified three target sections located in Baja
California that hold the promise of greatly increasing our understanding of
Upper Cretaceous chronostratigraphy of the Pacific Coast. We have recently
discovered that molluscan fossils from these sections are composed of a mixed
assemblage of Pacific Coast endemics and Gulf Coast and European species. Of
greatest importance are European zonal index ammonites, recognized here for the
first time form the Pacific Coast region. Our target sections have already been
partially sampled for magnetostratigraphy. By integrating a more complete
magnetostratigraphic sampling with a revised biostratigraphy, we will produce,
for the first time, a first order correlation between Pacific Coast Upper
Cretaceous strata and the stratotype sections in Europe, and with Tethyan
sections of the Gulf Coast, Western Interior and Atlantic Coast Plain.