* 9405284
* Pattern Formation by Motile Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Elena Budrene, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Shiladitya DasSarma
* 06/30/1997
* USD 270,000.00

Berg 9405284 Under certain conditions, cells of chemotactic strains of the
bacteria Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium aggregate in spots or
stripes distributed in symmetrical arrays. Each aggregate contains a large
number of cells that have migrated toward a discrete locus in response to a
signal generated by the cells themselves. This signal is produced when cells are
suspended in liquid media and exposed to environmental stress, or to succinate,
fumarate or malate (intermediates of the tricarboxylic-acid cycle), or when
cells are grown in soft agar with one the these compounds as substrate. The
primary signal is aspartate, produced from fumarate and ammonia. A secondary
signal is glutamate, produced by an unidentified pathway. We propose 1) to
establish the general mechanisms regulating pattern formation, 2) to identify
the glutamate pathway, 3) to learn how these pathways are activated by different
kinds of stress, and 4) to learn whether aggregation has an adaptive value. To
meet the first goal, we will obtain a more quantitative description of aggregate
formation in liquid media, characterize different modes of pattern formation in
soft agar, including migrating slugs, map gradients of aspartate, and attempt to
construct suitable mathematical models. More broadly, we hope to learn how large
numbers of identical cells are able to come together in response to
chemoattractants to form multicellular bodies and symmetrical patterns. This is
a cross-field endeavor that links sensory transduction responses to stress and
secretion of signal molecules to the problem of biological self-organization. It
does so with a model system readily amenable to genetic and biochemical
manipulation. %%% Bacteria are the simplest free-living organisms. Species that
are well understood include Escherichia coli, that lives in your gut, and
Salmonella typhimurium, that causes food poisoning. Both cell types are motile
and can change the way they swim in response t o changes in concentration of
certain chemicals. We have found conditions under which the cells excrete
chemical attractants (the amino acids aspartate and glutamate). As a result, the
cells swim toward one another and aggregate. When cells are grown on a gel- like
medium (agar), these aggregates form a variety of remarkable geometric patterns,
which change depending upon the amount of available nutrient. If the nutrient
concentration is high enough, the aggregates behave like multicellular
organisms, moving over the surface of the agar and consuming one another. Can we
understand this biological self-organization in molecular detail? The answer is
yes, because we a dealing with a model system made of cells readily amenable to
genetic biochemical manipulation. This work links several areas of basic biology
of current interests, including motile behavior, metabolism, response to stress,
self- organization and pattern formation. ***