* 9405166
* International Postdoctoral Fellows:  Foraging Decisions of  Mammalian Herbivores:  Optimal Bite Size and Patch Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1995
* Lisa Shipley, Individual Award
* Fixed Amount Award
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/1995
* USD 28,220.00

9405166 Shipley This award is under the International Junior Investigator and
Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a ten month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Lisa A. Shipley to work with Dr. Per Lundberg at the Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences in Umea, Sweden. Their research is designed
to examine the question of predicting optimal bite size for animals of different
sizes based on tradeoffs between intake rate and nutrient quality. They will do
this by modelling the optimal bite size based on animal size, the relationship
between fiber and plant secondary chemistry and bite size or twig diameter, the
digestive physiology of the animal, and the relationship between bite size and
dry matter intake rate. The predictions will be compared with field and lab
observations of four free-ranging browsing herbivore species of the boreal
ecosystem of northern Sweden feeding in winter on dormant browses. ***