* 9405448
* Low-Frequency Variability of Troposphere-stratosphere       Coupling
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Xinhau Cheng, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 05/31/1997
* USD 223,792.00

9405448 Baldwin On timescales from a week through interannual there is
considerable variability of tropospheric flow patterns. This study will focus on
understanding how much of the low-frequency variability of the stratosphere can
be accounted for by stationary wave patterns in the troposphere. The general
approach will be to identify patterns in the mid-troposphere that are linked
with stratosphere flow. Particular attention will be paid to the possible
influences of El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) on the stratosphere that may
be communicated through modulation of the extratropical tropospheric flow. The
PI will use empirical orthogonal function (EOF) analysis and singular value
decomposition (SVD) analysis of the tropospheric height field together with
correlations, composites and spectral analysis to identify modes which, on
interannual and interseasonal timescales, seem to have a significant
stratospheric influence. The complementary nonlinear technique of cluster
analysis will also be used. A series of experiments using a GCM with simplified
physics will be used to study the response of the middle atmosphere to
tropospheric circulation anomalies. The experiments will be designed to
determine the model's stratospheric response to tropospheric anomaly patterns.
Comparing the response of the model's winter stratosphere with the resultq of
the data analysis should provide a valuable method of identifying the
contribution to winter stratospheric interannual variability from tropospheric
anomalies. As part of this study the PI will use gridded ECMWF data analyses in
conjunction with rawinsonde data, to determine tropical tropospheric horizontal
wave structure to better elucidate the different types of synoptic-scale
disturbances that exist in the tropical troposphere and their vertical coupling,
if any, to the stratosphere. The focus is specifically on organized, westward-
traveling, synoptic-scale waves in the tropical lower atmosphere that may be
involved in the excitation of Rossby-gravity waves. Disturbances in both lower
and upper troposphere will ne investigated, as will any vertical coupling
between the two layers. This research is important because it should enhance our
understanding of important climate processes related to stratospheric-
tropospheric dynamics.