* 9405135
* Symposium on Guided-Wave Optoelectronics: Device Characterization, Analysis and Design to be held at the Brooklyn campus of the Polytechnic Univ. on Oct. 26-28, 1994
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1996
* Theodor Tamir, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 01/31/1996
* USD 3,000.00

9405135 Tamir The Symposium will address the broader physical principles and
analytical problems that appear in the context of optoelectronic configurations
and materials. To achieve this aim, the program will consist of invited and
contributed papers, all of which will be presented in sessions without overlap
so that participants may attend all of them. One or two poster sessions are also
projected. The funds requested for the conference are intended to: (a) help
promote a larger number of overseas participants, (b) cover travel expenses and
waive registration fees of selected meritorious U.S. graduate students to
encourage them to participate at the conference, and (c) share in the costs of
printing a high quality volume of Symposium Proceedings. The emphasis at the
Symposium will be on composite devices using planar waveguiding elements that
connect multiple optical and/or electronic components in integrated or hybrid
forms. Topics to be considered include but are not restricted to: (1) Passive
components: filters, multiplexers, routers and splitters, (2) Active components:
tunable semiconductor lasers, wavelength converters and filters, (3) Modulators,
photonic switches and arrays, (4) Couplers and optical interconnects, (5)
Periodic structures: time- and frequency-domain analysis, and (6) Planar
components using nonlinear effects. Although listed above according to
applications areas, the authors of invited papers will be encouraged to avoid
focusing on details of very specific cases. Instead, they will be expected to
address the analytical problems involved in the broader classes of the
applications being considered. Contributed papers will be accepted for
presentation based on these guidelines. ***