* 9405939
* RUI: Consequences of Modernization and Changing Family Structures for Kenyan Street Children
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Lewis Aptekar, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/1995
* USD 51,028.00

9405939 Aptekar This research involves faculty and students from San Jose State
University in collaboration with faculty and students from Kenya studying Kenyan
street children. The hypotheses to be tested concern the nature of the families
of origin of the children and the relation between aspects of rapid social and
economic change, varieties of family social structure and economic base and the
existence of street children originating from these families. By studying these
issues in Kenya, where there are diverse family structures and different degrees
of involvement in formal sector economies, the research addresses the effects of
modernization on family structures and the relationship of poverty and trauma to
child development. The specific goals of this project are to define street
children by testing procedures to establish their number, age, gender, and
street culture in five different sites in Kenya (the multi-site project will be
proposed after this project ends). A multi-disciplinary team of anthropologists,
sociologists, psychologists, and education specialists from the US and Kenya,
with their students, will conduct ethnographic interviews with street children,
administer structured interviews and psychological tests and collect physical
and archival data. This project is important because any theories of why
homeless children exist in our own society must be tested comparatively to
insure that the processes thought to cause homelessness are truly operative
rather than merely correlating with other, unknown causal factors. By having
comparative case studies such as the present one, our understanding of why
children end up on the streets and our ability to cope with them will be
advanced.