* 9405619
* The Role of Proteases in a Signal Transduction Pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Robert DeLotto, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

Extracellular serine proteases are required in several signal transduction
systems in order to generate extracellular ligands. These include some
relatively well characterized systems involving EGF, TGF-a, CSF-1, and KL-1. The
proteases involved in these systems, however, have not been extensively
characterized. A newly described signal transduction system is one which
specifies the dorsal- ventral axis during the embryonic development of
Drosophila melanogaster. The available data suggest that at least three serine
proteases are required in this signaling pathway. This investigator is
interested in elucidating the role of these proteases and understanding how
their activities are regulated. These serine proteases are encoded by the
maternal effect genes snake, easter, and gastrulation defective. These proteases
are secreted into an extracellular compartment called the perivitelline space as
inactive proenzymes (zymogens). Activation of the zymogens involves a protease
cascade and the end product of the cascade is proteolytic cleavage of the
spaetzle protein into a ligand for the Toll receptor. This investigator has
developed a method of producing biologically active recombinant proteases; he
has set up several in vivo and in vitro assays for the activities of these
enzymes. The biochemical interactions of these components are fundamental to the
mechanism by which a signal is produced in the perivitelline space.