* 9405979
* Resonance Raman Studies of Electron-Nuclear Coupling,       Time Resolved Dynamics, and Magnetic Perturbations of       Biomolecules
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1999
* Paul Champion, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1999
* USD 627,103.00

9405979 Champion The proposed research will utilize resonance Raman scattering
and its time domain analog, coherent impulsive scattering, to probe the
electronic and nuclear structure/function relationships of biological molecules
such as heme proteins (myoglobin, hemoglobin and cytochrome c) and
photosynthetic systems (light harvesting antennae and reaction centers). Related
techniques, such as electronic absorption and infrared spectroscopy, will also
be utilized, and theoretical models that link a variety of experimental
measurements will be developed. Absolute cross- section measurements will be
used to directly extract the electron-nuclear coupling strengths while the
temperature dependence of the optical absorption lineshape yields the coupling
of low frequency motion and its role in damping. The studies of low frequency
protein motion will be complemented with ultrafast impulsive scattering
techniques, which allow real time measurement of such motion. Further
experimental and theoretical studies involving the spectroscopic and kinetic
effects of protein distributions are also proposed. Dynamic studies will include
the measurement and analysis of ligand binding and electron transfer under a
wide variety of sample conditions, as well as pump/probe experiments designed to
monitor protein folding and conformational relaxations. Laser mediated thermal
perturbations will be followed using Stokes/anti-Stokes Raman scattering.
Studies of dynamic processes induced by photoreduction and kinetic studies of
biological single crystals will also be extended. %%% The general scientific
objectives are to achieve a better understanding of the dynamics of motion of
large biologically important molecules and their absorption and resonant light
scattering properties. The aim is to apply this knowledge to elucidate their
mechanism of action. These studies are significant not only in their
relationship to the biological sciences, but also in their connection to our u
nderstanding of the interaction of light with complex material systems in the
condensed phase. ***