* 9405198
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Pedology and 10-Beryllium  Dating of Colluvial Deposits in the Blue Ridge Mountains of North Carolina
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1996
* Randall Schaetzl, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 04/30/1996
* USD 9,820.00

9405198 SCHAETZL As early as the 1880s, geomorphologists like William Morris
Davis developed and tested models of landscape change in the central and
southern Appalachian Mountains. Only recently have new approaches and theories
been used to interpret the complex intermixture of landforms in the region,
however. New methods for dating materials offer considerable promise for
developing a chronology of landforms and materials. This doctoral dissertation
research project will elucidate the geomorphic and soils history of the southern
Blue Ridge as recorded in colluvial deposits and associated soils from the
Little Tennessee River basin of western North Carolina. Sets of colluvium
samples drawn from carefully selected series in tributary valleys will be
extracted in addition to other data derived in the field. The relative ages of
the colluvial samples will be determined by examining soil morphological
properties, ratios of iron species, and rations of differentially weatherable
minerals. The samples also will be examined using relatively new dating
techniques that measure an isotope of beryllium (10-Be). Dates determined using
this method should allow identification of a maximum surface exposure age for
each sample, thereby enabling examination of the properties and evolutionary
histories of these deposits and relative soils in a more quantitative frame of
reference. This project will advance knowledge about geomorphological and
pedological change in the Blue Ridge province in the southern Appalachians,
providing a much firmer chronological context within which to examine processes
of landscape and soil evolution. In addition, it will explore the utility of
10-Be dating procedures. As a doctoral dissertation improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career.