* 9405631
* Temporal Changes in Permeability Induced by Seismicity
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Stuart Rojstaczer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1998
* USD 190,096.00

9405631 Rojstaczer This study proposes to extend work on the causes and timing
of temporal changes in permeability induced by seismicity. The research is
designed to obtain a more definitive understanding of the coupling that exists
between fault motion and hydrology. Such information provides constraints on the
time dependence of the hydrology of the shallow crust. The research also has
application to the storage of high level radioactive waste at Yucca Mountain and
to understanding the timing and location of major ore and hydrocarbon deposits.
Finally, it may also provide prehistoric information on the rupture cycle of the
San Andreas Fault. The project will examine: whether ground motion induced shear
stress is capable of generating increases in permeability near the San Andreas
fault; and whether the influence of seismicity on groundwater flow over geologic
time can be seen in the rock record. The field aspects of the research will
focus on the San Lorenzo drainage basin. This basin accounted for 35% of the
excess streamflow produced by the Loma Prieta earthquake (10/17/89, M 7.0) and
has already been studied extensively by the PI. Hydraulic fracture tests will be
performed in granodiorite on the edge of the San Lorenzo drainage basin. The
results from these tests will be used in conjunction with models of ground-
motion induced shear stress to examine the constraints on ground motion induced
permeability enhancement. These constraints will be used to test whether
permeability enhancement can explain the spatial patterns of earthquake-induced
hydrologic change in the region. Core will be obtained from the granodiorite to
a depth of 300 m for petrologic analysis of the calcite cement which partially
fills fractures. The influence of pre-historic faulting on subsurface hydrology
will be examined by analyzing the isotopic signature of calcite fracture fills
in the existing and newly obtained core. The research will be done in
cooperation wit h Stephen Hickman of the U.S. Geological Survey who will provide
all of the equipment and manpower associated with the hydraulic fracturing
tests. Funds for Stephen Hickman's portion of the project will be provided by
the US. Geological Survey.