* 9405282
* The Folding Mechanism of the Intracellular Lipocalins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Ira Ropson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1998
* USD 319,800.00

9405282 Ropson The purpose of this study is to examine the kinetic folding
mechanism of several members of the intracellular lipocalin family of proteins.
These proteins share remarkable structural similarity by x-ray crystallography
despite as little as 20% sequence identity. The experiments proposed here will
determine if proteins that share the same structure also share the same folding
mechanism, even when there are low levels of homology in their sequence. A
multifaceted approach will be used to address this problem on all levels of
structural organization. Stopped- flow circular dichroism will be used to
examine global changes in secondary structure during folding and unfolding. In
addition, for proteins in this family that have proton NMR assignments, backbone
amide-hydrogen exchange labeling will be used to determine when the specific
hydrogen bonds that form the secondary structure and stabilized during the
folding process. Formation of tertiary structure during folding will be examined
by monitoring tryptophan fluorescence and by site-specific labeling of the
protein with fluorine and fluorine NMR. This unique method allows the changes in
tertiary contacts at specific sites during folding to be monitored, both at
equilibrium and kinetically by stopped-flow NMR. Fluorine NMR has already
identified an unusual intermediate that has little if any secondary structure
for one member of the family, intestinal fatty-acid binding protein. This
intermediate is highly populated at equilibrium at levels of denaturant
sufficient to completely unfold the protein by other spectroscopic methods.
These studies will be extended to other members of the lipocalin family to
determine if the same types of intermediates are present on their folding
pathways as well. %%% The mechanism of protein folding continues to be a elusive
problem in biochemistry. It is not currently known how the amino acid sequence
of a protein determines the final structure of the protein and the structures of
the intermediates that might be present during the formation of that structure.
This proposal uses a variety of physical methods to determine the mechanism of
folding for the intracellular lipocalin family of proteins. The study of this
family of proteins will improve our understanding of protein folding in general,
and of -sheet proteins in particular, which will have benefits for the
production of improved protein products by the biotechnology industry. ***