* 9405953
* Frameshift Mutations in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Sue Jinks-Robertson, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/30/1998
* USD 277,863.00

9405953 Jinks-Robertson Mutations can be generally classified as either
spontaneous or mutagen-induced. While spontaneous mutations are considered to
occur in a random manner without regard to function, recent work has indicated
that adaptive, selectively advantageous mutations can occur as well. The focus
of this project is on the origin and nature of a particular type of spontaneous
mutation: the frameshift mutation. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae will be
used as a model system to study the generation of frameshift mutations in
eukaryotes. Frameshift mutations will be identified by selecting for the
reversion of a defined frameshift allele, the lys2deltaBgl allele. Preliminary
analyses have demonstrated that &gt;95% of reversion events correspond to
intragenic, second site compensatory mutations that restore the correct reading
frame of the gene. The lys2deltaBgl allele will be used in three interrelated
sets of experiments. First, the spectrum of random versus adaptive intragenic
frameshift reversion events will be determined by DNA sequence analysis.
Molecular data derived from this analysis may yield information concerning the
mechanism of adaptive mutation in yeast. Second, the role of the yeast mismatch
repair system(s) in the removal of replication errors will be examined by
comparing the frequency and spectrum of frameshift events in wild type versus
mismatch repair defective yeast strains. Third, the role of DNA polymerase in
generating frameshift mutations will be assessed using polymerase-impaired yeast
mutants. For the first set of experiments the lys2deltaBgl strain used in
previous adaptive mutation studies will be used. For the latter two sets of
experiments, a portion of the lys2deltaBgl allele will be placed in a context
where functionality constraints on the encoded gene product are removed. The
only constraint is that a compensatory frameshift mutation occur that allows
translation through the entire lys2 region, resulting in the production of a
full-lengt h, assayable gene product. This approach should allow saturation of a
defined region of DNA with frameshift mutations only, thus mimicking the
spectrum of mutations that would be seen if a frameshift-specific forward
mutation system were available. %%% The process of gene mutation influences
virtually every area of biological science. Mutation is the raw material upon
which evolutionary forces act and the existence of mutant variants made possible
the development of genetics as a discipline. Mutational analysis is an essential
tool in the repertoire of the modern biologist since it affords a way to dissect
complex biological processes. In this project the PI will continue her
investigation into the processes involved in the formation of mutations. ***