* 9405799
* RUI:  Specification of Meristem Identity in Pea             Inflorescences
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Susan Singer, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1998
* USD 215,000.00

Diverse angiosperm inflorescence patterns can be attributed to modifications of
a few basic plans. Some of these modifications affect genes specifying
inflorescence (I) and floral (F) meristem identity. Mutations of the LEAFY gene
in Arabidopsis and the FLORICAULA gene in Antirrhinum block or delay the I to F
transition so that the terminal (I-1) meristem initiates second order (I-2)
meristems rather than floral meristems. These mutants have developmental
parallels to Pisum sativum inflorescences where I-1 to I-2 to F transitions
reflect the wild type phenotype. A comparison of meristem identity gene function
in Pisum, Arabidopsis, and Antirrhinum will address how evolutionary
modifications can alter inflorescence architecture. The long term goal of these
experiments is to establish the genetic hierarchy regulating inflorescence
development in Pisum. This proposal focuses on three meristem identity genes:
(1) DET (DETERMINATE), which is hypothesized to be an I-1 identity gene; (2) VEG
(VEGETATIVE), which is thought to specify I-2 and/or F meristem identity; and
(3) PIM (PROLIFERATING INFLORESCENCE MERISTEM), which appears to assign F
identity. Using mutants of these genes, the PI will explore how interactions
between meristem identity genes regulate inflorescence deelopment. Interactions
with other putative meristem identity genes will be investigated. Image analysis
of mutant meristems will be used to ascertain if expression of meristem identity
genes and meristem geometry correlate. Finally, cloned Arabidopsis and
Antirrhinum meristem identity genes will be used to identify homologous RFLP
(restriction fragment length polymorphisms) sequences in Pisum. These RFLPs will
be mapped and tested for linkage with genetically identified Pisum meristem
identity genes. Homology will be further tested by transformation of Pisum
meristem identity mutants with Antirrhinum and Agrobacterium meristem identity
genes. Together the proposed genetic, morphological, a nd molecular experiments
will ascertain if (and how) similar genes can give rise to both I to F and I-1
to I-2 to F inflorescence patterns.