* 9405117
* Collaborative Research: Unstable Behavior of the Southern Margin of the Laurentide Ice Sheet & Implications for Ice Sheet Dynamics & Climate Change
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* John Jenson, University of Guam
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1997
* USD 59,311.00

9405117 Jenson Unstable ice-sheet behavior is now recognized as an important
characteristic of the Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS) during the last glaciation, and
it played a crucial role in forcing abrupt climate change in the circum-North
Atlantic region and perhaps globally. In this collaborative work, we propose to
evaluate mechanisms of unstable ice-sheet behavior based on the late-Pleistocene
sedimentary record of the Des Moines and Lake Michigan lobes along the southern
margin of the LIS. This behavior is far better documented by well-dated records
of these lobes than for any other sector of the ice sheet, thus providing the
best opportunity to explore mechanisms of such behavior and it relationship to
abrupt climate change. Results from this research will have significant
application to other areas where unstable behavior of the LIS occurred, but
which are less well-constrained by the geologic record (for example, Hudson
Strait). Models of ice-sheet instability thus far have treated the sources of
the instability as arising from internal ice-sheet dynamics involving saturated,
deforming subglacial sediment. The Des Moines and Lake Michigan lobes advanced
across fine-grained sediments that, when water saturated, would have deformed
under the shear stress applied by the ice. Additional studies, however, suggest
external (climate) forcing mechanisms for unstable ice- sheet behavior. We will
continue our collaborative work of integrating field, experimental, and modeling
studies to investigate potential forcing mechanisms. Our field studies will
center on those aspects of the sediment record that offer the most information
on subglacial processes with respect to mechanisms of ice-sheet behavior as well
as for comparison to modeling studies. Our experimental work will involve using
geotechnical analyses of fine-grained diamictons deposited by the lobes to
define the range in rheological parameters of different till sheets that are
needed in the co nstitutive sediment flow law we use in modeling studies. We
will use a one-dimensional coupled ice-sediment numerical model that integrates
results of experimental work to investigate mechanisms of unstable ice-sheet
behavior due to internal ice-sheet dynamics or external climate forcing.
Finally, we will focus on intercomparison of results from field and modeling
studies of subglacial hydrology, subglacial sediment processes, and sediment
transport fluxes.