* 9405489
* Geochemistry of the Belt Supergroup (Middle Proterozoic),   Montana: Paleoenvironmental Implications
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Timothy Lyons, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1996
* USD 100,478.00

9405689 Lyons The goal of the proposed two year study is to perform the first
detailed geochemical assessment of the Middle Proterozoic Belt Supergroup,
northwestern United States, with specific emphasis on paleoenvironmental
reconstructions. Despite its importance within the context of Precambrian
research, fundamental environmental questions remain unanswered. Previous
interpretations of marine and nonmarine depositional conditions have relied on
an ambiguous set of stratigraphic and sedimentologic observations, yet
geochemical studies that might provide new interpretive insights have remained
largely unexplored. These data will also directly address the resource potential
and the regional patterns of postdepositional alteration of a classic,
economically- significant Precambrian basin. Research plans call for an
evaluation of C-S-Fe systematics and C-O stable isotopic trends within organic-
rich shales of the lower Belt Supergroup and limestones and dolomites of the
middle Belt carbonate unit, respectively. Through collaborative efforts, this
study will be undertaken within a strict stratigraphic and chronologic context.
Although the C-S-Fe system has proven value for the interpretation of
Phanerozoic paleoenvironments, its potential for studies of the Precambrian has
gone virtually untested. The results of this study should provide critical
insight with regard to controversial Proterozoic continental reconstructions.
Furthermore, a carefully- defined marine end member within the Belt Supergroup
would permit a direct characterization of the chemical composition of the poorly
constrained Proterozoic ocean.