* 9405884
* Analysis of Floral Organ Identity in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1999
* Thomas Jack, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1999
* USD 315,000.00

Plant development differs from animal development in a variety of fundamental
ways. The flower of the cruciferous plant Arabidopsis thaliana is being used as
a model to attempt to understand the basic molecular mechanisms that control
plant development. In particular, the proposed experiments focus on the
specification of organ identity in the flower. Experiments performed in recent
years in a number of plant species, in particular in Arabidopsis and snapdragon,
have revealed that the genes that control the specification of organ identity in
the flower are highly conserved in different plant species. Thus, information
gathered about flower development in Arabidopsis is likely to be applicable to
other plant species. The experiments proposed here deal with the
characterization of APETALA3 (AP3), a homeotic gene involved in specifying the
development of petals and stamens in the flower. AP3 has been cloned and its RNA
and protein expression patterns characterized. The AP3 protein has a conserved
57 amino acid domain called the MADS domain. The MADS domain is postulated to
encode a DNA binding function, and there is evidence that AP3 binds DNA.
Elucidation of the biological function o the plant MADS domain proteins,
however, has been hindered by the lack of a biologically relevant target (DNA
binding) sequence. The first set of proposed experiments is aimed at defining
the sequences in the AP3 promoter involved in establishment, maintenance
(autoregulation), and ovule- specific expression of AP3. The second set of
proposed experiments is designed to identify genes that interact, regulate, or
are regulated by AP3. The genetic interactions of the suppressor and enhancer
mutations with both ap3 and the other floral homeotic mutants will be
characterized.