* 9405844
* Genetics, Mechanism and Regulation of Cellulose Synthesis inA. Tumefaciens
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Ann Matthysse, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* A Berry
* 08/31/1998
* USD 276,000.00

9405844 Matthysse It was propose to continue our investigation of the mechanisms
of cellulose synthesis by A. tumefaciens. In previous research, two operons
required for cellulose synthesis were identified and sequenced. In the same
studies, an in vitro cellulose synthesis system was also developed. With this in
vitro cellulose synthesis system together with mutant cells in the cel
(cellulose synthesis) genes, the role of each one of the cel gene products in
cellulose formation may be determined. By using the same in vitro cellulose
synthesis system and mutant collection, putative intermediates in cellulose
synthesis were found. The chemical structure of these intermediates will be
determined. In addition, cellulose synthesis in A. tumefaciens is increased in
the present of plant cells or plant extracts. The mechanism of this regulation
will be examined. %%% Cellulose, which is made by plants and by some bacteria
and fungi, is one of the most abundant biologically produced materials on earth.
It is a relatively simple molecule consisting of a linear chain of
beta-1,4-glucose molecules. However, the detailed mechanism of cellulose
synthesis is not well understood. It is not now known whether all organisms
which make cellulose use similar pathways, or whether there are different
pathways used by different groups of organisms. The regulation of cellulose
synthesis is also poorly understood. In this research project, the mechanism and
regulation of cellulose synthesis by a bacterium called Agrobacterium
tumefaciens will be examined. The advantages of using a bacterium to study
cellulose synthesis are that the bacteria are relatively simple and often allow
more easily for the determination of genes required and the individual role(s)
of the same gene products in a complex biosynthetic pathway. In an earlier
study, the genes for cellulose formation by this bacterium were determined. Now
with a collection of mutant cells and the development of a cell-fre e cellulose
synthesis system, it is hoped that the function of each one of the genes of
cellulose synthesis can be determined, that the chemical steps in the pathway
for cellulose formation will be identified, and that experiments can be
undertaken to begin to understand how the microbial pathway is regulated for
cellulose formation. ***