* 9405442
* Indole Photophysics:  Implications for Protein Studies
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Bruce Hudson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jack Horowitz
* 07/31/1995
* USD 24,000.00

9405442 Hudson The proposal study is an in-depth investigation of the origins of
the nonexponential fluorescence decay behavior of indole and its simple
methylated derivatives in fluid polar solutions. This behavior will be
contrasted with the dipolar relaxation process that is observed with viscous
polar solvents which can be distinguished on the basis of its characteristic
red-edge excitation behavior. Hypotheses as to the origin of this behavior will
be tested. These included a specific exciplex formation process and electron
ejection to solvating defects present in polar solvents. The data obtained with
a variety of solvents (including mixed solvents with variable composition),
variation of temperature, variable excitation and emission wavelength and for a
variety of indole analogs will be analyzed using the Maximum Entropy method. %%%
This project is a collaborative effort involving workers at the University of
Oregon and Professor Alex Demchenko of the Institute of Biochemistry of Kiev,
Ukraine. The funds requested are primarily for support of Dr. Demchenko's
effort. The benefits to our research, particularly his development of the red-
edge excitation effect as a useful diagnostic method, his knowledge of
scientific literature in this field available only in Russian and his
familiarity with the Maximum Entropy method of analysis of fluorescence data.
***