* 9405837
* Mixing Rules at Pore and Fracture Junctions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* John Wilson, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1997
* USD 153,700.00

9405837 Wilson We propose to use a mathematical model and laboratory experiments
to elucidate the mixing rule at the pore body or fracture junction scale.
Traditional models have assumed that tracers or contaminants entering one of
these junctions are either well mixed, or follow flowlines through the junction.
A cellular automata numerical model and a machined Lucite experimental
micromodel are proposed to investigate the hypothesis that there is a range of
mixing rules between these limits. The Peclet number would be used to position
in flow between diffusion control leading to the well mixed rule, and advection
control, with contaminants never leaving a flowline. A pore or fracture junction
Peclet Number is defined as the mean advective velocity times pore/fracture
size, divided by the diffusion coefficient. At high velocities and high Peclet
Numbers there is little mixing across the dividing stream line, yielding
advective control. At small velocities and Peclet numbers diffusion dominates,
resulting in complete mixing. We hypothesize that the transition between these
limits spans about an order of magnitude of Peclet numbers, and occurs near a
Peclet number of 1. Lattice gas automata (LGA) and /or lattice Boltzman methods
will be used to numerically simulate flow and transport simultaneously. These
methods work well for Peclet numbers near one, but a new algorithm has been
developed to efficiently model dilute solutions of non-homogeneous fluids in
order to economically vary Peclet number over a large range, while holding
Reynolds number constant. The experimental approach employs a Lucite physical
micromodels of a junctions, consisting of four intersecting channels. In order
to accommodate the expected range of Peclet numbers the low Reynolds number, and
reasonable experimental time constants, the channels and flow rates must be
quite small. At low flow rates and Peclet numbers the experiment is very
sensitive to leaks, temperature fluctua tions, and other problems. We built a
preliminary version of the experiment to elucidate and solve each of these
problems. The cellular automata simulations and the physical micromodel will be
used to explore mixing with different combinations of entering and exiting flow
rates, and with different junction geometries. We will then work with other
investigators to apply the rules to percolation network models of porous
systems, and various fracture network systems, to determine the spatial
distribution of mixing rules, and their effect on mechanical and macro-
dispersion calculations. Through collaborations we will simulate miscible
displacement experiments in the networks, with mixing, no-mixing and adaptive
mixing rules, to further investigate the range of mixing conditions.