* 9405347
* Improved Age Calibration of the O-25 Ma (Miocene-           Pleistocene) Geomagnetic Polarity Time Scale
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1998
* USD 210,901.00

9405347 Swisher This project is intended to greatly improve the temporal
calibration of the geomagnetic polarity time scale (GPTS) in the O- 25 Ma age
range (Miocene-Pleistocene). Currently, calibration of the GPTS in this time
interval is based on three radioisotopic tie- points; 2.8 Ma, 14.8 Ma and 23.8
Ma. We propose to obtain between twenty and thirty high-precision 40Ar/39Ar
dates for specific reversals in this time interval from a variety of lmcations
and geologic settings, including the Mediterranean, East Africa, Iceland, and
North America. This project is partly an outgrowth and synthesis of several
ongoing research efforts by the PI's whose integration will increase the
efficiency and timeliness of obtaining accurate radioisotopic tie-points will
produce, for the first time, a GPTS based on the highest quality 40Ar/39Ar ages
obtainable, one that is capable of rigorously testing orbitally- tuned time
scales beyond the Miocene/Pliocene boundary. This intercomparison will help
evaluate the causes and timing of global climate change, and will also be useful
in assessing the ages of 40Ar/39Ar ages obtainable, one that is capable of
rigorously testing orbitally-tuned time scales beyond the Miocene/Pliocene
boundary. This intercomparison will help evaluate the causes and timing of
global climate change, and will also be useful in assessing the ages of
40Ar/39Ar dating standards for application well beyond the time range covered by
this project.