* 9405972
* Characterization of Components Interacting with the Cdc42p  GTPase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Douglas Johnson, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9405972 Johnson The specific goal of this project is to decipher the molecular
mechanisms that control the cell polarity process in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Polarized growth in response to different signals during the yeast
cell cycle can result in the generation of several different morphological
structures, such as buds, mating projections and pseudohyphae. Three protein
components of the cell polarity apparatus in yeast were previously
characterized; the Ras -related GTPase Cdc42p, Cdc24p, which activates Cdc42p
function by nucleotide exchange, and Cdc43p, the beta subunit of the
geranylgeranyltransferase that regulates Cdc42p subcellular localization. These
components have conserved counterparts in other eukaryots, suggesting that
common mechanisms may exist. This project will use genetic and biochemical
techniques to identify new or pre-existing proteins that interact with Cdc42p to
control either its function as a guanine-nucleotide exchange factor for Cdc42p
or its localization and interactions with the actin cytoskeleton. %%% The long
term objective of this project is to understand the mechanism that control
cellular morphogenesis during the eukaryotic cell cycle. Cellular morphogenesis,
the process by which the complex, three dimensional organization of the cell is
developed and maintained, is crucial for the control of many cellular and
developmental processes such as the generation of cell polarity and cell shape,
the intracellular movements of organelles, and the polarized secretion and
deposition of new cell surface constituents. Microtubules and actin based
cytoskeletal networks play a critical role in cellular morphogenesis. In the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, microtubules are required for proper chromosome
segregation and nuclear migration while actin microfilaments are necessary for
polarized growth patterns. Polarized growth in yeast occurs in response to both
internal and external signals, resulting in different m orphological structures.
One of the goals of the proposal is to understand the molecular machinery that
controls these changes in polarized growth patterns. In addition, it will also
be determined how the growth of cell polarity is integrated with other cellular
processes, such as cell cycle control. ***