* 9405546
* Genesis of Metallic Mineralization in Continental Rift      Basins:  A Study of Sandstone-hosted Pb-Zn-Sr Deposits in   a Tertiary Rift Basin, Yunnan, China
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* J. Richard Kyle, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Hart
* 03/31/1998
* USD 110,000.00

9405546 Kyle The Jinding deposit in Yunnan Province is the largest Pb-Zn deposit
in China and the world's largest and geologically youngest example of the
"sandstone-type" Pb-Zn deposit. The overall research plan is to establish the
detailed geologic framework for the Jinding and associated deposits through a
combination of field and mine mapping, core logging, and petrology. Sections of
drill holes through the deposit have been logged and sampled to provide the
three-dimensional framework to govern petrographic and geochemical studies.
Brines have been collected from wells within the region for comparison with the
"ore-forming" fluids as evidenced by fluid inclusions in diagenetic cements.
Petrography will be used to assess relevant porosity and permeability
relationship of the stratigraphic section. detailed sampling will maximize the
results of geochemical and isotopic analyses. Isotope studies will include C and
O analyses of carbonates, S isotope studies of sulfates (celestite and gypsum),
and complementary S and Pb isotope studies of sulfide minerals. Sr isotope
studies will be made of major Sr-bearing phases (celestite, gypsum, and
calcite). The project results will make a significant contribution to the
knowledge of sediment-hosted mineral deposits, and particularly to our
understanding of the link between fluid evolution and diagenetic processes in
continental basins.