* 9405757
* Investigation of Geomorphic Processes Active on the Inundated Altamaha River Floodplain.
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,12/31/1998
* Leal Mertes, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/1998
* USD 281,039.00

9405757 Mertes The research will test working hypotheses on relationships among
the geomorphology of an alluvial of floodplain/wetland, geomorphic processes
active on the inundated floodplain surface, and the hysteresis between water
discharge and sediment concentration during floods. Data for the Central Amazon
River show that the conceptual model adequately describes the characteristic
patterns of water and sediment transport and the related patterns of erosion and
disposition during flood on the largest river in the world. The proposed work is
to test the conceptual model at a smaller spatial scale by collecting
hydrologic, hydraulic, and sediment transport data for the Altamaha River,
Georgia. The work is a step in a larger study to develop a physically based
model of the construction of landforms on inundated floodplains for rivers
across all scales. It is anticipated that the results from the Altamaha River,
with a drainage basin area of 35,200 Km2 will significantly advance
understanding of the hydrologic and geomorphic processes controlling the
development and maintenance of its floodplain and wetland. Limited water
discharge sediment concentration data for the Altamaha River indicate that it is
similar to the Amazon River, in that the peak sediment concentration precedes
the peak water discharge. One hypothesis to be tested is that the rates of
deposition on a non-channelized floodplain surface are a monotonic function of
the rate of water and sediment discharge supplied from the main channel. The
second hypothesis is that the rate of deposition increases at the crest of the
flood as the pressure distribution across the channel-floodplain boundary
equalizes. The third is that the rates and loci of deposition and erosion in
drainage channels shift from the upstream end during initial stages of inundated
to the downstream end during the falling -water period. Data from field studies,
remote sensing, and numerical simulations of hydr odynamics will be used
numerical simulations of the hydrodynamics of the field sites for floods with
different magnitudes and durations the hypotheses. The data from each source
will constrain the interpretation of the results from the other techniques.