* 9405432
* Mixed Ligation and Multinuclearity in Metal Sulfide         Complexes of Geochemical Interest
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* George Helz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1998
* USD 240,021.00

9405432 Helz Much current research is directed toward understanding the behavior
of trace metals in anoxic aquatic environments. These studies create a need for
accurate data on the stoichiometry and stability of metal complexes containing
reduced sulfur ligands. Many existing stability constants are uncertain at the
order of magnitude level and thus far less accurate than the field data to which
they are applied. In some cases, especially for polysulfide or thiol ligands, no
data exist. When data are available, it is often uncertain whether the species
described are mononuclear or polynuclear. This proposal request support to
continue research on the stabilities of metal sulfide and polysulfide complexes.
Our approach combines traditional solution chemistry and EXAFS spectroscopy. In
the coming three years, emphasis will be placed on (a) resolving the controversy
concerning the nature of arsenic and antimony sulfide complexes (while at the
same time exploring the possible importance of thioarsenic and thioantimony as
complexing ligands for metals like Cu) (b) developing a continuous flow reactor
method and applying it to extend previous work on Zn and Cd sulfide complexes
and (c) continuing current work on the role of thiomolybdates as geochemically
important ligands and determining the form of Mo in black shales. In the
experiments on Cd and Zn sulfides, the possibility of measuring surface energies
will be explored.