* 9405215
* Upgrade Request for the Triangle Universities Electron      Microprobe Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* A. Boudreau, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 07/31/1996
* USD 65,485.00

9405215 Boudreau This award provides 42% of the funds for the acquisition and
upgrade of a used electron microprobe that will be installed and operated in the
Geology Department at Duke University. The instrument will be added to the
microanalytical equipment pool covered by a Cooperative Agreement of the
Triangle Earth Science Micro-analytical Consortium, assuring that it will be
freely available for shared use by staff and students of Duke University, The
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and The North Carolina State
University at Raleigh. The upgraded electron microprobe system will be capable
of accurate elemental chemical analysis of major and minor elements in solid
samples with a spatial resolution on the order of micrometers. The electron
microprobe is a basic tool of geological research dealing with the chemistry of
earth materials and will be used in a variety of research and teaching projects
in the earth sciences. *** 9406684 Johnson This award provides partial funding
for the support of a technician assigned to the Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory in
the Department of Geology and Geophysics at the University of Wisconsin,
Madison. The technician will assist in the operation and maintenance of the
laboratory's equipment that includes a multicollector thermal ionization mass
spectrometer and associated instrumentation for sample preparation and data
analysis. The laboratory is a resource for mass spectrometric analysis needed in
research and teaching projects in the earth sciences by a large number of
researchers on-campus and off-campus. Research applications include work on
Arctic Ocean sediments, mantle geochemistry, volcanism, geochronology of
carbonates in the Michigan Basin and Wisconsin Arch provinces, and Archean and
Proterozoic granites. The technician will also participate in the technical
developmental work of the laboratory, including the development of new methods
for the quantitative measurement of the isotope s of hafnium. ***