* 9405325
* Function and Organization of Photosystem I
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Parag Chitnis, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 07/31/1997
* USD 270,000.00

Chitnis 9405325 Photosystem I, the light-dependent plastocyanin-ferredoxin
oxidoreductase, is a multisubunit pigment-protein complex in the photosynthetic
membranes of chloroplasts and cyanobacteria. Photosystem I contains at least
twelve proteins, 100 chlorophylls, -carotenes and a series of electron transfer
centers. To identify roles of individual polypeptides in the function and
assembly of the complex, we initiated a program to clone and mutate genes that
encode protein subunits of photosystem I of the naturally transformable
cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Our NSF-supported research has
provided insights concerning the functions of several subunits of photosystem I.
This proposal describes our plans to continue the investigations by focusing on
(1) role of the accessory subunits, PsaL, PsaJ and PsaI in particular, in
mediating and stabilizing assembly of photosystem I, and (2) mutational
dissection and biochemical analysis of the reducing side of photosystem I.
Recently we showed that PsaL is required for the formation of trimeric
quaternary structure of photosystem I. PsaL binds calcium ions which stimulate
trimerization. Site-specific mutations and biochemical characterization will be
used to dissect the structural and regulatory basis for the role of PsaL. We
postulate that the small (&lt;4 kDa) hydrophobic subunits of photosystem I
(PsaJ, PsaM, PsaI) function as 'nuts and bolts' in the structure of the complex
by anchoring and stabilizing other proteins. Characterization of our PsaJ-less
mutant shows that PsaJ is necessary for the stable assembly of PsaF, a lumen-
exposed subunit, and possibly PsaE, a peripheral subunit on the n-side. We will
examine the interactions of PsaJ by biochemical and mutational analysis. We will
also generate mutants lacking PsaI and further test our hypothesis. The terminal
reduction reaction of photosystem I involves electron transfer from the reducing
site on the complex to ferredoxin. The reducing site on photosyst em I consists
of surface-exposed domains of PsaD, PsaE, and PsaC subunits. PsaD and PsaE are
required for reduction of ferredoxin and therefore form essential topological
components of the docking site where ferredoxin interacts and accepts electrons
from PsaC. We have identified the solvent-exposed regions of PsaD on the basis
of protease accessibility and labeling with NHS-biotin. Site-specific mutations
in these domains will be used to identify residues that interact with
ferredoxin. Physiological, biochemical and spectroscopic analyses will be
conducted to investigate roles of mutations in specific subunits onthe assembly
and function of photosystem I. %%%Photosynthesis is the major source of
biological energy and oxygen on the earth. Betterunderstanding of this process
is essential for facing the food and environmental challenges of the future.
Photosynthesis requires coordinated and efficient functioning of membrane-
embedded andsoluble enzymes in cyanobacteria and plants. Photosystem I is one of
two pigment-proteincomplexes in the photosynthetic membranes, that can utilize
light energy to produce high-energybiochemicals. Photosystem I contains at least
eleven proteins, 100 chlorophylls, -carotenes and series of electron transfer
centers. The long-term research objective of our research is to determine the
roles of different proteins of photosystem I in its function and organization.
We initiated a program to genetically manipulate photosystem I of a naturally
transformable cyanobacterium that is easily amenable to genetic engineering. Our
NSF-supported research has provided insights concerning the functions of several
photosystem I proteins. We plan to continue these investigations by focusing on
how these proteins mediate and stabilize the assembly of photosystem I. We will
also study the role of photosystem I proteins in the transfer of electrons from
photosystem I to soluble proteins. An interdisciplinary approach that uses
molecular genetics, physiology , biochemistry and biophysics will lead to a
better understanding of how light energy is utilized by plants to generate
chemical energy. ***