* 9405737
* GRGC: Modeling and Validating Cretaceous Climate and        Ocean Circulation Based on New Boundary Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* William Hay, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1998
* USD 210,000.00

19405737 Hay It has been common practice to run an atmospheric (AGCM) or oceanic
(OGCM) general circulation model and search for results that might be confirmed
or rejected by geologic data. AGCM output describes average conditions over
large areas, but the non-marine geologic deposits providing the best record of
climate were rarely laid down under average conditions. This mismatch between
the model results and the geologic data that might be used for their validation
has been a major problem in paleoclimate studies. A new AGCM, GENESIS, designed
specifically for paleoclimate research, and a new method for validating the
results of a paleoclimate model, the Proxy Formation Model (PFM), can be used
together to make more realistic simulations that can be validated by comparison
with real data. A validated AGCM can then be used to drive an OGCM to
investigate circulation of the ocean. GENESIS began as a heavily modified
version of CCM1 and differs from it in treatment of water vapor transport,
atmospheric convection from the earth's surface, solar radiation related to
aerosols, cloud parameterization, vegetation, soil, snow and sea ice. Its ocean
is a slab, with heat capacity and ocean heat transport included. GENESIS has
independent AGCM and surface grids, allowing for much better representation of
surface paleogeographic, vegetation, and soil conditions. The PFM is a
quantitative link between climate model data and geologic observations. PFM's
are being developed for sedimentary deposits that form under known climatic
conditions. 1) evaporites; 2) bauxites and laterites; 3) coal (peat). The PFM
prescribes boundary conditions that must have existed at the location where the
deposits occur. This additional "grid point" is inserted into the climate model,
and the calculated environmental parameters (temperature, humidity, etc.) are
compared with conditions required for formation of the deposit. Under this
proposal, we will develop 4 additional PFM's : 1) sand deserts; 2) coastal sea
ice; 3) mountain glaciers; 4) ice sheets. The climates of the Early and Late
Cretaceous were different from each other and both were different from Late
Cenozoic climates. In the Early Cretaceous there was high-latitude sea ice,
strong mid- latitude seasonality, and a tendency for the "Atlantic" to become
anoxic. In the Late Cretaceous there was no high-latitude ice, less seasonality,
and a more oxic ocean (with two brief notable exceptions). The differences were
a response to changing boundary conditions: 1) from isolation of the western
Tethys-Atlantic-Indian seaway from the eastern Tethys-Panthalassic Ocean during
the Early Cretaceous to more open connections in the Late Cretaceous: 2) rise in
the atmospheric content of CO2 from a lower level in the Early Cretaceous to a
high level in the Late Cretaceous: 3) increase in poleward ocean heat transport
form a low level during the Early Cretaceous to a high level in the Late
Cretaceous: and 4) rise of sea level to a mximum in the Late Cretaceous. The
paleogeography, paleoclimatology energy balance of the Earth in the Cretaceous
are well enough known to run AGCM's and subsequently OGCM's that can be
rigorously validated using PFM's based on geologic data.