* 9405941
* RUI: Carbon Encapsulated Magnetic Particles
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Kiumars Parvin, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 04/30/1998
* USD 284,319.00

9405941 Parvin This research emphasizes synthesis purification, magnetic
extraction, and structural and magnetic characterization of carbon- encapsulated
materials. The carbon-encapsulated particles of magnetic alloys (iron-transition
metal alloys, cobalt-transition metal alloys, nickel-transition metal alloys,
and iron-rich rare earth alloy R2Fe17, where R is a rare earth element) are
synthesized in a standard fullerene arc chamber. An efficient method extracts
the magnetic particles from nonmagnetic species using interaction of magnetic
moments with a magnetic field gradient. Characterization includes particle size
distribution analysis using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), compositional
and structural characterization using transmission electron microscopy (TEM),
and x-ray diffraction analysis (XRD). The magnetic nature of the materials is
studied using direct measurements of the magnetic moment of the particles over a
wide range of temperature and magnetic field. Additional information concerning
the magnetic nature of the iron-containing samples is determined in a series of
Mossbauer spectroscopy measurements. This grant is a collaborative research
project involving San Jose State University, SRI International, and E.I. duPont
de Nemours. SRI international is the site for synthesis, purification, and
magnetic extraction of the materials and XRD studies. SEM and TEM work is done
at DuPont, and magnetometry and Mossbauer spectroscopy is carried out at San
Jose State University. %%% Such materials are of interest because they combine
corrosion protection from the closed carbon polyhedra and desirable
ferromagnetic properties that can be tailored by the choice of particles to be
encapsulated and the processing conditions. ***