* 9405075
* Field Measurement and Theoretical Study of the Fractal      Properties of Hydraulic Conductivity
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Fred Molz, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/1997
* USD 255,440.00

19405075 Molz During the past decade, interest in the use of fractal concepts to
describe various phenomena in the Earth Sciences, including subsurface
hydrology, has been increasing. It has become apparent that many, if not most,
porous media posses a hierarchical structure. It is not clear how classical
transport theory based on the concept of a representative elementary volume
should be applied at the vastly different scales of interest in such natural
media. While it is not known how the term "hierarchical structure" should be
defined, there is experimental evidence that the hierarchical structure of the
three-dimensional hydraulic conductivity function exhibits the spatial structure
of certain self-affine, stochastic fractals called Gaussian noise (fGn) and
fractional Brownian motion (fBm). This work would develop a fractal-based method
for constructing three-dimensional distributions of field-measured K from a
limited number of measurements. Three dimensional horizontal K distributions
will be obtained at a variety of field sites using the new electromagnetic (EM)
borehole flowmeter. Data sets will then be analyzed for the presence of fGn/fBm
using rescaled range analysis. This will be followed by the generation of
stochastic K interpolations and a study of the distribution properties using
modern computer graphics. Finally, an attempt will be made to relate the
potential fractal properties of natural porous media to the physics of the
probably chaotic processes that determine the property distributions of
sediments. From an aquifer transport viewpoint, K is the single most important
property function. For any particular aquifer, K varies over one or more orders
of magnitude and is highly heterogeneous. Yet making sense of the K distribution
is often a prerequisite to understanding the pattern of contaminant migration in
polluted aquifers. A tremendous amount of money is spent attempting to
characterize aquifers using tools that are not adequate to the task. The
proposed work has the potential to lead to the development of new theoretical
tools and practical insights that could contribute significantly to the long-
term solution of subsurface contamination problems. It will have the potential
to establish a new practical framework for transport phenomena at a variety of
scales in natural porous media.