* 9405361
* The Flavonal Signal in Pollen Germination: Biochemical and Molecular Characterization
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1999
* Loverine Taylor, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1999
* USD 304,925.00

Flavonols are required for successful fertilization in maize and petunia. Pollen
lacking flavonols is unable to produce a functional pollen tube, but this defect
can be reversed and pollen function "rescued" by the timely application of
kaempferol, a flavonol aglycone. Biochemical complementation of mature petunia
pollen is achieved: (1) at pollination by wild type stigma exudate; (2) by
adding powdered kaempferol to the stigma or pollen at pollination; and (3) by
supplementing pollen with flavonol aglycones in vitro. The last method forms the
basis of a sensitive bioassay used to identify compounds that induce pollen
germination. It also provides a model system for a focused and systematic
investigation of flavonol-stimulated pollen germination. This investigator
proposes to combine biochemical and molecular approaches to characterize
flavonol synthesis in developing anthers, the subsequent metabolic fate of
flavonols during pollen germination, and the genes that respond to the flavonol
stimulus. This information is crucial to understanding how small, planar
molecules stimulate pollen germination. An understanding of the factors
regulating fertilization in higher plants is of interest not only in terms of
reproductive biology, but can lead to the mechanisms to regulate fertility and
fecundity.