* 9405058
* ES Postdoctoral Associate:                                  Image Compression and the Evaluation of Quality
* CSE,EIA
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Robert Gray, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 10/31/1996
* USD 40,200.00

9405058 Gray Lossy image compression methods, useful for cost and time
efficiency of image storage and communication, imperfectly reconstruct the
original image. Evaluating the resulting image quality is important and complex.
Recent algorithms perform simultaneous compression and classification,
presenting a further challenge for determining image quality. Quality is
typically quantified subjectively by statistical analyses of viewer ratings, and
objectively by signal-to-noise ratios, or by simulation of the actual use of the
images. As gathering viewers scores of simulating actual use is an expensive and
time-consuming endeavor, it is desirable to find computable measures of image
quality that strongly correlate with or accurately predict the more expensive
quality measures. Better computable distortion measures will permit better
screening of candidate coding techniques and may provide improved code designs
by incorporating them into the optimization algorithms used to design the codes.
The research would seek to develop statistical methods to quantify the
usefulness of computable measures of image quality in predicting the expensively
obtained measures from human observers. The methods would be based on fitting
general linear models, and evaluating significance using modern computer-
intensive statistical sample reuse techniques. Variations on a variety of
perceptually based computable measures and compare their predictive power will
be implemented. These computable measures of distortion and statistical
techniques could then be applied both for the evaluation of and design
optimization of vector quantization algorithms for compression and joint
compression/classification currently being developed. ***