* 9405177
* A Study of Weak Hydrogen Bonds by Matrix Isolation and ab   initio Calculations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Allan Headley, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/1996
* USD 49,000.00

9405177 Headley The hydrogen bond basicity ability of structurally different
sulfides will be determined in an Argon matrix and from theoretical
calculations. From infrared spectra of selected sulfur bases and 4-fluorophenol,
the vibrational modes of the hydrogen bonded complexes will be assigned based on
comparisons of the spectra of deuterated and undeuterated complexes. The
relative wave number displacements (DnO-H) for the O-H stretching of
4-fluorophenol caused by a hydrogen bond to the sulfides will be used to
represent the hydrogen-bond basicity of structurally different sulfides. Ab
initio molecular orbital calculations will be used to predict spectra for the
hydrogen bonded complexes after calibration to experimental data. This grant
from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of Professor Alan Headley at
Texas Tech University. Hydrogen bonds are weak bonds that form between a basic
atom and a proton donor. This type of bonding is considerable importance in
molecules of biological interest. In this research project, hydrogen bonding
between sulfur atoms and a proton donor will be studied by infrared spectroscopy
in conjunction with theoretical calculations. A hydrogen-bond basicity scale
will be determine for various sulfur containing groups in molecules.