* 9406576
* CAA:  Isotopic Investigation of the Ages and Origins of     Volcanic Successions of the Coastal Maine Volcanic Belt
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Sheila Seaman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/1996
* USD 40,000.00

9406576 Seaman This proposal to the Career Advancement Program represents a
redirection in the PI's research toward the application of isotopic and rare
earth element analyses to problems involving the origin of magmas. In the past
she has focused on interaction between magmas within plutons and volcanic
terranes, and has used textural relationships to evaluate mixing an mingling of
magmas as processes to produce compositional diversity. The use of isotopic data
will allow her to focus on larger scale, more tectonic problems of mechanisms of
melt genesis in extensional and compressional settings and the physical means of
producing a magma chamber. She intends to use isotopic and rare earth element
analyses for modelling igneous systems and studying tectonic problems through
magma genesis well into the future. The proposed research is on the timing of
Acadian magmatism and on the origin of bimodal volcanic rocks of the coastal
volcanic belt of Maine. These rocks provide an ideal research problem for age
and source material determination, and for rare earth element analysis. This
work will use U-Pb dating of zircons to date four volcanic successions of the
coastal Maine volcanic province and use Nd and Pb isotopic analyses and ICP-MS
analyses to complement existing field work, and major and trace element analyses
to constrain the origin of the materials involved in the genesis of the magmas
represented in these successions.