* 9406964
* Comparative Methods and Phylogenetic Analysis Techniques
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Emilia Martins, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 07/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9406964 Martins Comparative data are used in many areas of biology to infer the
history of phenotypic characters such as behavior, life histories or physiology
for which direct evidence from the fossil record is rare. Comparative data are
also used when researchers infer the behavior and physiology of humans from that
of animal models or search for general patterns that are true for diverse groups
of organisms. In the last few years, a number of problems have been pointed out
regarding the design of comparative experiments and the statistical analysis of
the resulting data. A number of solutions have been proposed to address those
problems. Most of these solutions were derived from phylogenetic (genealogical)
reconstruction methods, and all involve ways in which phylogenies can be
incorporated into the analysis of comparative data. These phylogenetic analysis
techniques (PATs) are particularly useful in describing how to infer phenotypic
change from the information found in living species. Because of the basic
statistical problems involved, PATs are also important in all comparative
studies whether or not explicitly historical questions are being asked and will
eventually be used by researchers in almost all areas of biology. As most PATs
were only developed during the last decade, however, many of the statistical
issues underlying the incorporation of history into interspecific studies have
not yet been addressed and it is often difficult to find computer programs to
conduct the analyses. The current study proposes to use a combination of
theoretical, computer simulation and applied techniques to alleviate many of
these problems. Theoretical approaches will be used to develop phylogenetic
techniques tthat incorporate within-species variability into the analyses, allow
for consideration of both continuous and categorical variables, include
estimators for the possible actions of natural selection, and consider the
interactions between phenotypic traits and the environments in which th ey are
observed. Computer simulation will be used to explore issues in the design of
comparative studies such as which species should be sampled, and to make
recommendations about the choice of available techniques to analyze categorical
variables. During this process, a large package of computer programs will also
be produced that is user-friendly, available for all standard operating systems,
and includes a detailed manual and on-line help systems. These programs will
help to make phylogenetic analysis techniques available and accessible to all
comparative biologists.