* 9406115
* Acquisition of A SQUID Magnetometer
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Chia-Ling Chien, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/1995
* USD 81,000.00

Funds are requested for the acquisition of a SQUID magnetometer to conduct a
variety of research projects in superlattices, multilayers, granular solids,
metastable alloys, low dimensional quantum magnets, and other systems with low-
dimensional magnetic and superconducting entities, funded by the NSF. These
samples will be fabricated by multisource advanced sputter deposition, molecular
beam epitaxy and single crystal growth. These systems are designed to reveal
finite-size effects and dimensional crossover in magnetic and superconducting
systems with various correlation lengths. The realization and the origin of
magnetic surface anisotropy and perpendicular magnetization will be
investigated. Surface and interfacial magnetism of a variety of heterostructures
and superlattices grown by MBE will be studied. In superconductor/magnetic
multilayers, experiments are proposed to investigate the relationship between
the effects on superconductivity and the magnetic ordering and conductivity of
the magnetic layers. A number of metastable solid systems will be studied in
order to reveal new properties in structures unattainable by conventional
methods. Low dimensional antiferromagnets provide unique opportunities to
explore quantum many-body effects. Various issues of the giant magneto-transport
properties in granular magnetic systems will be explored. These are problems of
fundamental interest, many of them having important technological implications.
In all these studies, a high sensitivity SQUID magnetometer with low- field and
variable frequency capabilities is imperative. Funds are requested for the
acquisition of a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID)
magnetometer, the most sensitive type of magnetometers, to conduct a variety of
research projects in superlattices, multilayers, granular solids, metastable
alloys, low dimensional quantum magnets, and other systems with low-dimensional
magnetic and superconducting entities, funded by the NSF. These a re problems of
fundamental interest, many of them having important technological applications,
such as magnetic recording media, field-sensing elements in magnetic recording
heads, and superconducting devices.