* 9406722
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Reconfigurations of the    Commons -- Equity, Property Regimes, and Environmental      Change in the Liangshan Mountains of China, 1930-1990
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Roger Kasperson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 07/31/1996
* USD 8,500.00

9406722 KASPERSON Equity concerns play an important role in the formation of
rule structures which govern environmental management institutions. Yet how
equity considerations influence institutional development, and thus specific
patterns of environmental and social outcomes, is a largely underdeveloped arena
of research. This project will study how equity concerns enter into the
structure and performance of an institutional format that has long been utilized
for managing common-pool resources, namely common property resource management
systems. The study will first examine how three types of equity conceptions
(procedural, distributive, and redistributive) are embodied in the formation and
operation of rule structures governing natural resource property regimes.
Second, an analysis of how the resultant property regimes produce specific
patterns of resource distribution and environmental change will be carried out.
The research will involve an historical and comparative study of two different
ethnic groups, the Yi (the minority group) and the Han (the majority) in a poor
agrarian region located in the environmentally-degraded Liangshan Mountains
situated in Sichuan Province, China. The methodology uses a diversity of methods
focussed on the collection of primary qualitative and quantitative data through
surveys, interviews, and the examination of village records and legal documents.
This study will provide important new insights as to how cultural differences in
the conception of equity enter into and shape institutional rules, producing
differential effects on the environmental and social outcomes within the same
mountain landscape. As a doctoral dissertation research enhancement award, this
project will also provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career. ***