* 9406888
* Mathematical Sciences:  Intrinsic Stochastic Analysis       on Path and Loop Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Elton Hsu, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1998
* USD 60,000.00

The PI will investigate analytical and geometrical properties of the path and
loop spaces over a Riemannian manifold. The analysis is based on the Wiener
measure on these spaces, which plays a similar role as the Lebesgue measure in
the analysis of finite dimensional manifolds. Since the Wiener measure gives
rise to Brownian motion and Brownian bridge, the probabilistic methods
(stochastic differential equations, diffusion theory, etc.) will be used
extensively in our analysis. The geometric and analytical properties of path and
loop spaces will be studied through the probabilistic properties of the so-
called Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. The PI will discover generalizations of
integration by parts formula for the gradient operator in various geometric
settings (mainly for manifolds with boundary) and compute the familiar geometric
objects such as torsion and curvature tensors of the path and loop spaces (as
Hilbert manifolds) in terms of stochastic integrals involving the usual torsion
and curvature tensors of the underlying Riemannian manifold. The long-term goal
is to develop an intrinsic, geometric Malliavin calculus and to investigate
hypercontractivity, logarithmic Sobolev inequality, and Meyer's equivalence in
our new geometric setting and their interaction with the Riemannian structure of
the base manifold. Interdisciplinary research is the current trend of scientific
research. Probability theory is a branch of mathematics which studies random
behavior of collective phenomena. In the last two decades probability theory has
been applied with great success to problems from classical mathematical subjects
such as partial differential equations and geometry. This new probabilistic
point of view not only stimulated research in these classical subjects but also
opened new avenues of research such as stochastic differential geometry and
diffusion theory. The PI will use probabilistic methods to study properties of
an important class of geometric objects called loop spaces (for example, the
collection of closed paths on a sphere), which just began to gain importance in
modern physics. He will show how the curvature of the base space (the sphere in
the above case) affects the behavior of certain random processes associated with
loop spaces and give both qualitative and quantitative descriptions of the
interaction between the geometry of the space and the underlying random
processes.