* 9406948
* Role of LEAFY in Determining Floral Identity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Detlef Weigel, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1997
* USD 310,000.00

A central step in flower development is the decision of a group of
undifferentiated cells to adopt a floral fate. A key role in this process is
played by the LEAFY gene, whose activity is required to promote floral over
shoot development. This investigator has cloned the LEAFY gene from Arabidopsis
and shown that it encodes a novel type of nuclear protein, which is the earliest
known gene product to be activated in nascent flower primordia. He proposes to
study in detail how LEAFY controls floral fate by elucidating how LEAFY protein
exerts its function at the molecular level, and by dissecting the cis-regulatory
elements of the LEAFY promoter. Since LEAFY encodes a nuclear protein, it will
be determined whether it encodes a novel type of transcriptional regulator. The
protein contains two domains with similarity to transcriptional activation
domains of known transcriptional regulators. The in vivo activity of these
domains will be determined by introducing in vitro engineered deletion variants
of LEAFY into transgenic plants and testing these constructs for complementation
of leafy mutations. The possibility that LEAFY acts as a novel type of DNA-
binding protein will be explored by testing in vitro synthesized LEAFY protein
for its ability to bind DNA. In addition, the molecular interaction of LEAFY
with other proteins known to have a role in floral development will be studied.
In the future, new proteins will be isolated based on their ability to bind
LEAFY protein in vitro. Cis-acting elements mediating the temporal and spatial
control of LEAFY expression will be identified by three strategies: First,
constructs containing combinations of 5' and 3' sequences as well as intron
sequences fused to a LEAFY cDNA will be tested for complementation of the lfy
mutant phenotype in transgenic plants. Second, the promoter sequence of the
LEAFY cognate homolog from snapdragon, FLORICAULA, will be compared to that of
the LEAFY promoter, in order to identify co nserved sequence elements. Third,
various parts of the 5.4 kb fragment, including 5' and 3' as well as intron
sequences, will be tested in transgenic plants for their effects on the
expression of a reporter gene. The analysis of LEAFY regulatory sequences with
reporter gene constructs will be complemented by studying whether expression of
LEAFY under the control of two floral specific promoters, those of the two
floral control genes APETALA1 and AGAMOUS, can completely or partially
complement the leafy mutant phenotype. These experiments will allow for
assessing whether the early expression of LEAFY, which is activated before
APETALA1 and AGAMOUS, is indeed required for its in vivo function. The proposed
research will further our understanding of how flowers are initiated, and will
be an important step toward the ultimate goal of achieving a mechanistic
understanding of this process. In the future, this will permit for directed
manipulation of flowering not only in model systems such as Arabidopsis, but
also in other, economically important flowering plants. This should lead to
improved partitioning of photoassimilates between reproductive and vegetative
organs, and thus to better crop yields.