* 9406272
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Maintaining Diversity in a Serpentine Ecosystem: The Role of Multiple Stable States    and Stochastic Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1995
* Alan Taylor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 10/31/1995
* USD 7,098.00

9406272 TAYLOR Concerns about global change and related issues draws more
attention to the need to understand the complex ways through which both human
and natural factors interact with each other. Of particular concern have been
analyses of the respective roles of natural and human factors on changes in
vegetation, particularly the succession of species in forests. This doctoral
dissertation research project will conduct a case study of forest succession in
the serpentine "barrens" of southeastern Pennsylvania and northeastern Maryland.
The bedrock underlying these areas makes its soils low in nutrients and higher
in toxins, thereby inhibiting development of vegetative combinations like those
found in surrounding areas. As a result, a complex mix of grasses and trees
exists along with a number of endemic and rare plant species. Two different
hypotheses have been formulated to explain the persistence of the distinctive
plant communities associated with the serpentine barrens. The first posits
multiple stable states, with each of the plant communities perpetuating itself
in association with local soil characteristics and other factors. The second
hypothesis holds that the vegetative landscape is primarily the result of
stochastic factors, including fires (whether started natural or by human
activity) and fire suppression. Of special interest in assessing the latter
hypothesis is the way that plants regenerate immediately after a fire. In order
to assess the validity of these hypotheses, this project will include analyses
of the historical and human-induced disturbances in promoting the diversity of
plant communities on serpentine bedrock, descriptions of the current composition
and structure of serpentine vegetation and how it has responded to disturbances,
and analyses of short- and longer-term responses of serpentine forests to fires.
In addition to analyzing historical documents and aerial photos, intensive
analyses will be made of vegetation bef ore and after controlled burns at two
sites. This project will contribute to understandings of the processes and
effects of human-induced and natural change, including better knowledge of the
different spatial and temporal scales at which different factors are important.
The project also will generate useful data, and it will contribute to knowledge
about strategies that can be used to maintain populations of rare species in
these areas. As a doctoral dissertation improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.