* 9406396
* RPG:  Effects of Organic Acids on Clay Mineral Dissolution: Integrating Geochemistry from the Atomic--to the Watershed  Scale
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Patricia Maurice, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1996
* USD 17,975.00

9406396 Johnsson Understanding of complex organic/inorganic interactions in
forested ecosystems requires an interdisciplinary approach wherein field
observations from carefully selected study areas are combined with macroscopic
thermodynamic and kinetic investigations and with surface-sensitive technologies
(e.g., atomic force microscopy, AFM; scanning tunneling microscopy, STM; X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy, XPS) that are capable of probing the unique
structure, composition, and reactivity of the mineral/water interface. This
Research Planning Grant proposal outlines two studies wherein an
interdisciplinary approach is taken to understanding the effects of organic
acids on chemical weathering and trace-metal mobilization in acidic, organic-
rich soils and streams. These studies include (1) the effects of simple
(oxalate) and complex (humic and fulvic) organic acids on hematite dissolution
in mixed-ligand systems, and (2) the effects of organic acids on AL-hydroxide
secondary phase formation during the dissolution of phyllosilicates (muscovite
and kaolinite). Both of these studies involve integration of geochemical
experimentation from the atomic- to the water shed scale. Results of these
preliminary studies will be used as background for submission of a large-scale
NSF grant, in 1994-95. In addition, establishment of a new field study area,
design and construction of a flow-trough reaction vessel attachment to a
computerized potentiostat, and development of expertise in the use of 14C-
labelled organic acids in competitive sorption experiments will lay the
groundwork for additional research efforts involving a wide range of
organic/inorganic interactions.