* 9406811
* U.S.-Czech Workshop on Carboniferous Paleobotany (October   11-13, 1994, Springfield Illinois)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Richard Leary, Illinois State Museum Society
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/29/1996
* USD 15,738.00

9406811 Leary This U.S.-Azech workshop will be held in Springfield, Illinois,
during October 11-13, 1994, and will bring together experts from both countries
to discuss Carboniferous stratigraphy of various Czech basins and correlate the
Czech information on environments of deposition with other regions of the world.
Dr. Richard L. Leary of the Illinois State Museum will serve as the U.S.
organizer. His Czech counterpart is Dr. Zbynek Simunek of the Czech Geological
Survey. The workshop will focus on topics in 1) Carboniferous fossil plant taxa,
assemblages, taphonomy, paleoecology, and evolution; and 2) their paleographic
implications. Results are expected to yield refined dating of first known
occurrences that will aid research on plant migration. Better knowledge of
similarities and differences in species common to both the U.S. and Czech coal
basin regions will aid in measuring rates of evolution and should contribute to
our overall understanding of global climate change. This joint workshop in
paleobotany fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine
complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. It is expected that the meeting will foster new
U.S.-Czech research partnerships as well as promote dissemination of information
on current research and methods in Carboniferous Euramerican paleobotany. ***