* 9406680
* Ultrafast Spectroscopy of Bulk and Microstructure III-V     Semiconductors for 2-5 um Diode Lasers, Detectors, and      Modulators
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Thomas Boggess, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 07/31/1998
* USD 281,600.00

9406680 Boggess This proposal focuses on the application of ultrafast optical
techniques, based on a broadly-tunable femtosecond optical parametric
oscillator, to the measurement of hot carrier relaxation, optical
nonlinearities, and carrier transport in GaInAsSb/A1GaAsSb quantum wells and
related ternary and binary heterostructures. The extent to which band structure
engineering, through both strain and quantum confinement, influences these
properties will be explored. Pump-probe spectroscopy, transient grating
techniques, and time-resolved photoluminescence upconversion techniques will all
be employed. The semiconductor samples to be used in this research will be
provided by The Hughes Research Laboratories (HRL) as part of a long-standing,
broadly- based collaborative program. While the ultimate goal of these studies
is to enhance the knowledge base required to improve mid-IR optical and
optoelectronic devices, it is emphasized that the proposed measurements will
provide information related to the fundamental physics of this largely unstudied
materials system. Specifically, these measurements will provide insight into
carrier energy relaxation through both inter- and intravalley electron- phonon
scattering, the relationship between the engineered band structures and
nonlinear susceptibilities, which in turn are related to dipole transition
matrices and energy band separations, and the fundamental scattering processes
that determine the nature of both in-well and cross-well carrier transport in
Sb-based multiple quantum wells and superlattices. ***