* 9406614
* U.S.-Norway-Germany Cooperative Research: Some Problems in  Galois Rings, Grobner Bases and their Applications (Applied Mathematics)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1999
* Irving Reed, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 07/31/1999
* USD 23,931.00

9406614 Reed This award supports Professors Irving S. Reed and P. Vijay Kumar of
the University of Southern California, together with a postdoctoral associate,
to collaborate in applied mathematics research with Professors Tor Helleseth of
the University of Bergen, Norway, and Henning Stichtenoth of the University of
Essen, Germany. In general, they are working in the area of the interaction
between algebraic geometry and coding theory. A major focus of their
collaboration is the study of exponential sums over Galois rings, and the
application of this to the design and study of error correcting codes. Another
significant component involves Grobner basis techniques, both their computation
over finite fields and their application for the decoding of cyclic and
algebraic-geometric codes. To complement the U.S. groups' strengths in error
correcting codes, Professor Helleseth contributes necessary expertise in the
theory of algebraic functions and their applications to coding theory as well as
experience with Galois rings and Grobner bases. He also offers access to
massively parallel computing machines in Norway which will be used for some of
the joint research. Professor Stichtenoth is an expert on algebraic geometry and
a world leader in the area of algebraic- geometric codes. The combination of
their talents creates an extremely powerful collaborative team. The proposed
research is an interdisciplinary combination of discrete mathematics, symbolic
computation and algebraic computation theory. Results will contribute to
advances in the theory of exponential sums and new and improved decoding
algorithms for error-correcting codes. Such results will have useful
applications in several fields of mathematics, computer science and engineering.
***