* 9406785
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research (INRIA):  Theory and       Implementations of Strongly Consistent Distributed Shared   Memory Systems.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Mitchell Neilsen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1997
* USD 20,500.00

9406785 Mizuno This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research
in computer operating systems and system software. The investigators are Masaaki
Mizuno, Gurdip Singh of Kansas State University, Mitchell Neilsen, Oklahoma
State University and Michel Raynal of the University of Rennes and INRIA (French
National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Applied Mathematics).
The objective of their research is to study the definitions and implementations
of distributed shared memory systems by developing a general framework for
classifying protocols and for evaluating efficient implementations. They will
develop protocols suited to different computer architectures. The U.S.
investigators bring to this collaboration expertise in mathematical analysis,
computer architectures, and software implementation. This is complemented by
French expertise in broad areas of distributed computing. The project also takes
advantage of a large array of equipment at INRIA, including a distributed
parallel machine (a Hypercube with 32 processors), which will be used in the
implementation studies. Distributed shared memory systems are important because
they simplify programming. This project will further understanding of these
systems and its results could be applied to replication of databases and
distributed file systems in a high performance computing environment. ***