* 9406073
* Bayesian Demodulation Algorithms for Digital Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Michael Fitz, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/1998
* USD 372,130.00

9406073 Fitz The Bayesian filter family of algorithms is a recently developed
family of deconvolution (both known and unknown channel) algorithms for digital
communications. The Bayesian filters are approximations to the K-lag optimum
symbol-by-symbol estimator with the unique characteristic that its resulting
exponential complexity is decoupled from both the filter lag and the channel
length. This project 1) will produce significant refinements to the Bayesian
filter algorithms, 2) will produce an analytical characterization of these
algorithms to provide greater insight into the performance, 3) will examine some
applications of the algorithms in digital communications, and 4) will implement
the algorithms in a fixed point DSP architecture. The Bayesian filters can be
refined to include significantly more general decision feedback structures, to
be applicable with more general channel models, to more accurately model time-
varying fading, and to implement optimal combining algorithms. The general
decision feedback structures are both similar to and a significant
generalization of reduced state sequence estimation. This structure will provide
an excellent tradeoff between achieving a long decoding lag and maintaining a
reasonable level of complexity. The channel models considered in this project
will be the autoregressive moving average model and partially observed Markov
chain model. Deriving deconvolution algorithms for these channels enables a
wider range of problems to be addressed by Bayesian techniques. The final
generalization is in the modeling of time-varying channels. If high performance
deconvolution can be accomplished in a rapidly fading frequency selective
channel, then significant improvements are available in the capacity of digital
communication systems (especially ones using TDMA). Finally, methods for
optimally combining more than one observation per symbol will be considered in a
Bayesian framework. Typical applications of this type include antenna diversity
systems and fractional spaced equalization. The Bayesian filter has a great many
potential applications areas and these applications will be explored in detail.
The areas targeted are: reduced complexity demodulation of nonlinear modulations
with memory; reduced complexity decoding of error control codes; high speed high
frequency (HF) digital communications; magnetic recording; and land mobile
radio. ***