* 9406065
* Protein Structure Determinations by NMR and Joint NMR-X-ray Refinement
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* David Hoffman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9406065 Hoffman The goal of the proposed research is to analyze the structures
of two unusual and biologically significant protein molecules. The specific
structures to be investigated are: (1) the "0.3" protein of bacteriophage T7;
(2) the RNA-binding protein L9 from the prokaryotic ribosome. In each case, the
structural information obtained will provide insight into the mechanism used by
the protein in performing its particular function. The 12.5 kDalton 03 gene
product of bacteriophage T7 is unique in its ability to bind to E. coli
restriction enzymes and RNA polymerase. The protein performs the task of
inhibiting the E. coli restriction system, thus permitting the T7 phage to
safely inject its genome into the host cells. There is evidence suggesting that
the 0.3 protein may function by mimicking the DNA structures that are normally
recognized by the E. coli restriction system. The structure of the 0.3 protein
will be determined by NMR methods, providing insight into the mechanism by which
it binds and inhibits DNA-processing enzymes. L9 is a highly conserved primary
RNA-binding protein from the prokaryotic ribosome. In the proposed research
plan, NMR and x-ray data will be used to supply structural constraints, and the
protein structure will be determined by a simultaneous refinement against both
the NMR and x-ray data, or "joint-refinement". This joint-refinement approach
should yield a much higher resolution structure, in which both RNA-binding sites
are well defined. This analysis will provide a model as to how NMR and x-ray
data can be practically and logically combined to determine the structure of a
single protein molecule. %%% The principal goal of the proposed research is to
analyze the structures of two unusual and biologically significant protein
molecules. The specific structures to be investigated are: 1) a protein that is
unique in its ability to bind to and inhibit the function of DNA-processing
enzymes; and 2) a protein with the ability to recognize and bind specific
sequences of ribosomal RNA. In each case, the structural information obtained
will provide insight into the mechanism used by the protein in performing its
particular function. An additional goal of the proposed project is to develop
new methods for determining protein structures, using the combined data from
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments and x-ray diffraction experiments.
It is anticipated that these new methods will be useful in determining protein
structures with greater accuracy. ***