* 9406186
* Molecular Genetics of Ribosomal RNA
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Harry Noller, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 10/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9406186 Noller We propose to study specific aspects of the structure, function
and assembly of ribosomal RNA (rRNA), using genetic approaches. Our main tools
are expression of cloned copies rRNA operons from natural rRNA promoters or from
inducible promoters, at high or moderate levels, and assay of structure and
function using allele-specific chemical probing as well as by more conventional
methods. Among the functional problems we plan to address are the role of rRNA
in tRNA selection, subunit association, translocation and peptidyl transferase
activity. Bases that have been identified as potential components of these
respective ribosomal functional sites will be targeted for site-directed
mutagenesis. The resulting phenotypes will be studied, and we will attempt to
analyze the mechanistic basis of the genetic defects, to obtain direct genetic
evidence for the functional roles of specific sites in rRNA in translation. We
will use suppressor and synthetic lethal mutations to discover new sites and
interactions that have not yet been identified by biochemical approaches. We
also plan to continue to analyze the higherorder structure of rRNA, using site-
directe mutagenesis. We will test the biological importance of proposed
pseudoknot interactions in rRNA, and will test the requirement for proposed non-
canonical base pairs for ribosome function. Finally, we wish to understand the
role of a newly discovered protein that we believe may be involved in assembly
events involving the 5' terminal region of 16S rRNA. %%% It is becoming clear
that ribosomal RNA (rRNA) plays an important role, not only in the assembly and
structure of ribosomes, but in their function in protein synthesis as well.
Using genetic approaches, we propose to study the molecular basis for the
folding and function of rRNA. From biochemical and phylogenetic approaches, key
nucleotides in rRNA have been identified. For example, many well-known
antibiotics inhibit bacterial growth by interacting with specific s ites in the
rRNA of bacterial ribosomes. These sites turn out to be functional sites where
other important macromolecular components of the translational system, such as
transfer RNA and elongation factors, interact with the ribosome. Using site-
directed mutagenesis, we can change the identity of these nucleotides and study
the consequences of these changes to try to deduce how they play a role in these
fundamental processes. Using genetic approaches that we have developed over the
past few years, we can also search for mutations that affect other sites and
functions of rRNA, by screening or selecting for their effects on specific
ribosomal processes. By combining the results of these genetic approaches with
the results of biochemical, phylogenetic and structural studies, we hope to be
able to gain a clearer understanding of how the ribosome is put together, and
how it works. ***