* 9406585
* Chemical Controls on Bioavailability of Riverine            Particulate Phosphorus and Changes in Riverine Particulate  Phosphorus Chemistry Across the Continent-Ocean Interface
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1999
* Kathleen Ruttenberg, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/1999
* USD 288,000.00

9406585 Ruttenberg The overall objectives of this proposal are (1) to use
selective leaching procedure (the SEDEX Method) to identify and quantify the
chemical from of particulate-P in the lower Mississippi and Atchafalaya Rivers,
at the interface between the Mississippi River and the deltaic marine shelf, and
in proximal surficial deltaic marine sediments; (2) to identify spatial and
temporal controls on processes modifying particulate-P during riverine
transport; and (3) to identify spatial and temporal controls on chemical
modification at the continent-ocean interface. Phosphorus (P) is an essential
nutrient which can limit biological productivity in fresh, brackish, and saline
natural waters. P associated with particulate matter in natural waters will
enhance biological productivity to the extent that the P can be assimilated.
Determining the bioavailable P associated with particulate matter is essential
for placing constraints on sources of P for biological cycling in aquatic
systems. Bulk P concentration is not a useful parameter as P-speciation is
required for assessment of the fraction of particulate P which is bioavailable.
The SEDEX method separately quantifies Fe-P, authigenic sedimentary apatite
(ASAP), (phases likely to control soluble, and therefore bioavailable-P in
natural waters), organic- P, loosely sorbed-P, and detrital apatite.
P-distribution in Riverine Suspended Particulate Matter (RSPM) will be
determined at a series of river stations chosen to permit comparisons of input
from agricultural versus industrial land and between the levied lower
Mississippi and the Atchafalaya hard-wood swamps. Temporal variability will be
assessed by re-visiting the river study sites seasonal. This work will be
carried out in conjunction with ongoing USGS monitoring programs, which provided
an array of valuable supporting data and a long-term record. The effect of
estuarine processes on RSPM P-distribution will be examined by coupling field
measurements with P-desorption experiments. The latter will cover the range of
salinity observed in the estuary. P-distribution of RSPM determined before and
after mixing should permit direct identification of solid-phase P-reservoirs
which liberate soluble (and therefore bioavailable ) P to solution. These
results will be compared to P-distribution of in situ RSPM from the estuary. The
riverine source of bioavailable-P to the coastal ocean will be assessed by
contrasting the P-distribution of RSPM from these two rivers with that in
proximal surficial marine sediments, and by contrasting P-loading calculations
of separately quantified RSPM P-reservoirs to P-burial rates in proximal shelf
sediments. The work focusses on a globally significant system, mechanisms of
transformation, and physical and chemical controls that should be broadly
applicable.