* 9406522
* A Generalized Approach to WDM Optical Switched Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Imrich Chlamtac, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1997
* USD 169,999.00

ABSTRACT: Chlamtac, Imrich NCR-9406522 University of Massachusetts A Generalized
Approach to WDM Optical Packet Switched Networks: Third generation "all-optical"
networks are advocated to yield a nearly four orders of magnitude capacity
increase by circumventing the speed limitations of electronics. In an optical
packet switched network it is necessary to have a methodology to deal optically
with the fundamental resource contentions problem occurring when multiple
packets are concurrently vying for key optical network resources. These can be
transmitters, receivers, switches, and channels. To realize the optical capacity
of the fiber, i.e., eliminate the electronic bottleneck, resource contention
must be resolved in a way which maintains packets flowing through the network in
the optical domain. One possible solution is based on the use of optical
switches and fiber delay lines to realize an all-optical switch termed Switched
Delay Lines (SDL). Among the advantages demonstrated for this approach are its
relative simplicity, implementation potential and excellent performance. The
goal of this research is the extension of the above solution to the case of
wavelength sensitive switches, targeted towards the emerging WDM based
communications environment. Preliminary results show that an SDL WDM solution
can offer: 1) an optical WDM packet switching transmission; 2) use of attractive
hardware design based on small number of delay lines, minimal functionality
switches, replacement of fast tunability by WDM filtering; 3) fault tolerance;
and 4) feasible electronic control. The research results of this study can be
expected to lay a basis for the next generation optical packet switched LAN/MAN
WDM networks. It will thus enable the use of WDM in LAN and MAN communication
systems for multiplexing several high speed data streams onto the optical fiber,
without requiring unrealistic parallel electronic processing. As a result, the
throughput potential of optical networks may be increased by orders of magnitude
paving the way for future applications.