* 9406636
* Mathematical Sciences: Stability of Streak-like Structures  in Wall-bounded Shear Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Peter Schmid, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9406636 Schmid A great number of turbulent fluid flows show the presence of
streak-like elements in the near-wall region. These coherent fluid patterns, and
in particular their persistence and flow-independent scales, have stimulated a
great deal of interest and investigations among the fluid dynamic community.
Although it has been found that their appearance and dynamics play a crucial
role in the transition to turbulence and in fully developed turbulence, our
knowledge about streaks in wall-bounded shear flows is rather limited despite
remarkable progress over the past years. The present proposal aims at
investigating the dynamics of streaks as well as their role in the production
and sustainment of turbulent fluid motion by a nonlinear stability analysis.
Owing to experimental and computational evidence, special emphasis will be
directed toward the important phase of the breakdown of streak-like structure. A
combined theoretical and numerical approach will be taken, employing a Floquet
stability analysis where the primary finite-amplitude disturbance state will
consist of a (slowly decaying) streamwise vortex. The resulting stability
equations for three-dimensional secondary disturbances will then be treated
within a temporal and spatial framework using both asymptotic, eigenvalue-based
tools and transient, initial-value-based techniques. Direct numerical
simulations will be conducted to complement and scrutinize the theoretical
results. The emphasis of this project will be on the influence of flow
parameters on the overall stability behavior and on the complete description of
the dynamics of the breakdown process.