* 9406130
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Conceptualizing Skill:      Female Supervisors in the Mexican Maquiladora Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1995
* Erica Schoenberger, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 11/30/1995
* USD 7,109.00

9406130 SCHOENBERGER This research examines how technological change and the
reorganization of production paradigms in multinational companies affect the
vertical mobility of women workers in these facilities. Recent scholarship on
changes in firm production strategies, worker-management relations, and on the
training of "skilled labor" suggest that the positions held by Third World women
in such facilities may not be as static as previously expected. The proposed
research investigates how women in "unskilled" jobs in the "global assembly
line" have acquired the "skills" qualifying them for promotion into supervisory
positions. Central to the study is the way that skilled labor comes to be
defined and recognized at the workplace across industries and within several
factories. This research will examine how new requirements for production and
renovated technologies alter the roles played by Third World workers in
multinational production facilities in situ. To do this, the investigators will
study the emergence of Mexican female supervisors within multinational
operations in Ciudad Juarez, which is one of Mexico's largest export processing
zones. Portions of this proposal are derived from preliminary research conducted
in Mexico in 1992. The proposed research focuses on the use of both
questionnaires and semi-structured interviews with workers, supervisors, and
managers at selected plants of multinational firms located in Ciudad Juarez.
This project will provide important new insights into the understanding of the
ways in which multinational firms interact with the local population in
industrializing areas with an emphasis on how gender relations both constitute
part of the structure of the organization of manufacturing and, in turn, are
redefined because of the presence of the multinational firms. As a doctoral
dissertation research improvement award, this project will also provide support
to enable a promising student to establish a strong indep endent research
career. ***