* 9406571
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Geographical Perspectives  on Innovation in Pollution Prevention
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1994,12/31/1995
* David Angel, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1995
* USD 9,485.00

9406571 ANGEL Pollution prevention is now widely regarded as necessary for
industrial and environmental sustainability. However, little is known about how
technological change is facilitated for pollution prevention and how information
and technology may be transferred from the leaders of pollution prevention to
other firms. This study will focus on an investigation of the significance of
location and regional context for processes of innovation and technological
change in the search for technologies and work practices that ameliorate the
environmental impact of manufacturing industries. The project will determine how
and to what extent various aspects of regional networks such as deep pools of
labor, appropriate infrastructure, and a diverse mix of economic activities
enhances the pollution prevention performance of establishments and industries
beyond what we would expect to find in the absence of such clustering. A mailed
questionnaire survey of chemical establishments will be used to examine how
independent variables such as establishment location, market forces,
environmental regulation, and the level of inter- establishment cooperation
affect an establishment's innovation strategy and success at pollution
prevention. This research brings together two important streams of geographic
research: the geography of innovation and the environmental effects of
industrialization. The study should generate new insights into development and
diffusion of pollution prevention practices within manufacturing industries. As
a doctoral dissertation research improvement award, this project will also
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career. ***