* 9406448
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Production of Overseas Opportunities: An Institutional Analysis of the Philippine  Migration Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1995
* Curtis Roseman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 04/30/1995
* USD 5,055.00

9406448 ROSEMAN International contract labor migration is an important source of
currency for developing countries as well as an important source of labor for
capital-rich but labor-short countries. The purpose of this project is to
examine the mechanisms involved in the production and transmission of
opportunities for such migration in one of the world's largest exporters of
labor, the Philippines. Opportunities for labor migration are produced through
institutional actions in the form of emigration policies at the national level
and then transmitted to communities and individuals through recruiting agencies,
mass media sources, and social networks. The research will be based largely on
structured interviews, undertaken in the Philippines, of key individuals in
government, umbrella organizations, and private recruitment agencies. This
information will be supplemented with secondary information collected in the
Philippines which will be used to further explain the production and
transmission of overseas opportunities. This research will make significant
contributions to our understanding of the international migration of contract
labor, an important source of contact between developing and developed countries
and an important source of capital for developing countries. As a doctoral
dissertation research improvement award, this award will also provide support to
enable a promising srudent to establish a strong independent research career.
***