* 9406280
* Primitive Antibodies
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* John Marchalonis, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F M 8I C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t * O b j e c
t P o o l M 8I M 8I ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; , 9 w 9 y w , ! Abstract Marchalonis 9406280 Sharks
belong to one of the most primitive vertebrate classes. This investigator has
been studying the immune system of sharks for a number of years. The blood of
these animals contains high levels of immunoglobulins, but this is IgM, a type
of immunoglobulin which appears first in mammals in response to an antigen. Like
human antibodies, these shark immunoglobulins show a large diversity in
sequence. With the recombinant DNA technologies this laboratory was able to
determine the sequence of the genes and their corresponding proteins, and found
that the mechanisms for generating diversity in these immunoglobulins differs
from that of mammals. In sharks the V (variable), J (joining) and C (constant)
regions are not separate as in mammals, with their products coming together and
combining to form different immunglobulin molecules, but exist in V,J,C
clusters. Nevertheless the proteins of the shark show great diversity and a lot
of similarity to the mammalian chains. More recent studies from this laboratory
show that the RAG (recombinant activating gene) is a lso found in the shark, but
may have a different function from that in mammals. %%% These studies which are
elucidating the immune system of the sharks, one of the most primitive
vertebrates, will not only provide information on how the immune system of these
organisms operates, but will give information on the probable development of the
immune system of vertebrate organisms. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l S u m m a r y I n f o
r m a t i o n ( &amp; D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Abstract Una Solomon Una
Solomon @ M 8I @ @ M 8I @ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e * l l l l l l l s 1 5 U T
2 s l s l l l l l l l l k Abstract Marchalonis 9406280 Sharks belong to one of
the most primitive vertebrate classes. This investigator has been studying the
immune system of sharks for a number of years. The blood of these animals
contains high levels of immunoglobulins, but this is IgM, a type of
immunoglobulin which appears first in mammals in response to an antigen. Like
human antibodies, these shark immunoglobulins show a large diversity in
sequence. With the recombinant DNA technologies this laboratory was able to
determine the sequence of the genes and their corresponding proteins, and found
that the mechanisms for generating diversity in these immunoglobulins differs
from that of mammals. In sharks the V (variable), J (joining) and C (constant)
regions are not separate as in mammals, with their products coming together and
combining to form different immunglobulin molecules, but exist in V,J,C
clusters. Nevertheless the proteins of the shark show great diversity and a lot
of similarity to the mammalian chains. More recent studies from this laboratory
show that the RAG (re