* 9406270
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Food Shortage Coping       Strategies Among Resettlement Area Households in Zimbabwe
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* David Campbell, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 07/31/1997
* USD 9,950.00

9406270 CAMPBELL Zimbabwe, like many parts of Africa, is facing important
questions regarding the ability of rural residents to cope with food deficits,
an issue that is inextricably connected to land distribution. Since 1980, over
50,000 households in Zimbabwe have been resettled in formerly white-owned farms
and ranches, mainly in semi-arid to arid environments. As witnessed during the
last prolonged drought period, resettlement households are particularly
vulnerable to recurrent food shortages. Food shortage coping strategies, as part
of food security, are dependent upon the interplay of complex linkages between
society and environment. This analysis is based on a regional political ecology
framework that facilitates the linkage of human and environmental variables and
views the environment as a dynamic and interactive component of rural societies.
This project will involve research in two field sites and in Harare with
collaboration of faculty and students at the University of Zimbabwe. Comparative
field work will be conducted in two resettlement areas in differing
environments, and in adjacent non- resettlement areas, which will serve as
control groups. A survey questionnaire will assess the role of human-environment
relationships in food storage coping strategies. Survey results will be combined
with qualitative information gathered during one year of field residence. This
study will contribute important new insights into the understanding of food
shortage coping strategies in the context of resettlement lands and it will
assess the efficacy of regional political ecology as a research framework. As a
doctoral dissertation research improvement award, this project will also provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career. ***