* 9406321
* Topology of Anion Carrier and Acetylcholine Receptor
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Jack Kyte, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1998
* USD 288,000.00

Kyte 9406321 The topology and functionally important conformational changes of
acetylcholine receptor and anion carrier, two proteins in the plasma membranes
of animal cells, will be examined with protein chemical and immunochemical
techniques. Sealed right-side-out vesicles or intact cells will be used to
determine on which side of the plasma membrane particular amino acids with
reagents impermeant to the vesicles or the cells will be established by
isolating peptides containing the modified amino acids by immunoadsorbents.
Changes in the rate of modification of particular amino acids in anion carrier
by neutral or charged electrophiles will be followed by isolating modified
peptides by immunoadsorption. These results will implicate particular locations
in this protein in functionally important structural changes. The topology of
acetylcholine receptor will be correlated with recent high resolution structures
of the protein. Both the topology of the protein and the conformational changes
involved in the coupled anion transport catalyzed by anion carrier from
erythrocytes will be related to the mechanism of its catalysis. In addition to
being structurally interesting, these two proteins are of central importance to
several physiological processes. Acetylcholine receptor transforms the neural
action potential into muscular action potential at the synapse. Anion carrier is
responsible for the bicarbonate transport across the plasma membrane of the of
the erythrocyte which permits efficient transfer of bicarbonate from peripheral
tissue to the lungs. %%% The plasma membrane is a thin bag that encloses the
living cytoplasm of a cell. This bag protects the cytoplasm from the unexpected
changes that occur on the outside of the cell, much as our skin contains and
protects us. The passage of chemicals across the plasma membrane is carefully
controlled. This control is enforced by proteins that are embedded in the plasma
membrane. Each of these proteins acts as a gatekeeper opening and closing to
permit particular molecules to pass through the membrane at specific times. We
are studying a protein that is the gatekeeper for sodium and potassium ions and
a protein that the gatekeeper for chloride and bicarbonate ions. The first
protein is located on muscle cells and remains closed until a nerve cell and
potassium to flow out, an event that causes the muscle cell to contract. The
second protein is located on red blood cells and allows the cells to pick up
bicarbonate in the muscles and transfer it to the lungs where it becomes carbon
dioxide. We are studying the design of these proteins that permits them to
perform these roles that are essential to the function of muscles and of the
blood. ***