* 9406646
* Ion Transport and Communication in Cultured Mammalian Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Mary Lee Ledbetter, College of the Holy Cross
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/1998
* USD 168,500.00

; R o o t E n t r y F C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t 4 O b j e c t P o
o l 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9406646 Ledbetter Dr. Ledbetter s previous work has used
simple assays to measure the ability of cultured fibroblastic or epithelial
cells to share small cytoplasmic molecules through gap junctions. This
cooperation can be inhibited by treatment of the cells with the sodium-pump
inhibitor ouabain. Furosemide, a modulator of Na+,K+, 2C1- cotransport,
stimulates communication. When kidney-derived epithelial cells are treated with
the steriod hormone aldosterone, their ouabain inhibition is reduced. Recent
work has suggested that calcium changes mediate the effects of ouabain and that
aldosterone s action may involve an unusual mechanism independent of the
classical Type I mineralocorticoid receptor. Dr. Ledbetter plans to pursue these
findings as examples of interactions between regulatory mechanisms that effect
ion transport and those that influence junction-mediated communication. She will
carry out these studies in her own laboratories as well as in collaboration with
Dr. Norton B. Gilula at the Scripps Research Institute (during her sabbatical
leave) and with Dr. Fredic S. Fay at the Univ ersity of Massachusetts School of
Medicine. The goal is to establish how these and other modulators of ion support
influence cell communication. She will use Dr. Gilula s collection of connexin-
specific antibodies and nucleic acid probes, to study. a. connexin protein
localization by immunofluorescent staining intact cells; b. expression of
connexin-specific RNA and protein and protein electrophoretic mobility in cell
extracts; and c. rapid changes in functional communication, measured by dye
coupling of cells. The PI will also use digital imaging microscopy and
spectrofluorimetry of cells loaded with ion-sensitive indicator dyes, along with
radioactive tracer experiments to correlate effects on communication with
influx, efflux and steady-state content of calcium and potassium and cytoplasmic
ph. %%% The results should help to refine new modes for the interaction between
ion-transport regulatory mechanisms and regulation of gap-junction-mediated
communication. *** ; S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 0 Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9406646 Shirley Parker Shirley Parker @ @ @ @ F #
Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e F 4 F j j j j j j j x 1 : Z T 7 x j x j j j j ~ j j
j j r 9406646 Ledbetter Dr. Ledbetter s previous work has used simple assays to
measure the ability of cultured fibroblastic or epithelial cells to share small
cytoplasmic molecules through gap junctions. This cooperation can be inhibited
by treatment of the cells with the sodium-pump inhibitor ouabain. Furosemide, a
modulator of Na+,K+, 2C1- cotransport, stimulates communication. When kidney-
derived epithelial cells are treated with the steriod hormone aldosterone, their
ouabain inhibition is reduced. Recent work has suggested that calcium changes
mediate the effec