* 9406217
* Behavioral Ecology of Vocal Diversity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Jack Bradbury, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 224,000.00

9406217 Bradbury Abstract A major focus of research on vocal communication
concerns why and how complex repertoires evolve in some organisms and not in
others. Complex vocal repertoires are found in humans (e.g. speech), some other
primates, cetaceans, many songbirds, and parrots. Comparative work over the last
decades has shown that complex repertoires are used in recognition of
individuals and associations, sharing of environmental information, declaring of
intentions, and competition for mates (sexual selection). Sexual selection,
alone or in combination with individual recognition, seems to account for many
of the complex repertoires in songbirds. Nonhuman primates declare subtle
variations in intention and have some simple environmental meanings. Cetaceans
remain difficult to study, but there is now evidence of both sexually selected
repertoires and social association signatures. Although both captive and wild
parrots are known to develop complex vocal repertoires and continue to learn new
signals as adults, nearly nothing is known about how their complex repertoires
are used in the wild. Dr. Jack Bradbury and his students have located a study
site in Costa Rica that hosts four species of parrots, has an open forest making
direct observations feasible, provides an extensive road system for following
the birds, and has sufficient control of poaching that the birds can be
approached closely without perturbation. Birds will be outfitted with newly
designed radio transmitters and followed intensively. All vocalizations will be
recorded and correlated with social composition of groups, environmental
contexts, and behaviors. Functions can be verified by playback of natural and
modified calls to wild birds. Parrots are extremely responsive to such
playbacks. Dr. Bradbury thus hopes to clarify the role of complex vocal
communication in a group of animals that, although critical to the general
understanding of vocal commu nication processes, has largely remained a mystery.
The results will provide a basis for subsequent lab studies on brain-behavior
relationships and allow contrasts with other avian and mammalian groups.
Furthermore, the extensive ecological data to be collected in this study will be
useful to Costa Rican conservation biologists.