* 9406120
* Technician Support (Phase ll) for the Neurton Activation    Analysis Facility in the EAPS Department at MIT
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Frederick Frey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 07/31/1996
* USD 80,000.00

9406120 Frey This award provides partial funding for the support of a technician
assigned to the operation and maintenance of the Neutron Activation Analysis
Laboratory in the Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The laboratory is a facility
dedicated to the analysis of natural materials, principally terrestrial rocks
and minerals. Gamma ray spectroscopy is used to determined the abundance of many
trace elements, used as tracers to better understand the processes which have
formed the Earth's crust and mantle. The instrumentation of the facility
consists of semi- conductor detectors, multichannel analyzers, and computer
control. The facility is used for sponsored geochemical research of the
Principal Investigator and colleagues at MIT and by a diverse group of other
U.S. scientists, including faculty and students from other universities and
colleges, principally in the northeast. *** 9406684 Johnson This award provides
partial funding for the support of a technician assigned to the Radiogenic
Isotope Laboratory in the Department of Geology and Geophysics at the University
of Wisconsin, Madison. The technician will assist in the operation and
maintenance of the laboratory's equipment that includes a multicollector thermal
ionization mass spectrometer and associated instrumentation for sample
preparation and data analysis. The laboratory is a resource for mass
spectrometric analysis needed in research and teaching projects in the earth
sciences by a large number of researchers on-campus and off-campus. Research
applications include work on Arctic Ocean sediments, mantle geochemistry,
volcanism, geochronology of carbonates in the Michigan Basin and Wisconsin Arch
provinces, and Archean and Proterozoic granites. The technician will also
participate in the technical developmental work of the laboratory, including the
development of new methods for the quantitative measurement of the iso topes of
hafnium. ***