* 9406391
* RUI:  Liquid and Solid State NMR of an unusual Polypeptide  System:  Structure of an Interfilament Matrix of Wool Fibers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Mark Liff, Philadelphia University
* Standard Grant
* Jack Horowitz
* 06/30/1997
* USD 70,000.00

9406391 Liff The three-dimensional structure of the cross-linked high-sulphur
protein matrix of wool fibers is still largely unknown. This project will
investigate (1) the conformational preferences of the chains of the matrix and
the conformational implications of the characteristic pentapeptide repeat and
(2) the degree and the homogeneity of the crosslinking in the matrix network
formed by disulfide bonding. These parameters constitute essentially full
characterization of a cross-linked polypeptide system. To study these issues
liquid state High Resolution 2D NMR, as well as solid state NMR, which involves
the analysis of chemical shift anisotropy and quadropolar interactions, will be
applied to model polypeptide systems. An understanding of the structure of the
interfilament matrix is one of the most important problems in the biophysical
chemistry of natural fibers and it is of special interest to materials science,
where natural materials are studied to foster new ideas for designing novel man-
made materials. %%% The purpose of this research is to elucidate the structure
of the biopolymeric networks formed by cross-linked high-sulphur proteins of
wool fibers. An understanding of their structure is one of the most important
problems in biophysical chemistry of natural fibers and is of special interest
to materials science where natural materials are studied to foster new ideas for
designing novel man-made materials. A variety of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
techniques will be used as they are the most appropriate and the most powerful
tools for this investigation. ***