* 9406941
* Innovations in Multiphase Flow - An International Fluid     Mechanics Symposium
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Kang Ping Chen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 07/31/1995
* USD 10,000.00

9406941 K.Chen Partial support will be provided for approximately 12 invited
speakers to a symposium on innovative techniques recently adopted in multiphase
flow and thin film research. The meeting will have a total of about 50
participants, and will be held on March 26-27, in Minneapolis (MN). Theoretical
approaches, non-intrusive measuring techniques and parallel computing developed
in the last years offer new tools for improved methods of investigations, which
would have been not possible only few years ago. The purpose of this
interdisciplinary symposium is to provide a timely forum for presenting the
latest developments in multiphase flow and thin film research, to highlight
outstanding scientific results, set directions for future research opportunities
with the highest return, and promote interactions among researchers in fluid
mechanics, particles technology, heat transfer, applied mathematics, chemical
and mechanical engineering. Senior and young researchers from several countries
have been invited to this symposium. The University of Minnesota offers a
stimulating environment through its research groups and well established
laboratories in this field of research. The presentations at the workshop will
be peer reviewed and published in a special issue of the journal on "Theoretical
and Computational Fluid Dynamics." ***