* 9406103
* Thermodynamics of Site-Specific Binding Processes in        Biological Macromolecules
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Enrico Di Cera, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9406103 Di Cera In the proposed research project we plan to continue to develop
the thermodynamic theory of site-specific binding effects. We have a dual goal
in mind. First, we seek to provide experimentalists with a conceptual framework
and effective strategies to be exploited in the experimental dissection of site-
specific effects. Second, we seek to bring the analysis of cooperative effects
in biology to a whole new level by unraveling the thermodynamic foundations of
the behavior of subsystems open to interactions with other subsystems. This is a
basic problem in statistical thermodynamics which remains in largest measure
unformulated and unexplored, due to its mathematical complexity. Without a
thermodynamic treatment of local effects, our understanding of the most exciting
and challenging problems in biology, such as cooperativity, molecular
recognition and protein folding, will remain necessarily incomplete. %%% Our
project entails the development of a theory for interacting systems in biology.
The goal is to understand the detailed basis for protein-ligand and protein-
protein recognition in terms of a novel conceptual framework. Protein-mediated
molecular recognition is a crucial step in nearly every aspect of biology, as
well as in the onset, propagation and control of diseases at the molecular
level. The developments under the proposed research project will provide us with
a much deeper understanding of how proteins work. This will eventually foster
the developments of new strategies for the control of diseases at the
pharmacological level. ***