* 9406812
* RUI:  An Experimental Study of Electronic Properties of     Strong-Scattering Liquid Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1998
* John Van Zytveld, Calvin University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1998
* USD 105,000.00

9406812 Van Zytveld Technical abstract: It is proposed to measure the electronic
properties of several strong-scattering liquid systems. The parameters of
emphasis are the electrical resistivity and the thermoelectric power, since
these can be compared rather easily with theoretical calculations, and will
therefore provide a good test of theory. The systems under study include the
liquid semimetallic alloys aluminum-calcium and aluminum-barium, the pure liquid
metals silicon and germanium, three of the liquid heavy trivalent rare-earth
metals, and the unusual "heavy Fermion system", cesium-copper, in liquid form.
These studies will further the understanding of these interesting classes of
liquids, and may also uncover materials of interest for thermoelectric power
generation. Non-technical abstract: It is proposed to measure the electronic
properties of conducting liquids: liquid metals, liquid alloys, liquid
semimetals and liquid semiconductors. In each of the systems to be studied, the
interaction between the conducting electrons and the liquid ions is strong,
making these properties more difficult to understand theoretically. It is
anticipated that these experimental studies will provide strong tests of the
current theories; an evaluation of the properties for possible applications in
thermoelectric power generation will also be made. ***