* 9406069
* Optimum Receivers Under Complexity Constraints for Radio    CDMA Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Mahesh Varanasi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 11/30/1998
* USD 297,483.00

9406069 Varanasi Several civilian nondirectional communication applications such
as mobile radio telephony and personal communication services require bandwidth-
efficient multiple-access radio communication as well as a tremendous
flexibility in system design. The dynamic channel sharing strategy of Code-
Division Multiple-Access (CDMA) is particularly well-suited and its feasibility
for such applications and is currently being actively investigated. This project
will advance the theory of optimum receivers under complexity constraints for
CDMA communication in fading multipath radio channels through research on
several aspects of this broad subject. The asymptotic performance measures of
near-far resistance and fading resistance will be defined in order to succinctly
characterize the effects of estimable and inestimable interference in multiuser
fading channels. The design and analysis of optimum linear detection rules for
slowly fading and time-varying but memoryless multipath fading CDMA channels is
proposed. Linear adaptive receivers that are near-far and fading resistant will
be developed for dynamically time-varying multipath fading channels with memory.
The concept of group detection will be studied in the context of Gaussian as
well as time-varying multipath fading CDMA channels in order to address the need
for strategies with complexities ranging between those of linear and optimal
detectors that bridge the wide gap in performance between them in applications
requiring bandwidth efficient communication. Receiver optimality is also
addressed through the design of signature waveforms that optimize the
performance of fading channel detectors under bandwidth constraints. The results
of this research effort will yield optimum centralized CDMA receivers under
various complexity constraints that are well-suited for implementation at base
stations and that will serve as ideals in both function and performance to be
emulated by decentralized signal reception schemes constrained by even lower
complexities. ***