* 9406809
* Random Finite Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* James Lynch, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 08/31/1998
* USD 88,120.00

9406809 Lynch The central theme of the proposed research is the analysis of
logically definable properties of random finite structures. The kinds of finite
structures that will be investigated occur in the theory of relational
databases, descriptive complexity theory, operating systems, and the analysis of
algorithms. There are two motivations for examining random structures. First,
the logically definable properties of many formal languages have a very regular
behavior on random finite structures. For example, every sentence in the
language may have probability that converges to a limit, as the cardinality of
the random structure increases. Often, the definable properties of a language
correspond to some class of computational problems. Then the regularity
condition can be exploited to show that some problems are not in the class: if a
problem does not satisfy the regularity condition, then it does not belong to
the class. The other motivation is that many computational processes, even
deterministic ones, are unpredictable because their inputs are unpredictable.
Then in order to estimate the likelihood or frequency of events, probabilistic
analysis is necessary. The events be investigated include satisfaction of
database queries and deadlock in multiprogramming systems. Both of these are
definable in certain formal languages.