* 9406594
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Technological Change in the Siberian Oil Industry: Performance and Its Influence on    Regional Economic Development
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1995
* Lucy Jarosz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 05/31/1995
* USD 9,664.00

9406594 JAROSZ In Russia and other former communist nations, economic activities
are continuing to undergo structural transformations. The processes through
which the old institutions geared toward centralized state control of resources
into decentralized forms of private ownership have varied in different
industries and in different regions. This doctoral dissertation research project
will consist of a small-scale comparative study of changing institutional
structure through examination of four different petroleum-extraction and
-transportation operations in Siberia. The initial phases of the project will
include archival research into international funding organization policies and
programs. Interviews will be conducted with officials at agencies like the
International Monetary Fund and World Bank, with project- development officers
and other officials at multinational oil companies, and with lawyers experienced
in joint ventures involving Russia. The doctoral student also will attend an
international seminar on petroleum and mineral law and policy. The final phases
of the project will consist of on-site visits to the Siberian oil operation,
where interviews will be conducted with industry and local government leaders
and workers, and data will be obtained from published accounts and field
observations. This project will provide valuable new insights into relationships
among institutional and technological changes in an important extractive
industry. In addition to generating empirical information about four private oil
operations in Siberia, this research will enhance understandings of the impacts
of local, regional, and national policies and the intervention of foreign
multinational corporations on the development of an important extractive
activity. As a doctoral dissertation research improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.