* 9406197
* Physically Based Information Science of Magnetic Recording
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1998
* Ronald Indeck, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 01/31/1998
* USD 421,807.00

9406197 O'Sullivan The existence, at Washington University, of strong programs
both in information theory and communications systems, and in magnetic
information storage, has resulted in fruitful collaboration on the information
capacity of magnetic storage systems. The initial results of this collaboration
show that the ultimate capacity bounds of magnetic storage media exceed existing
practice and short term projections by nearly three orders of magnitude. The
capacity bounds of the complete storage system reflect these ultimate bounds,
but are further limited by the other system components, including transducers,
codes, and electronics. This project analyzes these limits, and seeks design
rules for components and channels to maximize the use of the potential capacity.
This objective is supported by three connected research activities. The first of
these activities addresses the modeling of storage media. The models used to
date have been idealized to reduce their computational complexity; they have
yielded valuable qualitative results. The project is developing a quantitative
analysis requiring more realistic modeling while still being computationally
tractable. Specifically, thermal, spatial and dynamic effects will be included
in more refined medium and channel models. Annealing algorithms will be
incorporated to examine this area. This will allow understanding of the
fundamental limits of this channel. The analysis of possible implementations of
a complete storage channel from the viewpoint of its information capacity
comprises a major part of our research. Such an analysis accounts not only for
the properties of the medium, but also for such issues as asymmetries of storage
and retrieval, electronics, and archivability. Initial studies focus on
computing the capacity of simplified versions of the recording channel that
include the read head. A striking result of this work has been the development
of relations and equivalences between the ph ysical parameters of storage media
and their capacity bounds. This has led to a proposal of new medium design
guides for ultra-high density storage. These results were developed for media
imbedded in ideal systems, and are expected to be reflected in similar relations
in existing and projected technological realizations. The equivalences will be
tested experimentally, using a variety of media, in their unique laboratory
facilities. These researchers were the first to demonstrate experimentally that
medium noise has a repeatable component due to local medium properties. These
experiments motivated the development of medium models for use in magnetic
recording system analysis and design, which led to the proposal to exploit that
deterministic noise component to increase the capacity of magnetic recording
systems. Experiments form an integral part of the research. The research team
has theorists working closely with experimentalists. As a result, the models and
results derived can immediately be compared to measurements of physical systems.
The supporting studies will combine to address the design of optimal signal
processing schemes, for realizable systems, that take full advantage of the
available components. The design strategies will explore new methods for storing
information magnetically, and unconventional information processing techniques.
It is hoped that the results will have wide applicability to other information
systems; the approach, joining device physics with information science, is
unparalleled in the field. This physically-based approach to information science
will develop new analysis techniques for complex systems, motivate the design of
new components and systems, and design new signal processing strategies to
approach the computed capacity limits. Through this novel and unconstrained
approach new ways to process and store information will emerge yielding dramatic
increases in storage density. ***