* 9406198
* Magnetic Microstructures & Information Storage
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Ronald Indeck, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/1997
* USD 279,130.00

9406198 Indeck The proposed research will have two facets: it will be a
contribution to the understanding and design of materials and components of
information storage systems from a new viewpoint, and it will serve as the basis
for a potential breakthrough in increasing the capacity of information storage
systems. Recent studies suggest that the limiting effects of media noise in
information storage systems are capable of being reduced or eliminated by the
use of "smart" components in the storage channel that sense the irregularities
and compensate for them in the storage and/or retrieval process. Such adaptive
compensation can be made possible in real time because of the speed advantage of
semiconductor electronics processing over magnetization process time scales. It
is anticipated that a novel and unconventional approach to medium noise
reduction will become indispensable as storage densities (especially track
densities) increase. Several possible approaches to adaptive media noise
compensation can be envisaged at present, however, a detailed choice and a
successful implementation will require physical and analytical information not
currently available. The purpose of this work is to provide some of the
scientific underpinnings for such an effort. Accordingly the research activities
will include several interdependent studies: oMicroscopy: determination of the
physical and magnetic microstructure of medial and transducers oMagnetic
measurements of feature size, using instruments, experimental methods, and
methods of data reduction and analysis developed at Washington University.
oMeasurements and modeling of the trackwidth dependence of media noise.
oModeling and computational physics of storage media; correlation of
micromagnetic calculation with microscope observation; prediction of the
attainable storage capacity of a physically realizable storage system.
oDevelopment of design criteria for adaptive noise compensation and design of
multi-element transducers for functional implementation. The results of the
proposed research will have two-fold significance, as an augmentation of the
science base of magnetic information storage, and as a new departure in the
design of storage systems. ***