* 9406034
* Dissertation Research:  Analysis of Epipaleolithic Lithic   Materials
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1995
* Geoffrey Clark, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1995
* USD 4,650.00

9406034 Clark Under the direction of Dr. Geoffrey Clark, Mr. Michael Neeley will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will examine archaeological
collections at several U.S. universities and analyze the collected data. His
focus is on the Epipaleolithic period (from ca. 18,000 to 5,000 years ago) in
the Near East and he will study stone tools from a number of sites in this
region. He will conduct a number of technological analyses, note differences
among sites and attempt to relate these to a series of variables such as the
availability of raw material, the nature of the local environment and
prehistoric peoples' use of the environment. Because they are so common and well
preserved, stone tools provide an important source of archaeological data. For
over a century prehistorians have examined such materials to gain insight into
the culture of the makers. Traditionally, variation in assemblages between sites
has been ascribed to factors such as "ethnicity" or function. In recent years
archaeologists have recognized that other factors such as mobility strategy can
affect assemblage variation. This realization is resulting in the development of
analytic approaches which may provide new insight into prehistoric life. Mr.
Neeley's work follows in, and expands on this tradition. This research is
important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists. It will assist in the development of new analytic techniques of
potentially wide applicability and will assist in the training of a promising
young scientist. ***