* 9406550
* Regulation of Photosynthetic Electron Transport Genes in    Chlamydomonas Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1994,02/28/1998
* David Stern, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 02/28/1998
* USD 364,440.00

Abstract 9406550 Much of chloroplast gene regulation occurs at the post-
transcriptional level. The aim of this project is to undertake a systematic
study of chloroplast translation initiation using genetic and biochemical
approaches. We will focus on the pet genes, whose products form the cytochrome
b6/f complex, which transports electrons between photosystem II and photosystem
I. Mutations predicted to interfere with translation initiation will be
introduced into pet genes and second-site suppressors of these mutations will be
analyzed. In a parallel approach, efforts will be made to generate null
mutations in nuclear translational activator genes by insertional inactivation.
Non-photosyntheic transformants will be generated and screened for defects in
chloroplast protein accumulation and translation. The inserted DNA tags the
gene, which facilitates cloning the mutated gene and subsequently the wild-type
version. In addition to these genetic approaches, in vitro biochemical methods
will be used to identify and characterize proteins that interact with the 5'
UTR. Protein extracts from suppressor and insertion mutants will be assayed for
any differences in protein binding factors. The results of the project will lead
to a greater understanding of the cis-acting sequences controlling translation,
and the proteins that interact with these sequences. %%% Although chloroplasts
contain their own genetic apparatus, most of the regulatory signals are
transmitted to the chloroplast by the action of nuclear gene products. The
isolation and analysis of mutants in both higher plants and algae that are
defective in this signaling process have revealed that in most cases,
chloroplast gene regulation occurs at the post-transcriptional level. Examples
of such mutations include those that affect messenger RNA lifetimes or RNA
maturation, protein synthesis or stability, and the assembly of macromolecular
complexes. The first of two general approaches in this projec t is to introduce
mutations that interfere with protein synthesis into chloroplast genes and then
to identify compensating suppressor mutations in nuclear genes. At the same
time, biochemical methods will be used to detect the protein factors directly.
In a second general approach, efforts will be made to generate mutations that
disrupt the functions of nuclear translational activator genes, by introducing
transforming DNA into the nucleus. Once such mutants have been identified, the
"tagged" gene can be isolated. The results of the proposed research will lead to
a greater understanding of the sequences that control translation of chloroplast
RNAs, and of the proteins that interact with these sequences. ***