* 9406233
* Transcriptional Regulation by P and C1, Two Maize MYB -     Homologs
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Erich Grotewold, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 04/30/1998
* USD 356,992.00

Abstract 9406233 Flavonoid derived pigments are almost universally found in the
plant kingdom, providing color to flowers, fruits, leaves and storage organs.
The most commonly found flavonoid derived pigment, the anthocyanins, are derived
from 3-hydroxy flavonoids. The biosynthesis of the flavonoid derived pigments in
maize presents a unique system for the study of the structure and function of
transcriptional regulators. A large number of maize genes have been reported
that directly affect the amount, hydroxylation pattern and distribution of
flavonoids and flavonoid derived pigments. Several of the genes encoding enzymes
of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway have been cloned and characterized: C2,
CH1, A1, A2,BZ1, BZ2, as well as others which are shared between the 3-deoxy and
3-hydroxy flavonoid biosynthetic pathways: C2, CH11, A1. The regulation of these
pathways in maize is controlled by two classes of regulatory proteins: those
with a Myb-homologous domain (C1 and P1) and those with a basic helix-loop-helix
domain (members of the R and B families). Anthocyanin production requires the
interaction of a member of the C1/P1 family and a member of the R/B families.
Thus the pattern of anthocyanin pigmentation in any particular plant part is
given by the combinatorial, tissue specific expression of the regulatory genes.
The goals of this work are to 1) determine whether the regulation of C2 and CH11
by P and C1 is similar to that of A1 2) characterize the regions of P required
for the P regulatory function 3) structurally analyze the DNA binding domain of
P and its' relation to other plant Myb-homologs and 4)analyze possible
interactions of P with other factors. %%% The biosynthesis of the flavonoid
derived pigments in maize presents a unique system for the study of the
structure and function of transcriptional regulators, in that the absence of the
intermediates or final products of the pathway does not affect maize viability
and P activity can be readily scored by inspection of the kernels and cobs. The
potential of the system is increased, in that mutants of almost every gene in
the pathway are available. The results of this study should give greater insight
into the mechanisms of combinatorial regulation of biosynthetic pathways in
plants. ***