* 9406141
* Cellular and Molecular Events in Early Leech Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* David Weisblat, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 08/31/1997
* USD 285,000.00

Glossiphoniid leeches, including various species of Helobdella, are useful for
in depth analyses of developmental processes for two reasons: first, they are
relatively simple animals with large, accessible embryos that are suited for
combined cellular and molecular techniques. Second, since leeches belong to the
phylum Annelida, an otherwise poorly studied group, the results obtained are
useful for making interphyletic comparisons. Such comparisons are essential to
distinguish general developmental processes from phylum-specific ones, and also
to learn how evolutionary modification of developmental processes leads to the
appearance of diverse animal types. For example, annelids and arthropods
resemble each other (and differ from molluscs) in that they both have segmented
body plans. In both annelids and arthropods, segmental tissues arise from
longitudinally oriented, ventrally situated arrays of cells, termed the germ
band (in arthropods such as the fruitfly Drosophila) or germinal plate (in
annelids). In leech, the germinal plate arises in strict head-to-tail
(rostrocaudal) progression by repeated divisions of specialized embryonic stem
cells called teloblasts. Homologs of several genes involved in rostrocaudal
patterning of Drosophila seem to be expressed in homologous patterns during
rostrocaudal patterning of leech. This suggests that the molecular genetic
processes of differentiation and morphogenesis in later development will be
quite similar in the two phyla. But the early Helobdella embryo is strikingly
different from the early Drosophila embryo and strikingly similar to the
molluscan embryos. Thus, the question of how cell fates are determined in the
early leech is of considerable interest. The first part of this proposal
contains experiments designed to further previous investigations of how distinct
fates are assigned to particular cells in the developing embryo, with emphasis
on the assignment of mesodermal and ectodermal fates to individual ly identified
cells that are born when the embryo contains only 10 cells, and to look for
similarities between Helobdella and Drosophila in this regard. A second question
of interest is that of how the "molluscan" mode of early leech development
meshes with the "arthropodan" mode of later development. A critical aspect of
this process is the spreading of one layer of cells over the entire surface of
the embryo during the formation of the germinal plate in Helobdella. The
experiments in the second part of this proposal are designed to elucidate the
cellular processes involved in these morphogenetic movements.