* 9406424
* GRGC:  Collaborative Research:  A "Reference Section" at    Cismon, Italy, for the APTICORE  Program
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1999
* James Channell, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/1999
* USD 42,776.00

9406424 Channell This proposal coordinates the efforts of four American groups,
in conjunction with Italian investigators, to core and analyze a 125 meter-long
section of Aptian-Barremian age strata near Cismon, Italy. The core site has
been selected to recover an expanded pelagic section recording a time of large-
scale global change, namely the time of transition into the mid-Cretaceous
"greenhouse" climate. The study is part of a large program called APTICORE, and
will define a "reference section" for this major period of global climate
change. The cores and logs will be studied by a team of investigators from the
Universities of Florida, Michigan, Brown, and Rhode Island (who request support
with this proposal) and the Universita de Milano, whose investigators are funded
by the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche. The Florida investigator will study
the magnetostratigraphy and rock magnetic properties of the cored section to
define the essential timeframe for other studies and to determine the magnetic
mineralogy of the section. The Michigan investigators will study the carbon
isotope stratigraphy (both as carbonate and organic carbon) and strontium
isotope stratigraphy to determine the manner in which carbon is partitioned in
the oceanic system during global climate change, and to determine the initial
timing and relative magnitude of the volcanic pulse using Sr-isotopes as
markers. The Brown investigator will study the cyclostratigraphy of the cored
section by digital colorimetry and associated chemical analyses to determine the
detailed sedimentary history of the section and the absolute time spans of the
Selli Level "black shale" episode and various preceding magnetic chrons. The
Rhode Island investigator will co-mange the field program and will study the
chemostratigraphy and cyclostratigraphy of the section with chemical and
microresistivity logs. He will determine the chemo-sedimentary history of the
section and independently measure cyclosratigraphy with microre sistivity for
time resolution studies as described above. The Universita di Milano
investigators will define the biostratigraphy of the section, interpret the
ecologic responses of the biota to climate change, and have responsibility for
archiving and curation of the cores. It is expected that these studies will all
compliment each other and be published in various joint formats in attempts to
extract the causes and effects that link various geologic processes during a
period of major global climate change.