* 9406490
* Environmental Geochemistry of Chromium and Selenium:        Spectroscopy, Solution Chemistry, Electrochemistry, and     Collaborative Field Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* George Parks, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/1999
* USD 269,538.00

9406490 Brown This project focuses on factors that control the geochemical
behavior of Cr and Se in soils, sediments, and natural waters particularly those
affecting their sorption on the surfaces of common oxide and clay minerals. It
integrates laboratory studies of the surface geochemistry of magnetite,
kaolinite, and smectite and the sorption and redox behavior of Se on these
minerals and Cr on magnetite with several ongoing field investigations of the
environmental geochemistry of Cr and Se in magnetite- and clay-bearing sediments
being conducted by associate investigators from the USGS and LBL. The objectives
of this proposed research are (1) to define quantitatively reaction
stoichiometries and the geometry and composition of Cr(III) and Cr(VI) complexes
sorbed on magnetite and of Se(IV) and Se(VI) complexes sorbed on magnetite,
kaolinite, and smectite; (2) to characterize the magnetite surface before and
after sorption using various spectroscopic and scattering techniques; (3) to
utilize the results of our spectroscopic measurements in developing a predictive
macroscopic model of sorption behavior and fluid-solid partitioning of chromium
and selenium ions; and (4) to study the speciation of chromium and selenium in
natural sediments and soils from two field sites. The proposed research builds
on NSF-funded studies of sorption processes of inorganic solutes at mineral-
water interfaces of the past six years and is a natural extension to systems
involving redox-sensitive inorganic solutes.