* 9406943
* Construction of a Complete Map of the Arabidopsis Genome
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Joseph Ecker, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1998
* USD 1,250,000.00

9406943 Ecker, Joseph The goal of this research is to construct the physical
map of the genome of Arabidopsis Thaliana. Arabidopsis has become the best
studied reference flowering plant due to its unique features such as a small
genome of about 100 Mbp, a low amount of dispersed repetitive DNA, and a large
amount of accumulated genetic data. A Powerful method of furthering our
understanding of the genetics and molecular biology of an organism is the
construction of a physical map of its genome. The unique features of the
Arabidopsis system makes the prospects of construction of a physical map and
sequencing of the entire genome particularly promising. Specifically, Dr. Ecker
plans to map the genome of Arabidopsis by sequence tagged site (STS) content
mapping of yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clones with higher informative
simple sequence length polymorphism markers. The objectives include (1) the
identification of a large number of simple sequence repeats spread throughout
the genome which will form the framework genetic map, and (2) construction of
the physical map of the genome by STS content mapping of YACs using these
markers. Dr. Ecker plans to share his data by releasing genetic and physical
mapping information, DNA sequence information and biological materials on a
monthly basis. All DNA sequence data will be submitted to the STS database at
the National Center of Biotechnology Information. All biological materials
generated from this projects will be distributed through the Arabidopsis
Biological Resource Center at Ohio State University. ***