* 9406658
* Amphibolite Exchange and Social Complexity in Copper Age    Portugal:  Phase I - Source Characterizations and Analyses  of Archaeological Assemblage
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1995
* Katina Lillios, Ripon College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1995
* USD 17,260.00

9406658 Lillios With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Katina Lillios
will initiate the first stage of a proposed long term study which examines the
rise of social complexity during the Copper Age (3000-2000 BC) in Portugal.
Archaeological evidence indicates that it was during this period that stratified
complex societies first emerged in Western Europe. Dr. Lillios believes that
differential access and control over scarce and valued resources played a
central role in this process and that amphibolite, a rock which was used to make
ground stone tools, constitutes such a good. Dr. Lillios has identified outcrops
of amphibolite in Portugal and conducted preliminary petrographic and chemical
analyses which indicate that sources can be identified on the basis of structure
and composition. In this current project she will expand on this work.
Additional sourcing and analysis will be conducted with the goal of developing
methods which allow more precise geographic characterization. Dr. Lillios will
also study ground stone objects from a series of Copper Age sites to determine
whether or not assignment of finished materials to individual source areas is in
fact possible. On this basis, in future research projects, she should be able to
reconstruct trade routes and relate these to social and economic variation among
different settlements. Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies
originally arose and how they were maintained. Evidence from many parts of the
world suggests that trade and control over scarce and valued resources played a
central role. Researchers are now attempting to build a data base which would
allow the comparison of individual cases. Dr. Lillios' work is important in this
context. It will also provide data of interest to many archaeologists and will
assist in the career development of a promising young scientist.