* 9406322
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of rRNA Function in Tetrahymena
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Meng-Chao Yao, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1996
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract 9406322 Tetrahymena thermophila is the only organism in which the rDNA
is not redundant in the germline genome and in which complete replacement of the
functional rDNA has been achieved by this laboratory. It thus represents a
unique model system in which to study rRNA function by genetic means. We will
continue and expand our study of rRNA function in several ways. We will continue
our analysis of the D8 variable region, a conserved region which preliminary
experiments indicate is essential for cell growth and will then analyze three
other regions to determine if the sequence and structural features that are
important for cell growth in the D8 region are found in those regions. We will
do phylogenetic analysis of comparative sequences of the D8 region in
Tetrahymena chosen to represent groups with varying evolutionary distances from
T. thermophila. We will test whether the conserved features of the D8 region
reside in their secondary or tertiary structures by selectively altering limited
sequences and determining their ability to support cell growth after
transformation. We will continue several approaches in order to further define
the possible function of the D8 region and the peptidyl transferase center. We
will also study the effects of rDNA mutations on nucleolar organization. The
results of this study should give a greatly expanded view of the function of
rRNA in eukaryotic cells. %%% The ribosomal RNAs are among the most
characterized molecules in the cell. The complete nucleotide sequences of these
molecules are known from nearly 200 species of organisms including both
eukaryotes and prokaryotes as well as a number of chloroplasts and nitochondria.
Despite this knowledge, very little is known about the function of these
ubiquitous and important molecules. Essentially nothing is known about how rRNAs
are involved in protein synthesis or other cellular activities. They may
actually be involved in the catalytic process of the ribososme, thus repre
senting the largest and most ancient ribozymes. Past studies of rRNA function
have been limited in part by diffculties in genetic manipulations. The rRNA
genes are present in multiple copies in almost all experimental organisms.
Tetrahymena thermophila is the only organism in which the rDNA is not redundant
in the germline genome and in which complete replacement of the functional rDNA
has been achieved. It thus represents a unique model system in which to study
rRNA function by genetic means. ***