* 9406249
* The Evolution of Lymphocyte Recognition
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Gregory Warr, Medical University of South Carolina
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/1997
* USD 315,000.00

9406249 Warr Although the structure and pathways of expression of the gene
encoding the heavy chain of the IgM antibody of the channel catfish (Ictalurus
punctatus) have been defined in previous studies, many aspects of the function
of this gene remain unresolved. The evolution of the unusual pre-mRNA processing
pathways which produce the antigen receptor, membrane-bound form of the IgM is
not understood, and neither is the nature of the transcriptional control
elements (particularly the enhancer) that drive the expression of this gene. As
the major objective of this application, it is proposed to define the core
enhancer element in the catfish heavy chain gene in terms of its precise
location, structure and specificity of cell-type expression. An understanding of
both the structure and expression of the catfish heavy chain gene could permit
the successful design of genetic approaches to manipulating the antibody
response in a commercially important fish. The catfish IgH enhancer will be
investigated initially by functional criteria: the core enhancer will be defined
as that minimal segment of DNA from the catfish Ig heavy chain locus that will
drive expression of a reporter gene (e.g. chloramphenicol acetyltransferase) in
a B cell-specific manner. Reporter constructs will be transfected into cloned,
in vitro grown channel catfish cell lines of B cell, T cell and macrophage
lineage and their transcriptional activity measured in transient expression
assays. Once the core enhancer region of the catfish IgH locus has been located,
then the specific sequence motifs that bind the transcription factors will be
defined by a combination of mobility- shift, footprinting and functional
analyses. The functional analysis will consist of utilizing fragments of the
enhancer, in various combinations, in reporter constructs in which it is
attempted to reconstruct the tissue specific activity of the native IgH
enhancer. %%% These molecular level studies of the regulati on of catfish
antibody gene expression will provide insight into the evolution of immune
function and generate fundamental information that will lay the groundwork for
our future ability to enhance fish immune responses by genetic means. ***