* 9406224
* Mossbauer Spectroscopy on Nitrogenase Components
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Eckard Munck, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1999
* USD 610,000.00

9406224 Munck Mossbauer and EPR spectroscopy will be used to study a variety of
iron-sulfur proteins and synthetic complexes that mimic the active sites of
these proteins. The major focus of the proposed studies will be nitrogenase,
with particular emphasis on characterizing intermediates of the catalytic
reaction. For these studies protein is available that contains one cluster type
(either the cofactor centers or the P-clusters) enriched with the Mossbauer
isotope 57Fe whereas the other cluster type contains the Mossbauer-silent 56Fe.
The availability of such protein will facilitate the data analyses
substantially; moreover, it will allow us to probe the electronic structure of
both clusters in considerably more detail. It is also proposed to study
carbonmonoxide dehydrogenase and two types of hydrogenases. One of the
hydrogenases contains the so-called H- cluster, the stoichiometry of which has
not yet been determined in any system studied thus far. Finally, theoretical and
experimental studies of 3Fe clusters that occur in proteins and synthetic
compounds will be continued. %%% The biological system converts annually in
excess of 10 million tons of atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia, which is
subsequently incorporated into other cell constituents. Since this process is
fundamental to agriculture, many biochemists, biophysicists and geneticists have
directed much effort to understand this process on the molecular level. The
research of our laboratory has provided a major contribution to the
clarification of the structure of the metal centers of nitrogenase. While our
past research has addressed the structural aspects of two novel metal clusters
in this enzyme, future activities will be directed mostly towards understanding
the mechanism of the process, i.e. after having defined the structure involved
we wish to elucidate the sequential events occurring during nitrogen fixation.
Moreover, we wish to provide structural information to inorganic chemists for
the design of catalysts that mimic the biological process. Our struggles with
nitrogenase have involved complementary studies that lead to the discovery of
new clusters and to fundamentally new insights into magnetochemistry. The
proposal studies will address the biochemistry of nitrogenase as well as
research of a variety of other related proteins. Our studies of the biological
compounds will be complemented by studies of suitable chemical models and
theoretical modelling. ***