* 9406483
* Allelic Interactions at The R Locus of Zea Mays
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Elsbeth Walker, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1996
* USD 150,000.00

9406483 Walker Paramutation is defined as an interaction between alleles that
leads to directed heritable change at a locus with high frequency. The phenotype
is different depending upon which parent transmits the allele. The best studied
example of paramutation occurs at the R locus of Zea mays. We will study this
system in corn and analyze both the factors that cause a gene to be imprintable
and the factors which signal the gene to imprint strongly when next transmitted
through pollen. The goal of the work is to initiate a molecular analysis of
paramutation. We will determine whether methylation of the locus and decreased
production of pigment occur simultaneously and we determine the structures at
R/r that are responsible for allowing paramutation and imprinting to occur. %%%
Diploid organisms inherit two sets of chromosomes; a maternal set and a paternal
set. In most cases, both copies of a gene will function or not in the same way
but in a few known cases, the gene from one parent will be expressed and the
same gene from the other parent will not be expressed. This phenomenon is known
as parental imprinting or paramutation. One of the best studied examples of
paramutation is in corn at a locus named R. We will initiate a molecular
analysis of this phenomenon in corn and try to determine the mechanisms utilized
by the plant. Undergraduate students will participate in the work. A better
understanding of genomic mechanisms will be of importance both at the basic and
at the applied level. ***