* 9406436
* Development of an Evolutionary Flow Path Model of Water     and Solutes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1994,12/31/1999
* Carol Kendall, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/1999
* USD 310,317.00

9406436 McDonnell The knowledge of the hydrologic flowpaths is critical to
understanding runoff of generation and the transport of pollutants on to
modeling the linkages between hydrologic flux and geochemical flux. However,
models and field studies are not well linked in hydrological investigations.
Furthermore, attempts to introduce such field observations into models have
faced the inevitable compromise between the value of additional data and the
identifiability of parameters required to take account of the data. New research
on runoff flowpaths has shown that spatially- distributed models are required to
capture the key hydrological and geochemical processes. This work will develop a
new synergistically linked hydrologic/geochemical model of how: (1) waters
evolve chemically and isotopically along the different flowpaths and (2)
specific flowpaths produce distinctive "signatures" related to the topographic
position and hydrologic history of the water. Uncertainty analysis will be used
to assess uncertainty in the model parameters. Our objectives are: (i) to
develop a hydrogeochemical model within which the dynamics of stream chemistry
and flowpaths can be related to fieldwork, (ii) to assess model
structure/parameter uncertainties and identify fieldwork strategies to reduce
such uncertainties, (iii) to make spatially-distributed measurements in the
field to validate spatially-distributed estimates of soil moisture, water table
elevations, isotope and solute concentrations, (iv) to examine the controls on
geochemical/isotopic evolution along flowpaths by using physical characteristics
and responses of the catchment, and (v) to use the new model as a tool for
testing specific hypotheses on flowpaths and mixing overall this study
represents an innovative attempt (i) to link a evolutionary reaction-path model
constrained by both solute isotope and geochemical data within a
topographically-driven hydrologic model at the hillslope scale and (ii) to de
velop a new type of hydrogeochemical model in a form constrained by the
interaction of the field campaign and the assessment of model uncertainty. The
work would make it easier to apply fully distributed models in other study
areas.