* 9406275
* Genetic Studies on Mechanisms of Disulfide Bond Formation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1997
* Jonathan Beckwith, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/1997
* USD 220,000.00

9406275 Beckwith Many proteins exported from cells and many membrane proteins
contain disulfide linkages between cysteines within their sequences. These
disulfide bonds are often important both for the folding and the functioning of
the protein. In 1991, it was found that bacteria express a protein, DsbA, that
is required for efficient formation of disulfide bonds in proteins. Since then,
it has been found that the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae expresses a similar
activity. A major purpose of this project is to study the mechanism by which the
DsbA protein catalyzes oxidation of pairs of cysteines in proteins. To this end,
mutants are being isolated that are defective in DsbA activity, the mutant genes
sequenced and in vivo studies carried out to define the defective step in the
process. In addition, interaction and collaborations with biochemists and an
X-ray crystallographer will help elucidate the basis of the defect. These
studies should lead to a detailed picture of the structurefunction relationships
for DsbA. To further understand the mechanism of DsbA action, experiments done
in vivo are designed to indicate at what stage of protein synthesis and folding
the DsbA protein acts on exported proteins to catalyze disulfide bond formation.
In vivo and in vitro experiments will test whether DsbA can act on an already
folded protein. In vivo experiments will analyze exported proteins during the
process of membrane translocation to determine whether disulfide bonds can form
before the proteins are fully translocated. A genetic selection has been devised
which may allow the isolation of mutants of exported proteins that are unable to
be acted on by systems that promote disulfide bond formation even though they
retain the appropriate cysteines. beta-lactamase will be used as a model system
since it has a single disulfide bond, is exported to the periplasm, is
functional in the absence of its disulfide bond and has had its 3-dimensional
structure determined to 1.8 Angst roms. These mutants may alter the folding,
pathway for the protein or its secondary or tertiary structure. Analysis of the
sequence and structure of the mutant proteins should reveal the important
features that allow disulfide bond formation to take place. Experiments are also
designed to detect other systems in the bacterial periplasm that catalyze
disulfide bond formation. In the absence of the DsbA system, a background
disulfide bond-forming activity is found. Mutants that both increase and
decrease the activity of this background activity will be sought. In addition,
genetic studies will be initiated to identify the system responsible for
disulfide bond formation under conditions of anaerobic growth. These studies
should lead to the identification of genes and gene products responsible for
these other activities. %%% These studies have wide implications for basic and
applied science. The results are relevant to questions of protein folding, one
of the major new developing areas in biology. In addition, the formation of
disulfide bonds in expressed foreign proteins in bacterial systems has presented
many problems. The ability to manipulate the disulfide bond-forming systems
should allow more ready solution to these expression problems. The range of
important proteins that contain disulfide bonds includes peptide hormones,
membrane receptors, bacterial toxins and immunoglobulins. ***