* 9407122
* Are enzymes of the oxidative limb of the Pentose Phosphate  Pathway in soybean nodules organized in a macro molecular   complex?
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Daniel Kohl, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* A Berry
* 07/31/1998
* USD 287,900.00

9407122 Kohl The oxidative limb of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) in the
cytoplasm of soybean nodules may be an important source of ribose- 5-phosphate,
the starting point for the synthesis of ureades and the form in which
biologically fixed nitrogen is exported from the nodule to the whole plant.
Results with soybean suggesting that glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) in nodule extract
is not in equilibrium with the concentration of G6P in bulk medium, and that
half of the PPP activity precipitates at a relatively modest centrifugal force
(290,000 x g) have led to the proposition that the PPP functions as a
macromolecular complex (metabolon). Within this metabolon, PPP intermediates are
channeled from one enzyme to the next. Examples of metabolic channeling in other
systems has proved to be important in conserving the limited solvent capacity of
cell water, protecting intermediates which are unstable if not enzyme bound, and
maintaining metabolite concentration gradients inside cells. If our hypothesis
is correct about PPP channeling, this example of "channeling" would contribute
not only to understanding about nodule metabolism but also to understanding
pentose phosphate metabolism in other plant and animal cells. Several approaches
will be used to investigate the idea of PPP channeling including (i) determining
which PPP intermediates are out of equilibrium with their counterparts in the
bulk medium, (ii) measuring "metabolon" size via its centrifugal and gel
filtration behavior, and (iii) comparing the kinetics of pathway function by
metabolons vs. "collections" of dissociated enzymes. %%% Metabolic pathways
consist of a series of reactions, each catalyzed by a specific enzyme. The
product of one reaction becomes the substrate (food) of the next enzyme until a
final product is formed. In some cases, the enzymes of a pathway are associated
with each other such that the product of one reaction does not leave the site of
"formation." In this way product(s) m ay be "channeled" directly from one enzyme
to another. When this happens, channeling can be important in improving
metaboliic efficiency by speeding up a series of reactions and protecting
certain unstable intermediates on the way to a final product. Work in this
laboratory has led to the hypothesis that enzymes of the pentose phosphate
pathway, a key pathway in carbohydrate formation, operates as a macromolecular
complex to channel intermediates from one enzyme to the next. The present work
will test this idea and add to the body of evidence that similar enzyme
arrangements occur in the metabolic pathways of other cells as well. ***