* 9407612
* RUI: Ty Insertional Mutagenesis in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1998
* Molly Mastrangelo, Allegany Community College
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 12/31/1998
* USD 119,904.00

9407612 Abstract The major goals of this project are to increase the general
utility of insertional mutagenesis using inducible Ty elements in the budding
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and to gain a better understanding of the
mechanism of gene disruption by Ty. In addition, the techniques used are
designed insofar as possible to involve undergraduate students, to increase
their understanding of and interest in scientific research. This study uses a
plasmid- borne Ty element controlled by an inducible promoter, GAL1, and marked
with the HIS3 gene. Disruptions of essential genes on several chromosomes have
been isolated by inducing transposition in a diploid strain and screening for
cases in which the TyHis+ haploid progeny is non-viable. The predicted rate for
lethal gene disruptions, if the pattern of insertions is random, is about 12% of
TyHis+ insertions. The observed rate is 0.3%, indicating a limited number of
permissible targets. Attempts to broaden the target region for Ty insertion will
include use of mutant strains with altered chromosome function, and
transposition induction in meiotic cells. An alternate screening technique, to
isolate mutants resistant to alpha-mating-type pheromone, produced insertionsof
TyHis+ multimers into HML alpha, a normally silent gene containinginformation
for mating-type control. Unlinked suppressors which restore silencing in hml
alpha ::TyHIS3 mutants have been isolated as well. Characterization of the
suppressors, including their interactions with genes affecting chromatin
structure, will increase understanding of the silencing mechanism at HML alpha
and may help to define some properties of this particular target of Ty
integration. %%% Genetic research has given society much of the scientific
knowledge from which society has so profoundly benefited. The production of
mutations is an essential element of genetic research. In this project, the
investigator will attempt to broaden the usefulness of a biologic al tool, the
Ty element of yeast, in generating new mutations. She will also study its
mechanisms of gene disruption. The investigator, a professor at a rural
community college, will involve her students in this research, thus
significantly raising their scientific literacy and possibly inspiring some to
pursue research careers. ***