* 9407834
* Molecular Genetic and Cellular Analysis of Light Response inMaize Leaf Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Jen Sheen, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1995
* USD 36,000.00

9407834 Sheen Light regulates many aspects of plant growth and development among
which the conversion of dark-grown etiolated leaves to photosynthetic competent
green leaves (greening) is most essential to plant life and best documented in
higher plants. Although both red and blue light photoreceptors, phytochrome and
cryptochrome, have been implicated in light signal perception, very little is
known about the molecular basis of the intracellular signal transduction
pathways mediating the light-inducible developmental processes marked by
chlorophyll accumulation and photosynthetic gene activation. We are interested
in elucidating the molecular mechanisms mediating light responses in leaf cells
by combining the genetic power with other biochemical, cellular and molecular
approaches offered by the maize experimental system. We will investigate
systematically maize mutants that are defective in light-inducible gene
expression and chloroplast biogenesis. A versatile and powerful singlecell
transient expression system will be used to clone and characterize regulatory
genes controlling light-inducible gene expression and chloroplast biogenesis
which are cell autonomous activities. The studies will facilitate our
understanding of photosynthetic functions and signal transduction in higher
plants. %%% Light regulates many aspects of plant growth and development among
which the conversion of dark-grown etiolated leaves to photosynthetic competent
green leaves (greening) is most essential to plant life and best documented in
higher plants. Although both red and blue light photoreceptors, phytochrome and
cryptochrome, have been implicated in light signal perception, very little is
known about the molecular basis of the intracellular signal transduction
pathways mediating the light-inducible developmental processes marked by
chlorophyll accumulation and photosynthetic gene activation. We are interested
in elucidating the molecular mechanisms mediating light respo nses in leaf cells
by combining the genetic power with other biochemical, cellular and molecular
approaches offered by the maize experimental system. We are planning to analyze
systematically the existing maize photosynthetic mutants by RT-PCR and
protoplast transient expression assays. We will make expression cDNA library and
conduct pilot experiments to explore the possibility of complementing mutants
using the protoplast transient expression assay. New cell surface reporter genes
and fluorescence activated protoplast sorting techniques which offer the
efficiency and high resolution for expression cloning and mutant complementation
will be tested. It is likely that the system will serve as an excellent tool to
unravel unexpected new insights into the molecular mechanisms of light signal
transduction and gene regulation in higher plants. ***