* 9407153
* Systematics, Cytogenetics and Life Histories of Nearctic    Blepharicera (Diptera:  Blephariceridae)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Gregory Courtney, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 01/31/1998
* USD 90,000.00

9407153 Courtney Net-winged midges (Diptera: Blephariceridae) are a distinctive,
specialized, and unusual group of insects. The group has a world-wide
distribution and includes approximately 300 described species. Because of their
unusual morphology and intimate association with clean, cold, rapidly flowing
streams, net-winged midges have been of interest to morphologists, systematists,
and ecologists; yet these flies are one of the most under-appreciated groups of
aquatic insects. Recent studies have shown that the larvae of these insects are
significant to stream ecosystems, not only as consumers of algae but also as
food for vertebrate predators (e.g. trout). Because net-winged midges are a
diverse, widespread group with individuals short-lived and closely associated
with mountain streams, their patterns of speciation and distribution should
closely reflect historical events (e.g. mountain building, glaciation). These
attributes make net-winged midges a model taxon for studies of the relationships
and biogeography of montane and aquatic organisms. This study of the
systematics, cytogenetics, and life histories of North American species in the
genus Blepharicera will 1) examine the taxonomy, relationships and biogeography
of native species; 2) analyze the chromosomes of Blepharicera populations for
relationships and cryptic or sibling species; 3) test for congruence between
chromosomal and traditional morphological characters; and 4) compare and
contrast the life histories of North American Belpharicera, in order to identify
isolating mechanisms in species and sibling species. By incorporating all of
these objectives into a single investigation, this will be one of the most
comprehensive systematic studies of any group of aquatic flies. The significance
of this research extends well beyond systematics, genetics, and ecology of an
unusual group of aquatic flies. Because of their dependence on cold, clean,
well-oxygenated water, net-winged midges hold considerable promise as bioind
icators of stream quality. However, such determinations require baseline
information on biodiversity, distribution and biology of net-winged midges and
associated organisms. This study will provide these data and identify sites of
taxonomic and biogeographic significance. Simultaneously, the results of this
study will provide insights into management and conservation practices for
mountain streams in North America.