* 9407724
* Investigation of H2O2 and Ion Oxide Interactions for        Oxidation Hazardous Substances
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Mirat Gurol, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 02/28/1998
* USD 404,408.00

9407724 Gurol This is an award to support research on a potential water
treatment process using hydrogen peroxide in the presence of iron oxide
catalysts to oxidize organic substances of hazardous significance that may be
present in water or produced during its disinfection by use of chlorine. The
research involves determination of the mechanisms and rates of oxidation of the
target compounds, trichloroethylene and monochlorobenzene in continuous flow and
in batch processing modes of operating slurry reactors in which the reactions
take place. A conceptual model of the process will be experimentally evaluated
for its predictive capability. The investigator also plans on exploring the
potential use of the concept in a filtration process where the iron catalyst is
present as a coating on the water filter media. Presence of organic substances
in surface and groundwaters may result in the production of potentially
hazardous compounds when chlorine is used to disinfect the water. The research
being conducted in this project is expected to result in determination of
parameters for use in engineering design of water treatment processes to destroy
these compounds. Results may also be applicable in engineering design of systems
for remediation of groundwater that has been contaminated by chlorinated organic
compounds. ***