* 9407039
* Mathematical Sciences:  Improved Algorithms for Functional  Analysis of Genomic Information
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Diane Souvaine, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Fellowship Award
* Jean Thiebaux
* 08/31/1996
* USD 64,040.00

9407039 Souvaine Computational techniques are needed to assist in the analysis
of genomic information to determine structural and functional properties of the
genome. An example is the problem of differential gene expression. The
identification of genes expressed differently in different states of a disease
is essential for the characterization and classification of the biological and
clinical behavior of the disease. Algorithms are needed to accurately and
efficiently compare "gene fingerprints" in order to provide detailed
quantitative information on differential gene expression. To devise such
algorithms, it will be necessary to provide both useful data structures for
representing fingerprints and comparison algorithms to determine the essential
differences and similarities between two fingerprints. I propose to develop and
implement such data structures and algorithms, as well as investigate other
mathematical and computational problems that arise in the analysis of genomic
function. The first year of the proposed fellowship will be a DIMACS "special
year" in Mathematical Support for Molecular Biology. As part of this special
year, DIMACS will be holding a 25-month intensive training plan for its
postdoctoral associates. This training plan will include ongoing mentoring
biology seminars, tutorials and courses, and visits to the Waksman Institute of
Molecular Genetics at Rutgers and the NSF Science and Technology Center for
Molecular Biotechnology at the University of Washington. In addition to the
postdoctoral training plan, the special year will involve a distinguished
lecture series, a seminar series, workshops and mini-workshops, and ongoing
discussion and collaboration between the postdoctoral associates, graduate
students, and long- and short- term visitors to DIMACS. While the training
provided by CuraGen will be less organized than the training provided by DIMACS,
it will be equally valuable, and will consist of day-to-day contact with
CuraGen's molecular biologists and physical scientists, as well as unlimited
access to the biology and instrumentation laboratories.