* 9407089
* Copper and Silver Chemical Vapor Deposition:  An            Investigation of the Surface Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Toivo Kodas, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 06/30/1998
* USD 396,000.00

9407089 This renewal award is made in the Advanced Materials and Processing
Program in support of the research of Professors Mark Hampden-Smith and Toivo
Kodas. Support is provided by the Divisions of Chemistry, Materials Research,
and Chemical and Transport Systems. Two fundamental problems in metal chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) will be addressed: (1) methods of providing reproducible
delivery for precursors with low volatility, and (2) developing methods to
control selective metal deposition. Low volatility silver(I) precursors will be
prepared and their CVD studied using a aerosol delivery system which will allow
studies of reaction kinetics in partial pressure ranges that cannot be achieved
with conventional thermal delivery systems. Studies of surface chemistry will be
aimed at understanding how copper(I) precursor molecules react with surface
functional groups on silica, alumina, titania, and silicon and aluminum nitride
surfaces. These interactions will be characterized by FTIR, XPS and temperature-
programmed desorption-MS. Surfaces will be modified to control the selective
deposition of copper and silver metals. This research is relevant to
semiconductor technology. Copper will likely replace aluminum as an interconnect
for high resolution chips. This research will provide the fundamental background
for electromigration-resistant metal deposition.