* 9407232
* Regulation of the Growth and Activity of Leaf-Decomposing   Fungi by Dissolved Nutrients (N and P) in Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Keller Suberkropp, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1998
* USD 150,000.00

9407232 Subberkropp This study is designed to examine the role of dissolved
nutrients (N and P) in regulating the growth and activity of leaf-decomposing
stream fungi. Most quantitative studies of stream fungal communities have
occurred in streams with high nutrient concentrations. Consequently, little is
known concerning fungal activities in streams with low nutrient concentrations
even though much of our current understanding of stream ecosystem function has
come from studies of such systems. Rates of fungal growth and sporulation,
concentrations of fungal biomass and fungal production in both hardwater and
softwater streams with very low nutrient concentrations will be determined and
compared with similar data from streams containing higher nutrient
concentrations. Recently, a method for estimating instantaneous growth rates of
natural fungal communities by determining rates of incorporation of 14C-acetate
into ergosterol has been described. This method has been adapted for use with
stream fungal communities and will be used on decomposing leaf litter in the
study streams. These data, together with determination of ergosterol contents as
a measure of fungal biomass will allow estimation of fungal production during
leaf degradation and in streams over an annual cycle. Both types of production
estimates will be used in the comparative studies mentioned above. The effects
of N and P will be measured directly in field experiments in which water flowing
through streamside artificial channels will be amended with N, P or both
nutrients and the response of fungal communities determined. Organic matter
budgets for fungal isolates from nutrient poor and nutrient rich streams growing
on leaf litter in environmental simulating laboratory studies will be
constructed to determine if fungi exhibit different strategies of resource
allocation in response to varying nutrient concentrations. %%% This project will
provide the first research effort concentrating on the role of nutrient
limitation of fungal community structure and biomass in streams. The PI will be
using a novel technique to measure fungal growth rates and community structure.