* 9407779
* Structural Studies of Spectrin
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Leslie Wo-Mei Fung, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9407779 Fung We propose to understand the structural of the human erythrocyte
spectrin -subunit in forming head-to-head association with the -subunit to give
heterodimers and tetramers. We will use cDNA and PCR methods to express specific
-subunit segments in E. coli, with a glutathione-S-transferase gene fusion
system. Spectrin segments selected for this study will start from the N-terminus
of the - subunit and ending at different positions in the sequence, giving
peptides of various lengths. Binding studies of these purified, -recombinant
peptides with the isolated -subunit will be conducted to select peptides with
functional properties. From the functional peptides, Fourier transform infrared
techniques will be used to select the peptides that have secondary structure
similar to that of intact spectrin. The shortest peptide of these peptides will
be subjected to site directed mutagenesis to provide a set of peptides, each
with one cysteine per peptide but at different positions in the sequence, to
obtain topological information by spin label electron paramagnetic resonance
methods. At the conclusion of this project, we expect to have obtained
structural information about the first 60 amino acids in the N-terminal region
of the -submit that are required for head-to-head association. We believe that
an understanding of the -and -subunit head-to-head association forms the basis
for further understanding the assembly of spectrin subunits to give heterodimes
and tetamers. %%% Underneath the human red blood cell membranes is a skeletal
network of proteins. This skeletal network provides many of the membrane
properties, including mechanical and morphological properties, of the red cells.
Abnormal skeletal networks often lead to abnormal red blood cells causing
different types of anemia in patients. The major proteins in this network is
called spectrin. Abnormal spectrin may lead to abnormal skeletal networks. Thus
it is important to understand the structure of the spectrin molecule. However,
spectrin is a very large protein molecule for detailed structural studies. In
our project, we will synthesize a subfragment of the spectrin molecule, using
recombinant DNA methods and bacterial cells, and use reporter group techniques
to monitor the structural features of the molecule. In particular, we will
synthesize the region of the molecule that will bind its partner subunit to
provide interwoven molecules of two subunits (a dimer) that will then bind to
another spectrin dimer to form the skeletal network underlying red blood cell
membrane surfaces. With the spectrin fragment, we will attach a label which
exhibits a signal in a electron paramagnetic resonance instrument. By following
the signal changes under different experimental conditions, we will be able to
extract molecular information on the spectrin molecule. With the understanding
of the spectrin molecule, we will gain insights into the abnormalities of some o
the red blood cells from anemia patients. ***