* 9407581
* LTREB: Long-term Population Ecology of Canopy and Emergent  Trees in a Neotropical Rain Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1999
* Deborah Clark, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1999
* USD 294,871.00

9407581 Clark Lowland tropical rain forests contain a substantial part of the
planet's above-ground carbon and are the richest terrestrial habitats in plant
and animal species. In spite of their global importance and rapid rates of
tropical deforestation, surprisingly little is known about the basic ecology of
the largest organisms in these forests, the canopy trees. This project will
extend the longest running investigation on annually-measured growth, mortality,
and tree microenvironment for tropical rain forest trees. The study is located
in one of the world's most active centers for tropical rain forest research, the
La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica. Results from the first 11 years of
study have led to new insights into the ecology of tropical rain forest trees.
Multiple regeneration patterns are apparent. The great dynamism of these forests
causes high rates of physical damage to young trees. The vast majority of young
trees occupy very dark microenvironments, frequently passing years with no
growth. Small increases in light, as cause by the fall of a nearby canopy tree,
have important effects on saplings' performance and survival. Substantial
differences in annual growth occur concurrently across species, indicating the
pervasive impact of short-term climatic variation on the productivity of the
forest as a whole. Data from this project are providing a unique understanding
of the ecology of canopy trees in tropical rain forest.