* 9407903
* Realistic Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Proteins in     Mixed Solvents
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Valerie Daggett, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9407903 Daggett This is a Research Planning Grant Award. The overall goal of the
proposed research is to pursue realistic molecular modeling studies relating to
protein stability, structure, and folding. Specifically, mixed solvent systems
will be developed to better mimic experimental conditions in molecular dynamics
and simulations. With these more accurate solvent representations, current
studies in the area of protein folding will be extended by simulating the
unfolding of ubiquitin in denaturant. The molten globule state of ubiquitin has
been characterized in 60% aqueous methanol solution at low pH independently by
three research groups. The results are in opposition, with one study suggesting
that the molten globule conformation is almost completely native-like (by
hydrogen exchange), while the others identify native-like and random coil
regions of the protein (by 2- and 3-dimensional NMR). In this project,
simulations under these conditions will be performed to model the molecular
details of the molten globule state of this protein. These simulations should
shed light on the experimental discrepancies. In addition, by comparing the
detailed solvent-protein interactions occurring in pure water versus an aqueous
methanol solution, it should be possible to address how the solvent affects the
stability of proteins in various conformations (e.g., native, partially unfolded
and fully unfolded). Furthermore, the question of how the unfolding pathway
differs as a function of temperature, pH and solvent conditions will be
investigated. %%% A knowledge of the structural and mobility properties of
proteins is essential to understanding their properties and functions. For
globular proteins, internal motion is important to stability, catalysis, ligand
binding, macromolecular recognition and protein folding. The solvent environment
necessarily plays a critical role in these processes. Computer-assisted
simulations can provide detailed information in th ese areas that often cannot
be obtained experimentally, especialy in the case of protein folding where it
has proved difficult to characterize proteins during the folding process.
Protein folding is one of the fundamental unsolved problems in molecular biology
and can no longer be considered an esoteric scientific topic. To quote Science
magazine on the subject, "Why are the stakes so high? One reason is that the
payoff isn't merely theoretical ... The right answer is going to make a
difference not only to protein chemists but also to all of biotechnology."
(Hoffman, 1991). Protein folding is an area where experiment actually needs
theory, as it is unlikely that experimental studies will ever be able to provide
structural information about protein folding in comparable detail to that
available for native proteins. Computer power has now reached the stage where
protein unfolding can be simulated in water with all atoms present. The next
logical step is to perform simulations with more accurate representations of the
environment, focusing on proteins for which structural experimental data of
folding intermediates are now available. ***