* 9407321
* Protein Phosphatases:  1994 FASEB Conference                to be held July 17-22, 1994, Copper Mountain Resort,        Copper Mountain, Colorado
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1994
* Marc Mumby, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 12/31/1994
* USD 3,000.00

9407321 Brautigan This grant will provide partial support for the third FASEB
summer conference on Protein Phosphatases. Research on protein phosphatases is
proceeding at a brisk pace, revealing the fundamental importance and unexpected
complexity of these enzymes in the signal transduction pathways that govern cell
growth, structure and metabolism. Within the past year dozens of new
phosphatases and phosphatase regulatory subunits have been cloned. Now there is
appreciation that protein phosphatases initiate important intracellular events
such as G2 to M progression in the cell cycle. Particular phosphatases already
have been identified as the targets for natural toxins such as microcystius and
cantharidin. Like other FASEB summer conferences this meeting will select about
150 participants from applications, including representatives from industry and
academia, including senior scientists, postdocs, and graduate students. There is
a constant infusion of new researchers into this area and the 1994 conference
will be important for a focused, yet comprehensive, introduction to the
genetics, biochemistry, and cell biology of protein phosphatases. The conference
will consist of eight sessions, each with a discussion leader and four speakers
who will be selected from investigators that have made important recent
contributions. In addition, two poster sessions will be organized, with
published abstracts. At the prior conference on this subject more than eighty
posters were presented for two days, each providing an important format for
scientific exchanges. Inclusion of women, minorities, and students as speakers
and participants is a special priority. The 1994 summer conference on Protein
Phosphatases will orient new researchers, disseminate current information and
identify areas for investigations. ***