* 9407936
* Structure-Function Analysis of Protein Synthesis Elongation Factor G
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Caroline Breitenberger, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 10/31/1996
* USD 23,811.00

9407935 Breitenberger Bacterial protein synthesis elongation factor G (EF-G)
catalyzes the translocation step of protein synthesis, reconfiguring the
ribosome after the formation of each successive peptide bond. The complex
translocation reaction catalyzed by EF-G is very poorly understood, underscoring
the importance of analyzing the structure and function of bacterial EF-G. The
objectives of this research are to prepare site-directed mutations in defined
regions of the E. coli EG-G gene and to use biochemical and genetic methods to
analyze the effects of these mutations. One of the proposed regions for
mutagenesis includes the proposed ribosome-binding domain of EF-G and other GTP-
binding protein synthesis factors. A threonine to serine mutant in this domain
has been isolated, which appears to be partially functional, even though
threonine is invariable in wild-type elongation factors. Interestingly,
expression of mutants in which the same threonine has been changed to alanine or
proline results in a slow-growing phenotype in vivo. A highly conserved arginine
close to the threonine seems to essential for EF-G function. Further
characterization of these and other mutants described in the proposal will lead
to a better understanding of EF-G structure and function, as well as to new
insight into the structure and function of other members of the GTPase
superfamily. %%% The synthesis of proteins inside living cells is an elaborate,
multicomponent process, which consumes large amounts of energy. The bacterial
protein, elongation factor G, or EF-G, is an essential participant in this
process. The role of EF-G is to ready the protein synthesizing apparatus for the
addition of each new amino acid to the protein being synthesized. Very little is
known about the mechanism of action of EF-G, although tantalizing clues come
from comparisons of EF-G structures between different organisms. In particular,
structures which are always found in EF-G function. The objective of this
proposal are to make discrete changes in conserved parts of the EF-G protein and
to determine how the changes affect EF-G function, using a combination of
biochemical methods and the powerful techniques of bacterial genetics. These
studies will lead to a better understanding of how EF-G plays its part in
protein synthesis. Knowing the details of how proteins are synthesized, and how
protein synthesis is controlled and coordinated with intracellular processes.
***