* 9407824
* Phylogenetics of New World Aneuploid Astragalus:  Molecular, Morphological, and Cytogenetic Evidence
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Martin Wojciechowski, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 189,986.00

9407824 Sanderson The flowering plant genus Astragalus, of the legume family,
containing upwards of 2500 species worldwide, is a remarkable example of rapid
evolutionary diversification on a global scale. Reconstructing the evolutionary
relationships or phylogeny within such a genus can provide clues as to why it is
so ecologically successful. However, the technical and logistical problems
associated with phylogenetic analyses of large genera have prevented significant
progress in understanding relationships within Astragalus. One promising
approach is to identify major subgroups, establish the phylogenetic status of
these (whether they are monophyletic), and then reconstruct their relationships
to each other. The present study will evaluate three phylogenetic hypotheses
regarding one large putative monophyletic group within Astragalus. This group
consists of a series of some 500 species distributed in the New World, which all
possess an unusual chromosome complement (they are aneuploids) that differs from
the rest of the genus. The three hypotheses are (1) that all New World
aneuploids form a monophyletic group distinct from rare Old World aneuploids and
equally rare New World euploids; (2) that Old World aneuploids represent
evolutionarily independent origins of the aneuploid chromosome condition; and
(3) that New World euploids are not the closest relatives of New World
aneuploids, rather they are more closely related to Old World species. Evidence
from mutational differences in nuclear ribosomal and chloroplast DNA will be
gathered from hundreds of New and Old World species, and integrated with
chromosome counts and morphological features. Efforts will be made to detect
reliable morphological characters associated with the origin of the aneuploid
groups in the New and Old World.