* 9407776
* Metal binding and oxidation by spore coat proteins of marineBacillus strain SG-1
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Bradley Tebo, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* A Berry
* 08/31/1998
* USD 273,000.00

9407776 Tebo Bacteria are known to be important agents in the transformations of
metals in the environment, however, in most cases the biochemical mechanisms by
which metals are transformed are poorly understood. This proposal focuses on the
bacterial oxidation of manganese (Mn) to particulate Mn(III,IV) oxides, mineral
phases that adsorb many other metals and which are strong oxidants capable of
oxidizing a number of toxic xenobiotic, aromatic, and other organic compounds
and hydrogen sulfide. Bacillus strain SG-1 is a marine bacterium whose spores
bind and oxidize Mn. SG-1 spores also bind other heavy metals such as cadmium,
zinc and cobalt, the latter of which it also oxidizes. Because SG-1 is active
over a side range of conditions of low and high ionic strength (freshwater and
seawater), pH, temperature, and Mn concentration (&lt;nM to&gt; mM) it may also
have useful application for a variety of different technologies involving metal
precipitation, immobilization and recovery. Thus, this organism is a good model
system both for understanding the mechanisms of the biogeochemical cycling of
metals in the environment and for studying the potential biotechnological
applications of metal precipitation by bacteria. In our previous research with
SG-1 we have developed a genetic system and have evidence that Mn(II) oxidation
is catalyzed by a spore coat protein. We propose to further characterize the
genes involved in Mn oxidation, to isolate the active Mn oxidizing protein and
characterize its metal binding and oxidizing properties, and to determine
whether the Mn oxidation (mnx) genes we have identified in SG-1 have homologs in
other Bacillus species or environmental Mn oxidizing isolates. The fundamental
knowledge resulting from these studies may ultimately form the basis for
technologies for environmental remediation and metal recovery and recycling. %%%
Metal pollution is frequently a problem in the environment. unlike many other
kinds of toxic substances, metals ca nnot be destroyed, only transformed from
one form to another. For most metals, certain forms are toxic while others are
either non-toxic or less toxic. In most cases, it is the dissolved forms of
metals that are toxic whereas their solid forms are not. Bacteria transform
metals between their various forms. In some cases these are very general
mechanisms not specific to particular metals. In other cases they are highly
specific. It is important to study the mechanisms bacteria use to transform
metals to understand the behavior of metals in the environment and ultimately
employ bacteria for clean up of metal pollution or recovery of valuable metals.
This proposal focuses on an organism that transforms dissolved metals to solid
forms. It is a marine bacterium that forms spores which are dormant seed-like
structures. The spores do the metal transformations and accumulate metals on
their cell surfaces. Because the spores are resistant to many kinds of damage
they can capture metals from water under a wide range of conditions making them
suitable for environmental applications. In previous work we have cloned some of
the genes involved in metal capture. It appears that a protein on the surface of
the spores is responsible. Such proteins could be genetically engineered for
specific purposes. The goal of this research is to isolate and study this
protein and to learn whether such protein are found in other bacteria that
transform metals. ***