* 9407085
* The Physical Origin of Initial Discharge Processes in       Lightning
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1998
* Ewen Thomson, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 10/31/1998
* USD 352,373.00

Abstract ATM-9407085 Thomson, Ewen M. University of Florida Title: The Physical
Origin of Initial Discharge Processes in Lighting Transient electric fields have
been recorded in a 800 Hz to 5 MHz bandwidth at four to five stations at Kennedy
Space Center since October 1991. These fields are radiated from lighting and
other electrical processes of a much smaller scale than lighting. The primary
focus of this proposal is the analysis of these data to establish the physical
origin of their sources, with an emphasis on the initial discharge processes in
lighting and the initial lightings in a cell. According to recent theory that
employs a transmission-line model, four electric field measurements on a sub-
microsecond time scale can be processed to give the three-dimisional location,
vector velocity, and peak current of an in-cloud source. Wideband electric
fields pulses are associated with both step formation in streamers and the
propagation of large current pulse downs ionized channels. The objective of the
modeling is to characterize physically the sources of processes that previouly
have been characterize only in terms of features of their electric field
waveshapes. This will enable us to investigate the physical origin of processes
that produce large microsecond-scale electric field pulses. Or particular
importance are the sources of wideband electric field that occur in the initial
stages of lighting, since these are most likely to reflect the pre-existing
thunderstorm charge, and the initial lightings in a cell, since these are a
manifestation of the thunderstorm charge generator. Our analysis will result in
the physical characterization of the bipolar pulses that have been detected in
the early stages of both intracloud and cloud-to-ground flashes, narrow bipolar
pulses that may result from a discharge of much smaller extent than typical
lighting, early stepped leader steps, and sources, and sources of fine structure
in first return strokes.