* 9407984
* Molecular Phylogenetic Studies of Parasitic Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Daniel Nickrent, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 07/31/1998
* USD 190,000.00

9407984 Nickrent A diverse group of flowering plants, through the course of
their evolution, has become parasitic on other plants. These include the
familiar Christmas mistletoe and sandalwood as well as less familiar plants such
as Rafflesia, known for producing the largest blossom among all flowering plants
(one meter in diameter). Some plant parasites (so-called holoparasites) have
lost their ability to make nutrients via photosynthesis and must rely entirely
upon their host for nutrition. Loss of photosynthesis has occurred because genes
required for this process that reside on the chloroplast have been mutated or
lost. One goal of the project is to determine which such genes are present or
absent on the chloroplast of several holoparasites. Although chloroplast genes
have proven especially useful in resolving phylogenetic relationships among many
flowering plants, such genes may not be present in the holoparasites. For this
reason, alternate nuclear ribosomal genes are being analyzed and sequenced.
Preliminary data show high rates of mutational change in ribosomal genes of
several parasites, indicating that these sources will prove useful in examining
genus and family level relationships. Because ribosomal DNA is essential for
protein synthesis, high levels of mutational change in holoparasitic plants
should provide insight to structural and functional constraints on protein-
related physiologies in these plants. As well, the nuclear DNA characters, and
where available the chloroplast data, will help answer questions about the
genealogical affinities of various parasitic plants with reduced morphologies.