* 9407058
* Information Processing in Social Context
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Robert Wyer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/1997
* USD 107,000.00

9407058 Wyer ABSTRACT This research is part of a continuing investigation of the
cognitive processes that mediate the use of information about people and events
to make social judgments and decisions. Previous research has focused largely on
the interpretation of and reactions to information that is presented out of its
social context. Consequently, the factors that underlie the comprehension of and
reactions to information that is exchanged in a conversation or in other social
situations are not well understood. The present research addresses this question
by investigating the determinants of reactions to a particular type of social
information-- that which is intended to elicit humor. Specifically, the
conditions in which such information has the intended effect as opposed to
eliciting other types of reactions (anger, confusion, or no reaction at all)
will be investigated. The results will contribute to the understanding of those
factors that underlie the identification of statements as witticisms rather than
serious attempts to criticize or to convey hostility or prejudice. In its
initial stages, (1) the cognitive processes that underlie the comprehension of
jokes will be identified, and the situational, informational and individual
difference variables that influence these processes will be examined. Then, (2)
the processes that underlie the identification of witticisms of the sort that
occur in conversations will be investigated. In later phases of the research,
the factors that govern the communication and identification of humor in actual
social interaction situations will be determined. When information is exchanged
in a conversation or in other social situations, its interpretation depends
partly on perceptions of why the information is being conveyed (to persuade, to
criticize, to entertain, to tease, or simply to transmit new knowledge). It also
depends on recipients' prior knowledge about the referent of the information,
other communications about the referent that have preceded it, and the
communication's source. Depending on this knowledge, information can elicit
several different reactions--anger, sadness, or amusement. The factors that
determine whether communications, such as sexist or ethnic stories and comments,
provoke anger rather than amusement are poorly understood. Yet, the nature of
these reactions can be an important mediator of attitudes toward both the
referent of the communications and their source. In addition to its theoretical
implications for an understanding of humor elicitation and social perceptions,
the results of this research will contribute to the understanding of how to
minimize miscommunication in social interactions. ***