* 9407028
* British Petroleum (BP)/Rice University Postdoctoral         Fellowship on Parallel Algorithms for Uncertainty Estimationin Permeable Media
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Mary Wheeler, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 08/31/1996
* USD 71,000.00

9407028 Wheeler The primary objective of the fellowhsip is to expose the
postdoctoral associate (PA) to important computational engineering and
mathematics problems arising in flow through porous media. We will focus on the
areas of uncertainty estimation and development of parallel algorithms for
simulation of flow and transport processes. During the course of the fellowship,
the PA will develop and apply flow and transport parallel sofware (including
rescaling techniques) combines with software for reservoir characterization,
gridding, and uncertainty estimation to an actual BP reservoir. The software
will be used in analyzing production performance of the reservoir. The
participants in this fellowship include Rice University, where the mentors will
be Professors Clint Dawson and Mary F. Wheeler, and British Petroleum, where the
mentor will be Dr. Michael Christie. The PA will be exposed to several
techniques which are part of BP's and Rice's current activities. In particular,
Rice has expertise in parallel computing and algorithm development, while BP has
expertise in rescaling techniques, reservoir characterization, and well
management. The PA will be trained in the engineering and mathematical aspects
of the emerging areas of uncertainty estimation and parallel computation. This
will equip the PA to work as a specialist in reservoir simulation, hydrology, or
any other areas where estimating uncertainty and/or parallel computation are low
key.