* 9407988
* Mechanisms and Evolution of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Stephen Pruett-Jones, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1997
* USD 198,807.00

This research involves ecological and behavioral studies of a group of
passerine birds native to Australia. Species in this group exhibit a variety of
interesting patterns of behavior, the study of which will aid in understanding
evolutionary processes and social behavior in non-human species. Individuals
live in large social groups, and the offspring from one generation remain in the
territory and help the parents raise young in successive breeding attempts.
Despite the close social ties among individuals in the same group, females
generally mate with males outside their social group. By testing hypotheses for
the evolution of this type of social organization, Dr. Pruett-Jones hopes to
elucidate the factors important in the very general problem of mate choice by
both males and females. In his study of reproductive patterns, he is using the
technique of DNA fingerprinting and other molecular techniques. One of these
techniques, microsatellite analysis, has not been used before in such studies.
Thus apart from the topic under study, this research will contribute to the
field of molecular genetics and the development of new techniques of analysis
that may have applicability in human research. Two of the species under study,
the striated grasswren and mallee emu-wren, are endangered and restricted to
mallee scrub habitats, perhaps the most limited and endangered habitat in
Australia. In their ecology, these two species share many characteristics with
other vertebrate species restricted to mallee habitats. This study will
contribute to the conservation of mallee habitats and provide information
critical to the management of endangered mallee species.