* 9407568
* Verification of Computer Database for the Ichthyological    Collection of the Field Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Barry Chernoff, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1998
* USD 178,447.00

9407568 Westneat The collection of fishers at the Field Museum of Natural
History contains more than 1.7 million specimens in about 125,000 lots
representing more than 9,000 species and 320 families. The Collection and its
supporting facilities are recognized as an International Center of Ichthyology.
The fish collection serves as a major depository for historically important
collections, including type specimens for more than 1,420 nominal species, the
collection is world-wide in scope and in recent years has been enriched by the
addition of major collections from South America, the Western Atlantic Ocean,
and the Western Pacific Ocean. Many of these collections come from previously
unsampled localities and may never be duplicated. The holding of the collection
are extensively used both nationally and internationally. They constitute an
important source of primary research materials for professional scientists and
students engaged in the studies of systematics, biodiversity, morphology,
molecular genetics, and conservation biology. The accessibility and exchange of
information regarding the holdings of natural history collections are critical
to both basic and applied research. Therefore, the institution is engaged in a
long-range plan to create and manage an accurate computerized database
containing the records of all fish specimens housed in the FMNH collections.
This plan consists of three major stages: (1) data entry and proofing, (2)
verification of computer records and holdings, and (3) cataloging and shelving
of our enormous backlog. The initial state of data entry into the database
software system MUSE has bee completed. Updated of the computer records and
verification of their accuracy must be continued. This project will support the
second major stage of establishing the database for our collection: verification
of the accuracy of all computer records by comparing the computer records with
the physical holdings of the collection. The hardware of the local area compu
ter network will be upgraded to increase the speed of retrieval of information,
and bring the system closer to the goal of connection with the Internet computer
network. At the conclusion of the project period, the FMNH fish collection
records will be among the most accurate specimen databases available and will be
accessible to biological researchers worldwide.