* 9407899
* Pillared Layered Compounds:  Their Synthesis, Structure and Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Abraham Clearfield, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/1998
* USD 389,400.00

9407899 Clearfield Metal oxide pillared layered materials (PLM) are a relatively
new class of microporous solid acids. Potential areas of application include
their use as catalysts, sorbents, ion exchangers, sensors and ionic conductors.
In a previous grant from NSF, a wide variety of PLM were synthesized including
clay minerals, phosphates, oxides, layered double hydroxides (LDH) and single
metal hydroxides. Novel pillars were prepared in addition to more traditional
alumina, zirconia and chromia pillars. The aim of this work is to incorporate
other transition elements into the nickel oxide or cobalt oxide pillars. The
long range objectives are to obtain a fundamental understanding of the synthetic
and post-synthesis procedures for control of pore size and other structural
features, control of acidity or basicity by choice of layered material and
pillars and subsequent pillar treatments and to develop novel acid, bifunctional
and redox catalysts based upon this information. To acquire the needed
structural data for the new materials, novel x-ray methods and procedures
involving electron diffraction, lattice imaging, atomic force microscopy and
novel mass spectrometry methods will be used. %%% Solid-acid catalysts are the
backbone of the major processes of refining and petrochemistry. In the
reformulation of gasoline and petroleum products to meet environmental standards
and the requirements of future vehicles, new solid acids directed towards
catalyzing specific reactions will be in demand. Redox catalysts also play a
crucial role in many large scale industrial processes and in the future, both
catalyst types will be expected to play a greater role in the preparation of
fine chemicals. Pillared layered materials represent a potential new class of
catalysts of astonishing breadth and variety. However, before their application
becomes a reality, it is essential to develop a complete understanding of their
structures, develop strategies for altering the structures in controlled ways,
and relate catalytic behavior to structure and composition. These problems are
addressed in this proposal.