* 9407018
* African Wave Disturbances in the GISS GCM and their         Relationship to Climate Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Leonard Druyan, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/1997
* USD 150,852.00

ATM-9407018 Druyan, Leonard Columbia University Title: African Wave Disturbances
in the GISS GCM and their Relationship to Climate Variability African wave
disturbances are wave-like perturbations in the mid- tropospheric easterly
circulation of boreal summer over northern Africa which organize distinctive
spatial patterns of convergence and often precipitation. Although Sahel seasonal
precipitation is associated with these waves, GCM studies of the interannual
variability of sub-Saharan rainfall have not explicitly considered their
influence. The research is based on preliminary work which found a reasonably
realistic representation of African waves in the GISS GCM. The project will
study wave behavior in the model at 4x5 degree and 2x2.5 degree horizontal
resolution, and the relationship between this modeled behavior and the principal
circulation features of the African summer monsoon, namely the tropical and
African Easterly Jets. An archive of GCM simulations of some 10-20 summer
seasons will be created from model runs forced with observed global SST for
selected years during the 1950's through the 1980's (including years of
anomalously sparse or abundant Sahel rainfall). In addition, wave
characteristics will be analyzed from an ensemble of three equilibrium
simulations with doubled CO2 concentration. For each run, model winds and
precipitation will be saved as six- hour averages for grid boxes over northern
Africa. These data will be used to construct wave composites of winds,
divergence and precipitation rates for different locations, months and years.
Power spectra of meridional wind and precipitation time series will show the
spectral peaks that are related to African wave periodicities. Cross-spectra
will document the mutual correlations of circulation and precipitation and
spatial mapping of selected spectral amplitudes will highlight the geographical
areas of preferred activity. Interannual variations in the composites, spectra,
cross-spec tra and spatial and spatial distributions of spectral amplitudes will
reflect variability of wave behavior for contrasting scenarios of drought and
heavy precipitation and for the warmer, double-CO2 climate. Model results will
be compared with analyses of observations in the literature and with analyses of
time series of corresponding twice-daily observed ECMWF winds. This research is
import because it seeks to increase our ability to simulate and predict climate
variability.