* 9407741
* Solution Properties of Hydrogen-Bonding Polymers and Co-Polymers
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Philip Pincus, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/1997
* USD 389,500.00

9407741 Pincus This theoretical research will be carried out at both the
University of California at Santa Barbara and the University of California at
Los Angeles. Analytical and simulational investigations will be done on polymers
which are soluble in aqueous solvents because of hydrogen bond formation between
the solvent molecules and the moities on the chain, e.g., oxygen on the backbone
of polyethylene oxide. The particular focus will be on the interplay between the
chemical nature of the hydrogen bond and the hydrophobic interaction associated
with the hydrocarbon backbone. These uncharged hydrosoluble polymers have
important applications to technological issues associated with the use of
inorganic solvents and also as models for the activity and function of a class
of biopolymers. The work will be extended to copolymers where one part has
hydrogen bonding character and the other part is a more typical hydrocarbon.
Such copolymers are potential candidates for vesicle stabilizers in drug
delivery systems. %%% This theoretical research will be carried out at both the
University of California at Santa Barbara and the University of California at
Los Angeles. Analytical and simulational investigations will be done on polymers
which are soluble in water. ***