* 9407158
* U.S.-Polish Cooperative Research on Development of          Guidelines for Heat Straightening
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1996
* Charles Roeder, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 04/30/1996
* USD 20,750.00

9407158 Roeder This U.S.-Polish Joint Cooperative Research in "Development of
Guidelines for Heat Straightening" is between Dr. Charles Roeder of the
University of Washington and Dr. Henryk Zobel Warsaw Polytechnic University.
Plastic deformations occur when metals are subjected to a stress or a thermal
gradient at elevated temperatures. This deformation is commonly used in the heat
straightening or heat curving method to repair damage or reduce initial
curvature in the member. Though such deformations are of considerable
importance, they are poorly understood. This lack of understanding results in
limited use (and, in some cases, misuse) of the heat straightening method. With
a rational understanding of the method, engineers will be able to predict (1)
the members suitable for straightening; (2) the deformation resulting from
heating; (3) the required location and quantity of heating; and (4) the number
and sequence of heat applications. Such estimates now are made by experienced
metalworkers, whose estimates are highly variable and often grossly inaccurate.
This proposal seeks to extend the existing understanding of heat straightening.
The Polish P.I. will draw on recent practical experience in using heat
straightening to repair bridges in Poland, and theoretical experience in
developing an empirical model for predicting the behavior of the model. The
American P.I. has had extensive research experience with thermal effects and the
heat straightening method. He has performed many experiments and a wide range of
temperature-dependent inelastic analyses. Ultimately, the researchers hope to
develop practical guidelines to use and control heat straightening and
verification of guidelines through monitoring several actual straightening
projects. This proposed research in civil engineering fulfills the program
objectives of advancing science by enabling leading experts in the U.S. and
Poland to combine complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence. ##