* 9407701
* Forest Floor Carbon Dioxide Evolution:  Measurement and     Modeling at Landscape Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Wayne Swank, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford N. Dahm
* 06/30/1997
* USD 259,975.00

Bolstad The overall objectives of this study are to determine the range o
spatial and temporal heterogeneity in CO2 evolution from eastern deciduous
forest floors, and to develop and validate a landscape-scale forest floor CO2
evolution model,. This project would measure multiple abiotic and biotic
factors, and couple these to forest floor CO2 evolution over a large area using
a variety of modeling and scaling techniques. The 1600 ha main basin of the
Coweeta Hydrologic lab in the Southern Appalachian Mountains will be the
physical focus of our research. Measured factors will include soil temperature,
soil moisture, litter quality and quantity, fine and coarse root biomass, N, and
C, and soil N and C. We will then integrate these factors with mappable
landscape parameters such as elevation, terrain position, soil characteristics,
vegetation type, age, and structure, in a series of models which predict forest
floor CO2 evolution across the landscape. The proposed research will utilize the
measurements of the spatial and temporal variation in forest CO2 evolution to
develop models which link abiotic and biotic driving variables with forest floor
CO2 evolution. These will help understand and predict ecosystem-level changes in
CO2 response to short-term and long-term changes in environmental and global
conditions.