* 9407933
* Development of a Spin Polarized Inverse Photoemission       Spectrometer
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* David Sellmyer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1995
* USD 80,727.00

This work is concerned with building a new facility to study the spin-polarized
unoccupied bands of ferromagnetic thin films and surfaces and Mott-Hubbard
insulators. This facility will permit, in conjunction with existing spin
polarized photoemission facilities, to identify the exchange splitting of large
local moment systems where spin mixing rather than exchange splitting collapse
occurs. As with ferromagnetic systems, we also plan, in the case of systems
exhibiting Mott-Hubbard transitions, to identify the upper Hubbard band in
systems where the Hubbard bands exhibit ferromagnetic (as opposed to
antiferromagnetic) ordering. By building this facility, the characterization of
not only the occupied band structure (the occupied density of states) but the
unoccupied band structure (the unoccupied density of states) is possible. This
proposal is based upon existing expertise of five research groups in
photoemission, spin- polarized photoemission, inverse photoemission, spin-
polarized electron sources, and magnetism. %%% Photoemission, has been the
spectroscopy of choice in characterizing electronic structure. The use of
polarized light in angle-resolved photoemission studies has made the
identification of electronic bands through symmetry selection rules possible,
greatly enhancing the technique. These techniques probe the occupied part of the
band structure: the valence bands of semiconductors or occupied states of metals
and condensed matter systems. More recently, inverse photoemission studies have
found a unique role for exploring the conduction band of semiconductors or the
unoccupied states of metals and condensed matter systems. Spin-resolved
photoemission and spin-resolved inverse photoemission have greatly enhanced the
study of electronic structure; particularly in the case of systems with spin-
ordered bands, such as ferromagnetic systems. We propose to complement our
existing facilities with spin resolved inverse photoemission capability in order
to chara cterize both occupied and unoccupied parts of the band structure. This
combination of facilities will substantially enhance the ability to investigate
magnetic thin films and surfaces and nonmetal to metal transitions. It is this
combination of techniques at a single center which would be unmatched by any
other facility in the world.