* 9407008
* Mathematical Sciences:  Courant - Schlumberger Postdoctoral Research Associateship in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Marco Avellaneda, New York University
* Fellowship Award
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1997
* USD 71,000.00

9407008 AVELLANEDA This project concerns the study of flow and dispersion in
porous media, in particular the estimation of the physical properties of porous
media such as permeability and the hydrodynamic dispersion coefficient of
solutes. There has been considerable effort devoted to exploring correlations
between such physical properties as diffusional relaxation times, conductivity
and sound velocity, and the hydrodynamic permeability and dispersion
coefficient. These macroscopic constants are linked because they arise by
solving similar equations on the same microstructure. We will construct bounds
and estimators of permeability and dispersion coefficient based on knowledge of
more easily measured properties. This problem has been studied for some time,
and was pioneered in work by Schlumberger scientists. The transport and
dispersion of solutes in porous media will be analyzed through analysis and
numerical calculation of different microstructures, e.g. networks of capillaries
or intergranular space. We will perform theoretical and numerical studies in
which we will concentrate on the following issues: i) building efficient
numerical algorithms for modelling 3D transport in porous media, ii) modelling
porous media which are bi-periodic or contain two or more characteristic scales,
iii) studying flow and dispersion in partially saturated porous media.