* 9407853
* Effects of Lateral Shading on the Long-Term Dynamics of     Tropical Rainforest Canopies
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1996
* Stanley Herwitz, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Taber D. Allison
* 05/31/1996
* USD 89,923.00

9407853 Herwitz Height differences of neighboring canopy tree crowns are
responsible for the characteristic roughness of tropical rainforest canopies. If
the three-dimensional form of such a canopy was known, the differential
interception of direct solar radiation by the more prominent canopy trees and
the lateral shading of their less prominent neighbors could be determined. Crown
asymmetry, which increases canopy tree susceptibility to windthrow and toppling
because of the crown's uneven weight distribution is believed to be the best
result of lateral shading. The objective of proposed study is to test the
hypothesis that differential interception of solar radiation has a predictable
influence on the long-term survivorship and growth patterns of tropical
rainforest canopy trees. This hypothesis will be tested by: (1) three-
dimensional modeling of a tropical rainforest canopy in Queensland, Australia
using data derived from large-scale aerial stereophotographs taken in July 1976;
(2) determining the annual daily courses of solar radiation for the selected
site; (3) applying a 3-D model to simulate light interception over the course of
a year; (4) computing the light-intercepting crown area/total crown area; (5)
using the direct solar radiation model survivorship probabilities and growth
potential; and (6) analyzing the predicted compared with actual derived from
large-scale aerial steropairs to be taken in a proposed overflight sequence in
July 1994. To our knowledge, no study has previously examined tropical
rainforest canopy dynamics over a comparable time period with the same
resolution that will be obtained using our proposed combination of large-scale
aerial photogrammetry and computer modeling. Identification of some of the
factors contributing to the spatial patterns of mortality, survivorship, and
growth of neighboring plants competing for sunlight will allow a clearer
understanding of the interactions among canopy trees and more accurate models of
carbon and water exchanges i n tropical rainforests.