* 9407596
* Microbial Mediation of Environmental Stresses: Nitrogen Fixation in the Spartina Alterniflora Rhizosphere
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Charles Lovell, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 07/31/1998
* USD 269,883.00

9407596 Lovell This project examines the community structure and environmental
specificity of nitrogen-fixing bacteria that occur across the gradient from
highly productive, low intertidal marsh to stressed, low-productivity, high
marsh. This gradient in productivity is reflected in gradients in salinity, H2S
concentration, pH, and redox potential, all of which have likely impact on the
nitrogen-fixing bacteria. The bacteria in turn may generate a gradient in
nitrogen availability, which may control plant productivity. The project
characterizes the bacterial communities along this gradient by PCR amplification
of the bacterial DNA and DNA "fingerprinting." The resulting banding patterns
provide a means of identifying key bacterial species and determining the
composition of bacterial communites along the marsh gradient. The physiological
responses of key bacterial species to environmental stresses are being studied.
The investigator is also conducting reciprocal transplants of bacterial
communities to examine bacterial and plant responses to the new environmental
conditions. This research improves our ability to determine the effect of non-
point source pollution on salt-marsh microbial communities and the effects of
changes in these communities on higher organisms in salt marshes. The results of
this research has application in pollution monitoring and environmental risk
assessment.