* 9407712
* Molecular Phylogenetic Study of Apiaceae Subfamily Apioideae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Stephen Downie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 240,439.00

9407712 Downie The "umbellifer" group of plants, including economically and
pharmaceutically important plants such as carrots, parsnips, celery, anise,
caraway, coriander, cumin, fennel, dill, parsley, and many toxic and medicinal
plants, has attracted interest and study for centuries. Despite this attention,
fundamental disagreements persist regarding precise delimitation of genera and
tribes in the family Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae. Existing taxonomic treatments
constructed largely on the basis of morphological and anatomical characters give
contradictory interpretations of relationships, and many suprageneric taxa are
maintained largely on considerations of tradition and convenience. Dr. Stephen
Downie of the University of Illinois will bring molecular data from chloroplast
and nuclear DNA to bear on genus and tribal level taxonomic problems in the
subfamily. Detailed restriction site mapping of the entire chloroplast genome
and comparative nucleotide sequencing of the nuclear ribosomal DNA internal
transcribed spacer regions will be used to provide a robust phylogenetic
framework for the group. Within this framework, hypotheses about non-DNA
character evolution can be interpreted and the systematic value of such
characters evaluated. The DNA results obtained in this project will provide the
first modern phylogeny of the Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae. These results will
be an important reference for taxonomists, plant breeders, ecologists, and
pharmacologists as well as evolutionary biologists interested in the
interactions of umbellifers with their associated insect herbivores. Future
taxonomic and evolutionary studies of the plants will benefit from this robust
phylogenetic analysis.