* 9407264
* Genes Involved in the Regulation of Seed Germination
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Kent Bradford, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1997
* USD 270,000.00

Seed germination is a critical phase in the plant life cycle, both ecologically
and agriculturally, and is sensitive to both endogenous hormones and
environmental factors. Seeds integrate physiological and environmental
information to determine whether to germinate or remain dormant. Two important
physiological regulators of germination are gibberellin (GA), which generally
promotes germination, and abscisic acid (ABA), an inhibitor of germination. A
key environmental determination of germination behavior is the availability of
water, since radicle emergence requires water uptake and cell expansion. Single-
gene mutations in tomato which block synthesis of either GA or ABA result in
contrasting effects on dormancy, germination rates, and sensitivity to reduced
water availability. These mutants have been used in combination with hormonal
application to demonstrate that the regulation of germination occurs via
alterations in the water potential threshold, allowing radicle emergence. A
quantitative mathematical model has been developed that can describe the
responses of seed germination to the plant growth regulators GA and ABA and to
the seed water potential. A key feature of this is the recognition that
individual seeds vary in their threshold responses to GA, ABA, and water
potential. The sensitivity thresholds for tomato seed germination are determined
by the mechanical resistance of a thin endosperm layer to penetration by the
radicle. When stimulated to germinate, the walls of these endosperm cap cells
are degraded and weakened, allowing radicle emergence. Multiple factors are
likely to be required for successful completion of germination, with their
combined influence setting the sensitivity threshold for a given seed. The goal
of this project is to determine whether the transition from quiescence or
dormancy to germination is associated with specific changes in gene expression.
The effects of GA and ABA on mRNA populations in mutant tomato endosper m caps
will be visualized by a differential display reverse transcription PCR
technique. Imbibed wild type seeds will also be sorted into dormant and
nondormant categories prior to visible germination using a single seed assay.
The mRNAs expressed in the endosperm caps of the two categories will be
similarly displayed. Messages that are consistently associated with either
dormancy or germination in all comparisons will be evaluated by RNA blot and in
situ hybridization to determine whether their abundance, timing and tissue
location are regulated by GA, ABA, and water potential as expected. Expression
of selected genes under a range of hormonal and environmental conditions will be
investigated in single seeds using tissue printing to determine whether they are
regulated among seeds within a population in keeping with the predictions of the
threshold models. This approach will distinguish genes involved in the
regulation of radicle emergence from those that are associated with post-
germinative events such as reserve mobilization. Characterization of the
function of these genes and their promoters will provide insight into how plants
integrate multiple internal and environmental signals to control a critical
developmental process.