* 9407880
* LTREB - Long Term Studies of African Lions
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1999
* Craig Packer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1999
* USD 408,995.00

9407880 Packer Over the next decade, the principal investigators will extend the
long-term ecological, demographic and genealogical records on lions in the
Serengeti National park and Ngorongoro Crater, Tanzania. These populations are
already among the best-studied vertebrates in the world, but lions have long
life expectancies and lion population size responds slowly to ecological
perturbation. Extensionof these records will have three important consequences.
First, the relationship between small-scale environmental heterogeneity and
local carrying capacity will be determined by collecting more complete and
extensive data on survival, reproduction, and the physical growth rates of
immatures. Knowledge of this relationship will make it possible to answer a wide
variety of research questions, including (a) the role of territoriality in lion
population regulation, (b) the effects of territoriality, familiarity and
kinship on female dispersal patterns, (c) the extent to which territorial
neighbors collude to pre-empt settlement by potential newcomers, and (d) the
impact of post-reproductive females on the reproductive rates of their younger
companions. Second, extending the long-term lion study will permit the ongoing
monitoring of these populations in the face of impending ecological change. By
recording population changes and patterns of physical growth, it will be
possible to measure the impact of the enormous increase in human population
around the Serengeti. Maintenance of the data in the Ngorongoro Crater will
further elucidate the consequences of chronic inbreeding in a small population.
Continued measurement of both populations will be invaluable in monitoring the
effects of global climate change. Third, by maintaining the long-term records,
the PI's and their collaborators will be able to incorporate highly detailed
background data into cross-sectional studies that will receive funding from
other sources. At the minimum, these surveys will include studies of host-
parasite coe volution, endocrinology, and behavior. Not only will the lion
project carry out basic research, but it will also have a practical application.
The long-term lion data will be incorporated into a new GIS project in the
Serengeti along with all available data collected by the Serengeti Ecological
Monitoring Program.