* 9407920
* Isolation and Characterization of Virescent Mutants in      Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Judith Brusslan, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9407920 Brusslan This is a Research Planning Grant. The objective are to: 1,
isolate virescent mutants from EMS, fast-neutron, and T- DNA mutagenized
Arabidopsis; 2, characterize the development of the photosynthetic apparatus in
these mutants using absorption spectroscopy, fluorescence emission, transmission
electron microscopy, and native Deriphat gel electrophoresis; 3, to analyze
mutants with regard to temperature sensitivity as well as sensitivity to
differing light intensities; and 4, to perform a genetic analysis. The genetic
analysis will include reciprocal backcrosses to determine if mutations are
inherited maternally or through either parent, complementation studies between
the different mutant lines, and crosses between mutant lines and a wild type
line of a different ecotype to permit RFLP mapping. The long term goal is to
clone and characterize genes whose products are involved in the regulation of
chloroplast development in higher plants. %%% The chloroplast is the site of
photosynthesis and carbon fixation, and its development is critical for plant
survival. The chloroplast originated as an endosymbiont of photosynthetic
bacteria, and over time many regulatory functions of the bacterial genome wre
taken over by the nucleus. Although many mutations that alter the chloroplast
have been isolated from a large number of different plant species, none so far
have led to clear understanding of the molecular events that regulate
chloroplast development in higher plants. The model plant system, Arabidopsis
thaliana, offers an opportunity to understand this process because genes
involved in plastid development that are identified by mutation can be cloned.
The objective of the work proposed in this research planning grant is to isolate
mutants in Arabidopsis that display a delay in greening phenotype (termed
virescent) in order to evaluate mutations most likely to be involved in the
regulation of chloroplast development. Several mutants have alr eady been
obtained, and more will be obtained. These will be characterized biochemically,
structurally, and genetically in order to identify those of the greatest
potential for understanding chloroplast development. The long term goal of this
work is to clone the genes responsible for these mutations and to understand
their functions. ***