* 9407769
* Young Investigator Symposium at 1994 Workshop on Steriod    Hormones and Brain Function; April 1-5, 1994                Breckenridge, Colorado
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Robert McGivern, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 09/30/1995
* USD 4,375.00

9407769 Handa Steroid hormones are key modulators of the intracellular
communications network used by the nervous system. These simple hormones
potentially influence virtually all neural functions, from the organization of
neural circuits during development to the activity of individual synapses of
adults. The circuits affected by steroid hormones include those involved in
neuroendocrine physiology, reproductive behaviors, and non- reproductive
behaviors such as emotion, aggression, feeding, and learning and memory. This
action is to provide support for a Young Investigator Symposium to be held at
the 1994 Workshop on Steroid Hormones and Brain Function in Breckenridge,
Colorado on April 1-5, 1994. This workshop brings together scientists using
different approaches to address important and timely issues concerning steroid
regulation of brain function. Molecular biologists, neuroanatomists,
neurophysiologists and behaviorists will be examining such issues as sexual
differentiation of the brain, neuroplasticity and steroid action, and
alternative mechanisms of action. These are fundamentally important questions in
an field that is rapidly advancing and changing. The format of the workshop and
the inclusion of a Young Investigator Symposium provide the appropriate
mechanism to nurture young talent and facilitate collaborative efforts that may
significantly enhance our understanding of the basic neurobiological mechanisms
where steroid hormones can affect various neural systems. ***