* 9407267
* RPG: Regulation of Gap Junctional Coupling in LHRH Neuronal Cultures by Stimulation of the Cyclic AMP Pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Diane Matesic, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 08/31/1995
* USD 17,897.00

IBN-9407267 Diane Matesic This research will investigate a very novel idea
proposed by this young scientist, Dr. Matesic. She has observed that there are
increases in the connections (gap junctions) between cultured neurons containing
an important hypothalamic hormone, luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH)
when those cultured neurons are treated with chemicals known to increase the
levels of an intracellular messenger molecule called cyclic AMP. LHRH-containing
neurons in the hypothalamus secrete LHRH in a coordinated, pulsatile manner. The
mechanisms that establish coordinated secretion of LHRH by these neurons are
unknown. Dr. Matesic's idea is that electrotonic coupling via gap junctions
located at points of interconnection between LHRH neurons may play a role in
coordinated LHRH secretion. This is a novel idea and, therefore, support of
preliminary research of this work is particularly critical. To do this work, Dr.
Matesic is capitalizing on her training in gap junctional intercellular
communication in rat liver cells to extend these ideas to the nervous system.
This work will increase our understanding of the role of gap junctions in the
coordinated activities between many types of neurons within the central nervous
system.