* 9407289
* Spectroscopic Determinations of Excited State Properities of Organometallic and Inorganic Compounds
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Jeffrey Zink, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 07/31/1995
* USD 69,398.00

9407289 Zink U. of California - Los Angeles Dr. Jeffrey I. Zink, Chemistry
Department, University of California - Los Angeles, is supported by the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division for research into the electronic excited states of metal-containing
molecules. Excited state geometries will be determined from highly resolved
vibronic structure in emission and excitation spectra of molecules in the cold
collision-free conditions of a supersonic free expansion jet and by excited
state pump-probe Raman spectroscopy. Resonance Raman excitation profiles and low
temperature single crystal polarized electronic absorption and emission
spectroscopy will then be used to determine distortions in the excited state.
The goal of these studies is a unified understanding of excited potential
surfaces which will lead to an understanding of the geometries, reactivities,
electronic structure and vibronic interactions which occur as metal complexes
are in their excited states. Before normally stable molecules will undergo
chemical reactions, they must be "excited" so that they become less stable and
more reactive. This project aims at determining what changes metal containing
compounds undergo as they are "excited" by the addition of energy. This is
important because the "excited state" of a molecule must be understood in order
to predict its chemical behavior. This investigation will concentrate on some
molecules which are important to establishing a general understanding of the
behavior of "excited states" and some which have important reactions which occur
in the gas phase, such as those used as precursors for electronic materials.