* 9407794
* U.S.-Hungary Developmental Research Efforts: Biodiversity   and Long-Term Ecosystem Research
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Diana Wall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/31/1996
* USD 102,255.00

9407794 Freckman This U.S.-Hungary developmental effort will create new links
among a broad community of ecosystem specialists in the United States and
Hungarian specialists in taxonomic biological surveys. The intent is to broaden
the NSF supported activities at Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites
through an extended international network with sites in Eastern Europe,
beginning with Hungary. Dr. Diana W. Freckman of Colorado State University will
serve as the U.S. principal investigator. Her Hungarian counterpart will be Dr.
Edit Kovacs-Lang at the Institute of Ecology and Botany of the Hungarian Academy
of Sciences. Together they will organize a series of interactive visits. The
first will bring LTER scientists to Hungary to examine sites which possess
extensive biological surveys and long-term data sets of species assemblages.
U.S. and Hungarian researchers will discuss methods for collecting and
organizing this wealth of biodiversity data. A second visit will bring Hungarian
counterparts to LTER sites to discuss methods of managing such vast sources of
long-term ecological data. The final visit will bring the U.S. and Hungarian
participants together for a workshop in Hungary to formulate plans for
collaborative, long-term research in biodiversity that will draw upon the
strengths of both communities. Results are expected to build considerable
impetus for integrating biodiversity research with ongoing research at LTER
sites and to lead to a strengthened capacity for international comparisons for
study of global problems. These developmental ecological exchanges fulfill the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts
in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and
pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ***