* 9407129
* Regulation of Water Use by Rhododendron maximum on an       Elevation Gradient at Coweeta (LTER)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Erik Nilsen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 12/31/1996
* USD 103,320.00

9407129 Nilsen Regulation of Seasonal and Spatial Water Use by R. maximum at Two
Elevations at Coweeta (LTER) The understory of the Appalachian forest is
dominated by two ericaceous shrubs Kalmia latifolia and Rhododendron maximum. In
particular, R. maximum covers over half a million hectares of southern
Appalachian forest. Dense thickets of this species, called "slicks", inhibit the
growth of canopy trees. These dense growths are often close to streams making R.
maximum a keystone species in the interface between terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems of the southern Appalachian mountains. Although R. maximum must have
a significant impact on several ecosystem processes, the "role" of R. maximum in
functions of the Appalachian forest have been only rarely studied. The influence
of R. maximum on ecosystem hydrology may be one of the important impacts of this
species on the Appalachian forest system. The objectives of this proposal are:
1. to determine the factors that regulate water use patterns in R. maximum; 2.
to develop mathematical functions that predict water use patterns from
environmental conditions; 3. to collect evidence for possible competition for
water between R. maximum and an important canopy species. Experiments are
designed to fit into the currently funded research program at the LTER site at
Coweeta Hydrological Laboratory. Results from this proposal will clarify the
importance of R. maximum in the ecosystem water budget for the regulation
mechanisms therefore for R. maximum water use, and determine if competition for
water between this important understory species and a canopy dominant species is
likely. ***