* 9407364
* Reorganization of the Collections of the Paleontological    Research Institute
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Warren Allmon, Paleontological Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 459,864.00

9407364 Allmon The combined collections of invertebrate fossils and Recent
mollusks of the Paleontological Research Institution (PRI) and Cornell
University (CU) contain almost two million specimens, including the fifth
largest collection of invertebrate fossil type and figured specimens in the
United States, and constitute a major potential resource for research and
education in paleontology and systematics. These collections, however, have been
almost completely inaccessible to potential users. In September 1992, PRI
embarked on a program of renovation of staff and facilities that included
reorganization and preliminary inventory of its collections. As result, these
collections are now usable by staff and visitors. Yet they are still
inadequately housed and curated. The CU collection of Recent mollusks is fairly
well curated and inventoried, but inadequately housed in an out-of -the-way
location. The CU collection of invertebrate fossils is poorly curated, largely
univentoried, and housed in inadequate facilities without any curatorial staff
in an out-of-the-way location. Funds will be used to support the first phase of
a complete reorganization of the PRI and CU collections of invertebrate fossils
and Recent mollusks, involving moving the CU facilities, together with
approximately half of the existing PRI collections. This will allow these
important collections to be curated properly and cared for in a way that will
make them fully available to the research and educational communities, and that
will prepare them for eventual computerization.