* 9407894
* Biochemical Analysis of the Defective Signaling Pathway in  Anergic CD8+ Murine T Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Pamela Fink, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1995
* USD 43,392.00

9407894 Fink The discovery that tolerance to self antigens encountered in the
lymphoid periphery can be induced by rendering self- reactive T cells
immunoincompetent has stimulated the analysis of the signaling machinery in
these anergic populations. The experiments described in this proposal are aimed
at understanding the nature of the signaling defects in a subpopulation of
murine T cells that has been rendered refractory to normally stimulatory
signals. These T cells are derived from mice that are transgenic for a T cell
receptor (TCR) chain gene whose expression mediates the recognition of a self
antigen. Encounter of the T cell with this self antigen is unusual in that it
results in the downregulation of the cell surface expression of both the TCR and
its CD8 coreceptor, and renders these cells immunoincompetent, even upon
stimulation by signals not thought to be affected by receptor density. These
studies are designed to localize the impairment in signaling in anergic cells by
analyzing: (1) their ability to mobilize internal calcium stores in response to
antibody-mediated crosslinking of surface TCR molecules (2) their patterns of
tyrosine phosphorylation before and after TCR crosslinking (3) the mobility
shift of the CD8-associated nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinase p56lck upon cell
activation (4) the activity of mitogen-activated protein kinase upon TCR
crosslinking, and (5) the transcriptional activity of the genes encoding the
transcription factors c-fos and c-jun upon activation. %%% The lymphocyte
effector arm of the immune system is divided into two main compartments, B and T
Cells. While B cells make antibody molecules that can recognize soluble foreign
substances or antigens, T cells concentrate on cell-bound antigens using a two
chain surface receptor (the T cell receptor or TCR). Much of T cell
differentiation takes place in the thymus, including the induction of self
tolerance, a process that often resu lts in the deletion of thymocytes whose
TCRs recognize self proteins. This distinction between "self" and "nonself" is
critical to the functioning of a healthy immune system. T cell tolerance to
antigens expressed outside the thymus can be induced and maintained by
mechanisms in addition to clonal deletion. Encounter of self-reactive T cells
with antigens in the lymphoid periphery can render these cells nonfunctional or
"anergic" frequently resulting in their elimination. This investigator has
defined a population of relatively long- lived anergic T cells that can purified
from murine blood on the basis of an unusual surface antigen phenotype. Using
this system, she will define the aspects of the complicated pathways of
signaling that lead inward from the TCR on the cell surface that are altered in
anergic relative to immunocompetent cells. These studies are aimed at
understanding this nondeletional mechanism for maintaining self tolerance, and
why it occasionally fails. ***