* 9407937
* Mating Structure and Inbreeding Depression in the Moss,     Ceratodon purpureus
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Arthur Shaw, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1997
* USD 145,000.00

Shaw 9407937 Research supported by this grant will determine if mating between
related individuals of the moss, Ceratodon purpureus, results in offspring that
are less fit than mating between unrelated individuals. In addition, actual
patterns of interbreeding within two populations will be investigated in order
to relate experimental results to plants in natural habitats. The research
involves growing plants of known familial pedigree, conducting crosses, and
measuring both viability and fertility in offspring from different matings.
Because the study organism is haploid (i.e., cells contain one set of
chromosomes rather than two as in most plants and animals), new insights into
the genetic consequences of consanguineous mating are expected. Although this
research addresses basic scientific questions, understanding the effects of
different mating patterns is critical to a range of applied issues including the
conservation of rare and endangered plants and animals, and the most effective
breeding strategies for increased agricultural production. Funding for this
research also provides critical support for involvement of undergraduate
students in biological research. In addition to research opportunities during
the academic year, funding supports full-time collaboration between
undergraduate students and the Principle Investigator during two summers. Active
undergraduate involvement in research is the most effective way to promote the
development of promising young scientists.