* 9407128
* The Peritrophic Envelope as a Barrier to Absorption of      Ingested Allelochemicals in Insect Herbivores
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Michael Martin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/1998
* USD 239,000.00

9407128 Martin The goal of this project is to clarify the role of the
peritrophic envelope (PE) in protecting insects from ingested toxins. The PE is
thin membranous sheath that lines the midguts of insects, which is the section
of the digestive track where digestion of food and absorption of nutrients
occurs. Several functions have been proposed for the PE: (1) protection of the
gut lining from damage by abrasive food items; (2) prevention of access to the
gut wall by bacteria and viruses; and (3) compartmentation of the midgut
resulting in improved efficiency of digestion and assimilation. In this study
the PI will test the hypothesis that the PE also serves as a barrier to the
absorption of many toxins. The PI has already demonstrated that the PEs of two
caterpillar species are impermeable to tannic acid, which is a toxic phenol that
occurs in plants. In order to determine whether the failure of common plant
toxins to penetrate the PE is a general phenomenon, or one limited to tannins,
we will determine the permeability of the PEs from a selection of species of
both caterpillars (Lepidoptera) and grasshoppers (Orthoptera) to a wide range of
toxin classes that include compounds with a variety of chemical and physical
properties. Possible mechanisms that might result in the containment of
chemicals within the PE include: (1) absorption on the inner surface; (2) the
presence of pores in the PE that are too small for the toxin molecules, either
free or complexed within other molecules, to pass through; (3) association of
the toxin with lipid aggregates that are too large to pass through the pores of
the PE; and (4) repulsion between negatively charged groups on the toxin
molecule and negative charges present in the matrix of the PE. Results obtained
to date rule out absorption as the mechanism in Lepidoptera, and measurements of
PE pore size suggest that the pores are too large to restrict the passage of
uncomplexed toxin molecules. Additional expe riments will be conducted to test
the other possible mechanisms. This study will advance our understanding of the
basic physiological and biochemical adaptations of insects to natural and
synthetic toxins. Our findings might have practical significance in the area of
pesticide development and in efforts to produce pest-resistant crops by plant-
breeding programs or by genetic engineering. ***