* 9407790
* RPG:  Pollinator-Mediated Selection on Flower Color in      Snapdragons (Antirrhinum:  Scrophulariaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Kristina Jones, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 08/31/1995
* USD 17,938.00

9407790 Jones Pollinators can strongly influence the reproductive success of the
plants they visit. Floral variation is therefore subject to natural selection
mediated by pollinator behavior. Theoretical models have shown how selection on
fertility can affect the relative frequencies of alternative alleles from one
generation to the next in idealized situations. Many field studies have
indicated that pollinator visitation patterns are correlated with male and/or
female plant reproductive success. However, theory and empirical work have not
yet been put together to predict accurately the precise outcome of pollinator-
mediated selection for the next generation of plants. Close examination of the
microevolution of a single trait will yield insights into the mechanisms of
selection by pollinators on plant populations. Are male and female components of
reproductive success equally responsible for differential fitness of two floral
phenotypes? Would a favored trait increase more quickly in frequency if it is
controlled by a dominant or a recessive allele? Is selection dependent on the
relative frequencies of the floral phenotypes in a population? The purpose of
the PI's research is to address these questions about pollinator-mediated
selection on single-locus floral traits. The planning activities described in
this proposal will address several important questions before the long-term
experiments begin. First, the PI will determine the feasibility of using
pollinator observations and/or indirect measures of pollen movement to estimate
the relative reproductive success of the color morphs and the pattern of mating
(random or non-random) with respect to the polymorphism. The preliminary
experiments will investigate: 1) whether there are phenotypic differences other
than flower color between the genotypes that might affect pollinator behavior or
plant fitness; 2) what the relationships are between pollinator visitation and
pollen export and receipt for snapdragons, and 3) whether there ar e any
postpollination processes (fertilization or seed maturation) that are nonrandom
with respect to genotype and therefore need to be taken into account in the
selection model. The snapdragon-bumblebee interaction appears to be an excellent
system for the study of pollinator-mediated selection. Investigation of these
important preliminary questions will determine exactly how the selection
experiments will proceed.