* 9407367
* Avian Neuromuscular Diversity: The Evolution of Muscle Morphology, Function and Development
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Stephen Gatesy, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Jereatha Coleman
* 05/31/1997
* USD 183,419.00

9407367 Gatesy Species of animals can differ in the number, arrangement and
function of their muscles. This research seeks to understand the relationship
between muscle form and function and how this can change with time. The PI will
study a group of muscles in the thigh of birds called the deep dorsal thigh
muscles. During embryonic development, a mass of cells breaks up, or cleaves, to
form the individual muscles present in adults. Some birds, such as the chicken
or guineafowl, have four separate deep dorsal thigh muscles. However, in other
birds, the deep dorsal muscle mass may not cleave completely, yielding less than
four adult muscles. For example, the pigeon and the duck only have three deep
dorsals, while a roadrunner has only two. The PI is interested in knowing what
effect this variation in number and position has on the function of these
muscles. Using fine wires as electrodes, the PI will record electrical changes
that reveal when a muscle is contracting. Previous studies have shown that as a
guineafowl walks or runs, deep dorsal thigh muscles are active at different
times in the stride. When will the deep dorsals be active in birds with fewer
than four muscles? Do new muscles evolve to perform new functions or movements?
How does the nervous system change when muscle anatomy changes? Through
questions such as these, the PI hopes to gain a better understanding of animal
design and the evolution of vertebrate diversity. ***