* 9407377
* Resource Competition Theory:  The Link between Climate      Change and Diatom Sedimentary Assemblages in the YellowstoneEcosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1994,09/30/1999
* Susan Kilham, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1999
* USD 325,000.00

9407377 Kilham This research addresses one of the major concerns of the
ecological agenda: the relationship of climate change to the structure, function
and survival of ecological communities. The objectives of the study are (1) to
characterize the physiological responses of the eight dominant diatom species
from selected lakes of the Yellowstone National Park region to temperature,
light, silicon, phosphorus, and nitrogen, (2) to determine the relative
competitive abilities of the species, and (3) to perform field studies on the
abundances and relative competitive abilities of the species. A set of
lacustrine sedimentary records, coupled with active and intense investigations
on landscape, climatic and limnological changes underway in Yellowstone
ecosystems, provides an unparalleled opportunity to incorporate resource
competition theory with field observations on diatom assemblages, evolution and
extinction. This study will integrate the predictions and results based on
resource competition theory with observations with changes in the structure of
diatom assemblages in the lakes of the Yellowstone Region to explain the present
diatom distributions and to test the causal factors proposed to explain diatom
distributions over the Holocene. %%% This research provides a strong causal
linkage between limnology and process-oriented physiological ecology to acquire
information necessary for a detailed interpretation of the paleorecord and a
firm basis for developing landscape-level transfer functions that will lead to
fine-scale climate reconstructions.