* 9407810
* Gene Expression in the Pneumocystis Life Cycle
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1995
* Saundra Stringer, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 05/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9407810 Stringer This project is being funded as a Research Planning Grant. The
work centers on Pneumocystis, an exotic fungus which was for many years thought
to be a protozoan, and which may represent a new order of fungi. The organism
exists in morphologically distinct developmental forms, cysts and trophic forms,
and very little is known about its life cycle. The project will address a single
fundamental and important question: can genetic markers be identified which are
specific to the different forms of Pneumocystis? The specific aims are to
separate the cysts and trophic forms of Pneumocystis from natural isolates,
prepare mRNA from the different forms, compare them by a PCR-based technique
called differential display to identify cDNAs that appear to be differentially
expressed in the different forms, use standard analytical techniques to verify
that the mRNAs detected by differential display are present in different amounts
in the different forms, and determine the sequences of these differential cDNAs.
In addition, in situ hybridization will be used to define expression of the
mRNAs in the various forms of the organism. %%% Pneumocystis is an unusual
fungal pathogen that is commonly found in mammalian lungs and which causes
pneumonia in immuno-compromised mammalian hosts. It is difficult to study
because to date it has not been cultured successfully in vitro. Taxonomically,
it appears to be only distantly related to other known fungi, and in fact for
many years was mistakenly believed to be a protozoan. Because of the novel
taxonomic status of this organism, the significance of studies of it extend well
beyond merely learning more about an important pathogen. Molecular research on
Pneumocystis and organisms like it has only recently begun. The proposed work
will be an important contribution to the evolutionary and general biological
understanding of fungi in general. ***