* 9407304
* Function of Acoustic Signal Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Michael Greenfield, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* None
* 12/31/1998
* USD 143,239.00

Many animals that communicate with sound time their calls in relation to their
neighbors' calling and collectively produce various forms of synchronous or
alternating choruses. Traditionally, these signal interactions have been
described as cooperative events that serve to enhance species recognition,
reduce attacks by predators or parasitoids attracted to the acoustic signals, or
enhance the ability of a group to attract females. Alternatively, a few
researchers have suggested that acoustic signal interactions represent some form
of competition among individuals. Recently, Dr. Greenfield demonstrated
experimentally and theoretically that synchrony and alternation in some sound-
producing insects can be explained as by-products of jamming interactions
between males competing to broadcast their signals to females. These findings
were largely restricted to the experimentally ideal and simple situations of
isolated pairs of signalers with comparable signaling strategies. Dr. Greenfield
now will extend this work on jamming interactions by studying (1) how males in
larger groups, such as found in most natural situations, control the timing of
their signals, (2) whether or not individual males differ in how they jam
neighbors' signals, and (3) whether or not the possible strategic differences
between males depend on their energy reserves and/or the signaling of their
neighbors. The orientation of females toward individual males in choruses will
also be studied to determine how female choice may influence, and possibly be
influenced by, male signal interactions. Dr. Greenfield's findings will provide
critical information on neuro-behavioral timing mechanisms, the role of learning
in signal interactions, and the complex interplay between female choice and
signal-jamming competition between males. Because various sound-producing
insects are agricultural pests, the behavioral information from this study may
lead to improved control strategies via disruption of pair-forming activities.