* 9407220
* Characterization of the acylCoA Binding Domain of E. coli   FadR
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1995
* Concetta DiRusso, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 10/31/1995
* USD 21,481.00

9407220 DiRusso Fatty acids and higher lipids are essential to cellular and
organismal structure and function. Our interests lie in understanding how lipid
metabolism is coordinated to meet the nutritional, structural and regulatory
needs of cells and organisms. Escherichia coli is a useful model system since
its lipids are confined to the cellular envelope and this organism modulates its
membrane fatty acid and phospholipid composition in response to variations in
the nutritional and environmental state of the cell. The research proposed here
investigates the E. coli transciption factor FadR which regulates at least nine
genes required for anabolism and catabolism of fatty acids. FadR exerts its
effect by binding to DNA to cause repression of genes encoding proteins required
for fatty acid catabolism and to activate genes required for fatty acid
anabolism. DNA binding by FadR is specifically prevented by long-chain
acylcoenzyme A thioesters. The FadR gene has been cloned and sequenced; and the
protein purfied and preliminarily characterized by the Principal Investigator.
The present proposal is designed to: (1) address questions regarding FadR
protein structure and function, and (2) evaluate physiologic parameters which
result in induction and the cascade of FadR-dependent alterations in gene
activity. The expertise of the Principal Investigator is in the molecular
genetics of E. coli fatty acid metabolism. The present award supports research
activities during a sabbatical leave in the laboratory of Dr. Jens Knudsen at
the Institute of Biochemistry, University of Odense, Odense, Denmark to acquire
technical skills in additional areas of lipid and protein chemistry. The
specific research to be conducted involves investigations into: (1) the
regulation by acyl- CoA thioesters of FadR-DNA binding activity and prevention
of transcription activation, and; (2) determination of native FadR structure and
FadR complexed with acyl-CoA. %%% Fatty acids an d higher lipids are essential
structural, regulatory and nutritional compounds in all organisms. Our interests
lie in understanding how lipid metabolism is coordinated to meet the
nutritional, structural and regulatory needs of cells and organisms. The
bacterium E.scherichia coli is a useful model system since its lipids are
confined to the cellular envelope and this organism modulates its membrane fatty
acid and phospholipid composition in response to variations in the nutritional
and environmental state of the cell. The research proposed here investigates the
Escherichia coli transcription factor FadR which regulates many genes encoding
proteins required for both synthesis and degradation of fatty acids. FadR
regulates these genes by binding to DNA to decrease the activity of those
encoding proteins required for fatty acid degradation and to increase the
activity of those required for fatty acid biosynthesis. DNA binding by FadR is
specifically prevented by fatty acyl-coenzyme A thioesters. The present proposal
is designed to: (1) address questions regarding FadR protein structure and
function, and (2) evaluate physiological parameters which result in induction
and the cascade of FadR-dependent alterations in gene activity. ***