* 9407864
* Structure and Function of the Arabidopsis Phytochrome       Photoreceptor Family
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1999
* Robert Sharrock, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 06/30/1999
* USD 370,000.00

9407864 Sharrock This award addresses the general question of how plants sense
the environmental light cues that control their physiological and developmental
processes. More specifically, the proposal tests a model for the organization
and function of a plant regulatory photoreceptor system, the red/far red light-
sensing phytochrome family. In this model, covalent linkage of a light-absorbing
chromophore to the diverse family of phytochrome (PHY) apoproteins gives rise to
a heterogeneous population of photoreceptors which have differential roles in
control of photomorphogenesis and may be differentially expressed in various
plant cell types. Work from the preceding grant has shown that five phytochrome
apoproteins are encoded by a PHY gene family in Arabidopsis thaliana and that
similar though not identical PHY gene families are present in all flowering
plants. An understanding of the individual roles of the phytochromes in light
control of plant physiology and development is clearly an important goal. In the
current funding period, major emphasis is placed on analysis of the functions
and the regulation of the recently identified fourth and fifth Arabidopsis
phytochromes, PHYD and PHYE, and on the structural determinants of phytochrome
functional specificity. The research directly addresses basic questions
concerning the organization of a plant photoreceptor family and the mechanisms
of light-activated plant developmental responses. Moreover, many phytochrome-
controlled responses are components of important agronomic traits such as seed
germinatiion, yield, and flowering time. Hence, the phytochrome receptors are
likely targets for future modification in crop plants via plant biotechnology.
***