* 9407151
* Computerization of the Fish Collections of the California   Academy of Sciences.  Phase 2
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1994,02/29/1996
* William Eschmeyer, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/29/1996
* USD 82,755.00

9407151 Iwamoto The preserved fish collection of the California Academy of
Sciences (CAS) is considered the second most important international
ichthyological research resource in North America. Of the 218,00 specimen lots
contained, only 60,000 (27.5%) are currently entered in a computer database.
This will capture catalog data from hand-written CAS and former Stanford
University catalog ledgers using the MUSE collection-management software. This
accomplished, the Academy's fish collection will have more than 157,000 records
in its electronic database, representing 72% of its total collection. In a
subsequent phase, electronic cataloging will capture data for all 61,000
remaining uncataloged lots. When completed, the database will allow maintenance
of better inventories and records of collections and loan transactions,
immediate access to collection data, and quick and efficient computer-generation
of lists of specimens, localities, and other custom-sorted data for the user
community. Cost savings in personnel time necessary to carry out these routine
functions will be enormous compared with using the old hand-written ledger and
records systems. The value and use of the collections will be greatly enchanced
by the unlocking of information previously unretrievable because of limitations
in time and personnel. Time saved by curatorial staff will be better used to
continue high-quality maintenance of the collection. Sharing of the captured
data set will be a prime concern, and to this end the collection database will
be made accessible to the world community through Internet, using the Gopher
system.