* 9407350
* Phylogenetic Relationships in the Ericaceae s.1: Combined Evidence From Morphology and DNA Sequences of Two Chloroplast Genes and One Nuclear Ribosomal Gene
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Kathleen Kron, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 07/31/1997
* USD 190,000.00

9407350 Kron The blueberry or heath family (Ericaceae) is a remarkably diverse
group of horticulturally and agriculturally important plants. It has a broad
geographic distribution that spans both the temperate and tropical regions of
the world. Many of the patterns of diversity seen throughout the flowering
plants as a whole can be seen within the blueberry family alone. For example,
whereas most of the members of the family are woody shrubs and trees, several
are herbs; most members are green and photosynthetic, but several lack
chlorophyll and are essentially parasitic; many are insect pollinated but some
are wind pollinated or pollinated by birds. This diversity presents questions
about the relationships among the members of the family. Using both morphology
and DNA sequence data, Dr. Kathleen Kron of Wake Forest University will provide
an assessment of the phylogenetic relationships of species of Ericaceae. DNA
data are being collected from both chloroplast and nuclear sources, and will in
turn be integrated with morphological characters used in traditional taxonomies
of these plants. The determination of phylogenetic or genealogical groupings
within the family will provide a framework for future studies in such areas as
biogeography, fungal host/parasite specificity, and pollination biology, as well
as provide reference data for detailed taxonomic studies at genus and species
levels.