* 9407997
* Cell Volume Regulation in Bivalves:  Response to            Fluctuating Salinity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Stephen Wright, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1998
* USD 180,000.00

9407997 Wright Because of the very large concentrations of salt in seawater,
marine animals live under constant salinity stress. Marine invertebrates
generally cope with this stress by maintaining in their cells a combination of
inorganic solutes that together balance the large osmotic concentration of full
strength sea water. Estaurine invertebrates face an added challenge. As a
consequence of the daily change in tides, the estaurine environment can
cyclically shift from full strength sea water to freshwater. Animals living in
the intertidal habitats can, therefore, be exposed to changes in ambient
osmolarity that can have a profound impact on their physiology. In particular,
when exposed to reduced osmolarity (i.e., dilute sea water), the cells and
tissues of estaurine animals typically swell. It is widely believed that the
response of cells to this type of stress includes a loss of solute that induces
an osmotically-obligated loss of water and hence a reduction in volume back
toward normal levels. Indeed, this has been shown to be the case for many
mammalian cells. For an estaurine animal faced with large daily shifts in
osmolarity, any loss of solute must be met by an equal gain in solute when the
tide shifts and ambient osmolarity returns to normal. Although these cyclic
losses and gains of cell solute could represent a substantial energy cost to the
animal, the actual extent of the energetic stress associated with exposure to
cycles is unknown. The present work will examine the influence of cyclic changes
in salinity on (i) the extent of osmostically-induced changes in cell size; (ii)
the accompanying changes in cell solute concentration; and (iii) the cellular
mechanism of the regulatory response to these changes. The experiments will
focus on the response to salinity stress of bivalve gills, a tissue uniquely
suited to measurement of cell volume using both direct optical and direct
radiotracer methods. This combination of techniques will permit measu rement of
the extent of volume regulation in intact animals as well as in isolated
tissues. The results of the proposed studies will lead to the first assessment
of the impact of cell volume regulation on the energy budget of an estaurine
animal.