* 9407131
* Genealogical Concordance and Discordance in The Genetic     Structure of Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* John Avise, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 12/31/1998
* USD 223,000.00

9407131 Avise In recent years, it has become increasingly clear that geographic
populations of most animal species differ from one another genetically, and both
historical and contemporary processes can influence these genetic distributions.
Less-well appreciated are how closely the patterns of geographic variation in
different genes and genetic assays match one another within a species, or how
frequently concordant patterns are exhibited across species. Yet such
assessments of genealogical concordance are crucial to a number of disciplines
ranging from population genetics to systematics to conservation biology. For
example, concordant genetic patterns would likely reflect shared elements in the
histories of natural selection, population subdivision, and gene flow. Such
patterns would also be highly relevant to taxonomic descriptions, and to
assessments of within species biodiversity in a conservation context. This
project will involve molecular genetic assays of geographic populations within
several vertebrate species in the southeastern United States. The intent is to
determine whether and how often concordant (as opposed to discordant) genetic
patterns exist within these taxa, and to address the historical processes
governing such patterns. The goal will be to provide a molecular level
assessment of biodiversity in the southeastern region, and to develop a
conceptual framework for interpreting and utilizing such information.