* 9407261
* RUI:  Molecular Regulation of Sodium Transport Systems in   Euryhaline Animals
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* David Towle, Lake Forest College
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 272,493.00

9407261 Towle Euryhaline animals by definition are capable of tolerating a broad
range of salt levels in their aquatic environments. An example is the green
shore crab Carcinus maenas, an introduced species in many intertidal habitats
around the world. This crab succeeds in a range of environmental salinities by
regulating its own salt levels in the blood, depending on transport systems in
its multifunctional gills. Two sodium transporters in crab gill, a
sodium/hydrogen exchanger and a sodium/potassium pump, are very similar to
transporters in the mammalian kidney. If we can learn more about how the green
crab and other euryhaline animals cope with varying salt loads under natural
conditions, perhaps we will better understand processes in our own kidney which
may be related to hypertension and other disorders of homeostasis. We may also
learn enough about the specifics of the physiology of Carcinus to suggest
environmentally safe approaches to its control as a pest species. Dr. Towle
plans to study the two sodium transporters in the crab using the techniques of
molecular biology. He will identify the genetic code for each of the
transporters using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Determining the DNA
sequence of each will permit a comparison with similar transporters in mammals
and other vertebrates. He will also be able to study the molecular expression of
each transporter in different specialized tissues under various salinity
challenges. He expects that the transporters will be expressed most strongly in
gills of animals challenged with low environmental salt, conditions in which
salt uptake would be adaptive. The research will be accomplished with the
assistance of undergraduates at Lake Forest College and Mount Desert Island
Biological Laboratory. ***