* 9407874
* U.S. National Committee for the Committee on Data for       Science and Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1995
* Paul Uhlir, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* William Blanpied
* 06/30/1995
* USD 49,375.00

Abstract INT-9407874 The globalization of science is occurring in parallel with
a rapid expansion in the speed and sophistication of information and data
handling technologies, and in their uses for scientific purposes. Developments
in these areas permit the planning and execution of large scale scientific
programs. Such programs, in turn, frequently require sophisticated data handling
and processing techniques. In view of the multilateral character of many large
scale scientific programs, the handling, processing, and transmission of
scientific data has become a major international enterprise in its own right,
one that is vital to those scientific programs. The Committee on Data for
Science and Technology (CODATA) is a non-governmental, multilateral body
affiliated with the International council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). The
principal objective of CODATA is to facilitate worldwide communication on
problems relevant to scientific data. Like other members of the ICSU family,
CODATA is comprised of non-governmental National Member Organizations. The
National Academy of Sciences (NAS) fulfills that function in the United States.
This award will provide partial support to the NAS to continue to manage U.S.
participation in CODATA, including partial payment of dues to CODATA and partial
support of the activities of the U.S. National Committee. Additional support is
also being sought from several other federal agencies: DoE, NASA, NIH, and NIST.
***