* 9407050
* Mathematical Sciences:  Proposal on Feature Extraction in   Spoken Language Acquisition
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Kris Ukraincik, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1997
* USD 71,000.00

9407050 Auslander There are many ascpects of automated speech understanding, but
the overall problem is often divided into two main tasks, The first is the
transcription of spoken language into text and the second is the derivation of
meaning from the transcribed speech. These tasks are traditionally addressed
separately, assuming a clean interface at the level of transcription. However,
it is clear that the acoustic and semantic problems must be intimately related.
It is also felt that traditional tools of acoustic analysis of speech signals,
based on the Fourier spectrum, are insufficient for the robust recognition of
fluent speech. The substance of our project will be to study time-frequency
feature extraction techniques for the purpose of clarifying the acoustic-
semantic relationship, with the goal of improving the performance of systems for
spoken language understanding. Specifically, we purpose the integration of time-
frequency techniques being developed at CUNY with existing acoustic and semantic
processing already in place at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories. A primary issue will
be to understand the relationship of the extracted time-frequency objects to
traditional phonetic subword units, with emphasis on providing improved acoustic
discrimination in regions of semantic ambiguity. While primary features
extracted by the auditory periphery are innate in humans, the perceptual metric,
subword and word symbols are acquired knowledge. We want to understand how time-
frequency feature extraction techniques might simulate this behavior in a
machine, for the purpose of improving the robustness of spoken language
processing.