* 9407251
* Protein-protein Interactions in Membrane Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Gerda Breitwieser, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9407251 Breitweiser Although hundreds of "seven transmembrane helix" G protein -
coupled receptors and a sizable family of heterotrimeric G proteins (consisting
of , and subunits) have been identified and cloned, there is as yet a minimal
understanding of the effector proteins of these signaling pathways. Most cells
contain many types of G protein- coupled receptors, a host of G protein
subtypes, and numerous effectors. The ability to respond to a given agonist with
activation of the appropriate range of effector enzymes may be controlled by
subcellular localization of signaling pathways, variable activation of G protein
subtypes and effectors by receptors, by modulation of the levels of expression
of components of the various signaling pathways, or most likely, a combination
of these and other measures. We have extensively characterized the kinetics of
muscarinic receptor-mediated activation of an inwardly rectifying K+ channel in
bullfrog atrium via a pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein, Gk1, and have
developed a minimal model for regulation of muscarinic K+ current activation and
desensitization. With the recent cloning of the muscarinic K+ channel (GIRK1),
we now have the means to test the hypotheses derived from studies in intact
myocytes by expression of the complete signal transduction pathway (m2
muscarinic receptor, inhibitory G proteins and GIRK1) in a heterologous system.
The experiments in this proposal will yield significant new information about
the protein-protein interactions involved in G protein-mediated signal
transduction. We will examine muscarinic K+ current activation in a heterologous
mammalian expression system, which will allow kinetic analysis of G protein-
channel interactions with high time resolution, under conditions in which the
levels of expression of the various components in the signal transduction
pathway are known. We will also make GIRK1 - IRK1 chimeras, by exchanging the
conduction pore regions, to examine the r ole of cytoplasmic domains in channel
gating. These chimeric molecules will be transiently expressed in the mammalian
cell line containing m2 mAChR, to assess the functional consequences of the
cytoplasmically-localized domains on channel gating. The techniques implemented
during the accomplishment of these two aims will establish the approaches which
can be used for a more extensive examination of the role of protein - protein
interactions in membrane signaling. %%% Cells are capable of responding to a
variety of signals carried by small molecules which bind to specific receptors
on their surface membranes. The mechanisms by which these events at the cell
surface are translated into appropriate alterations in cell function are the
focus of this study. Many distinct receptors have been identified, and a large
number of them interact with a family of "signal transducing" proteins, called G
proteins, which carry the signal from receptor to the appropriate enzyme which
must be activated or inhibited. The ability to respond to a specific small
molecule (agonist) with activation of the appropriate enzyme is a complicated
process which may be regulated in a variety of ways. We have extensively
characterized the kinetics of activation by acetylcholine of an inwardly
rectifying K+ channel in bull frog atrium. This ion channel has now been cloned,
which permits us to insert this signal transduction pathway into a cell type
which does not normally contain it, and to study it under controlled conditions.
The experiments in this proposal will yield significant new information about
the interactions involved in G protein-mediated signal transduction. We will
examine how channel activation is regulated in a well-controlled system in which
the amounts of each protein in the signaling pathway are known. We will also
examine the role of various regions of the channel molecule in the activation
process by producing hybrid channels in which various regions are intercha nged
with similar, but distinctly regulated channel types. The techniques implemented
during the accomplishment of these two aims will establish the approaches which
can be used for a more extensive examination of the role of protein - protein
interactions in membrane signaling. ***