* 9407233
* Regulation of Methane Flux From Freshwater Wetland Sediments By Competing Anaerobic Microbial Processes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Robert Wetzel, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Joaquin Martinez Martinez
* 06/30/1997
* USD 196,661.00

9407233 Roden Anaerobic microbial processes in the decomposition of sediment
organic matter , and methane is typically the dominant end-product of anaerobic
metabolism in wetland sediments. Methane is the second-most important
atmospheric "greenhouse" gas, and it is crucial that accurate estimates of
current and projected rates of methane production and emission to the atmosphere
be developed for global climate change evaluations. Factors which control
regional variations in methane production and emissions are important to
process-level ecological research. Several recent studies of freshwater wetlands
in the southeastern U.S. have indicated that non-methanogenic carbon
mineralization processes account a large part of carbon metabolism. The proposed
research examines the hypothesis that competition by non-methanogenic anaerobic
microorganisms for substrates of anaerobic metabolism can divert carbon
metabolism away from methane production and thereby suppress methane release
from freshwater wetland sediments. In particular, microbial iron oxide reduction
may be an important carbon decomposition pathway in the typically iron-rich,
sulfate poor freshwater wetlands found throughout the southeastern U.S.. A
wetland in the Talleasdega National Forest in Alabama will be used as a model
system to examine this hypothesis. Microbial iron oxide reduction and iron
cycling processes will be examined in two locations, the sediment surface ,
where iron oxides are deposited or formed by reaction with oxygen introduced
from the atmosphere or overlying water; and the rhizosphere, where iron oxide
layers form in association with transport of oxygen through aquatic plant roots
(for respiratory metabolism) into the sediment. Time course laboratory studies
of gas exchange, dissolved and solid phase chemical distributions, and rates of
microbial metabolism will be conducted in artificially constructed sediment
cores with and without emergent aquatic plants. The results of these laboratory
studies will be compared to analogous field measurements in order to assess the
significance of iron oxide reduction in anaerobic carbon mineralization, and to
quantify its influence on methane production and flux to the atmosphere directly
and through emergent aquatic vegetation. While advancing knowledge of carbon
cycling pathways in the Talledega wetland, the research will also furnish a base
of information to which the studies of anaerobic metabolism and regulation of
methane release from different types of wetland ecosystems can be compared.