* 9408012
* Isolation and Characterization of Progestin Specific Messenger RNAs from the Yellow Perch Ovary at Ovulation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Frederick Goetz, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 160,000.00

9408012 Goetz Ovulation is the release of a mature egg from its enclosure in the
ovary. Progestational steroids have been implicated in the control of ovulation
but little is known about their specific role in this process. The objective of
this proposal is to determine what these steroids are specifically stimulating
in the ovary at the time of ovulation. To accomplish this, a fish model, the
yellow perch, will be used. The reason for using this model is that research on
perch has already demonstrated that ovulation is regulated by a progestational
steroid and that the regulation requires the activation of genes and the
synthesis of new protein. When a gene is activated in a cell, a specific message
(called messenger RNA; mRNA) is created that acts as a template for protein
synthesis. In the present study, the mRNAs that are stimulated by the
progestational steroid during ovulation will be isolated using molecular
biological techniques and their biochemical sequences determined. These
sequences will be compared to those of known proteins that are maintained in the
national GenBank database. Through these comparisons an initial idea of what the
steroid is specifically stimulating at the time of ovulation can be obtained.
***