* 9408382
* LTREB: Abundance and Phenology of Rocky Mountain Flowering  Plants and Their Pollinators
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1994,10/31/1997
* David Inouye, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1997
* USD 45,000.00

9408382 Inouye The value of long-term biological data sets has been increasingly
recognized in recent years, for the insights that they can provide on the
dynamics of population biology, the frequency of unusual events, the
consequences of climate change, and the nature of interactions among species.
Despite this recognition that number of long-term data sets available for
analysis is still quite small. One reason for this paucity is that generation of
such data sets typically involves long-term monitoring, which may be show
(especially at the rate of 1 datum/yr) to generate data necessary before
hypotheses can be tested, manipulative experiments designed, or publications
produced. This project will extend collection of data on several aspects of the
ecology of herbaceous plants in the Colorado Rocky Mountains, including the
abundance and phenology of flowering and the abundance and seasonality of insect
pollinators. Approximately 100 species of plants will be included in this study.
This project builds on a continuing endeavor that began in 1973 at the Rocky
Mountain Biological Laboratory, and already provides one of the longest
available data sets on flowering. Data from the existing data set have been
included in three recent publications. The data will be accessible and of
interest to a large number of active researchers.