* 9408946
* Simultaneous Removal of Soot and NOx From the Exhaust of    Diesel Powered Vehicles Using a Rotating Fluidized Bed      Filter
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Robert Pfeffer, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 07/31/1996
* USD 45,000.00

ABSTRACT -- CTS-9408946 Pfeffer - NJIT It is proposed to explore the use of a
rotating centrifugal bed filter with a "self cleaning" zeolite catalyst for
removal of soot and NOx from the exhaust of internal combustion engines. Its
application for reducing air pollution from mobile Diesel engines will also be
tested. The rotating fluidized bed as a dust filter with variable speed was
proposed by the PI. A preliminary test for a "self cleaning" zeolite catalyst
has been performed in the University of Tokyo, by a collaborator of the PI. At
695 degrees Kelvin, the soot and NOx interacted successively with the fluidized
bed composed of a copper ion-exchange ZSM-5 zeolite catalyst, resulting in
emissions of N2 and CO2 and a continuous regeneration of the original catalyst.
This project aims to verify the "self cleanliness" of several particulate
catalysts, their range of application, and the time scales over which the
catalysts would remain active. If the preliminary study is positive, a fluidized
bed device will be engineered for direct attachment to a mobile Diesel-powered
vehicle and tested in situ with the objective of reducing air pollution. If
successful, the research may lead to a versatile filter for the internal
combustion engines, with improved performances as compared to existing systems
for a variety of applications in environmental technology.