* 9408298
* RUI: Strategies for Fast Execution of Constraint Logic Programs Over a Real-Number Domain
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1997
* Jennifer Burg, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 03/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

Constraint logic programming is a declarative programming paradigm which has
proven to be expressive for computationally difficult problems such as
scheduling, air traffic flow management, simulation of dynamic physical systems,
solution of differential equations, and options trading analysis. However, while
CLP languages are expressive, their execution is not always efficient enough for
the problems to which they apply. The goal of this research is to develop
strategies for fast execution of constraint logic programs, particularly in the
domain of real or rational arithmetic constraints. To this end, incremental
Gaussian elimination-based and simplex-based constraint satisfaction algorithms
are compared for their efficiency in the context of CLP; the feasibility of
intelligent backtracking and independent and-parallelism is investigated; work
on asynchronous parallel execution of the inference engine and solver is
continued; and parallel incremental algorithms for constraint solving are being
developed. The research program has strong undergraduate involvement and
research components. Students are involved in the design, implementation, and
testing of algorithms, and are exposed to concepts from the theory of
computation, programming language design, the linear programming problem, AI
search and backtracking strategies, and parallel computation.