* 9408266
* Cyclic Amp and Symbiosis in a Bioluminescent Bacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Paul Dunlap, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 07/31/1997
* USD 270,000.00

9408266 Dunlap Mutualistic luminescent symbiosis between the marine bacterium
Vibrio fischeri and sepiolid squids (Euprymna scolopes and E. morsei) is a model
system to identify microbial determinants needed for colonization. Cyclic
nucleotide metabolism in V. fischeri, which may play a fundamental role in host-
symbiont interactions, will be examined from two perpsectives. The role of
periplasmic 3':5'-cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (CpdPase) will be
determined with colonization assay of the squid using V. fischeri cpdP deletion
mutants. V. fischeri cpdP deletion mutants will be prepared using molecular
biology methods. Differential expression of the cpdP gene will be determined
measuring CpdP enzyme activity, protein levels, and mRNA in bacteria during the
initiation and maintenance phases of the symbiosis. The role of microbial
adenylate cyclase and cAMP receptor protein in squid symbiosis will be observed
also using squid colonization experiments with cya and crp mutants from a squid-
symbiotic V. fischeri strain. For these studies, V. fischeri cya and crp genes
will be obtained from a V. fischeri DNA gene library by complementation with
Escherichia coli deletion mutants. Once obtained, wild-type V. fischeri genes
will be inactivated and transposon insertion will be employed to produce cya and
crp defective squid-symbiotic V. fischeri mutants. Loss of ability of the cya
and crp deficient mutants to establish symbiosis will help us understand the
molecular basis of V. fischeri squid colonization and identify the cAMP
regulated genes involved. %%% Symbiotic associations between bacteria and higher
organisms dominate almost all terrestrial and marine habitats. Vibrio fischeri,
a marine bacterium, forms a beneficial symbiosis with certain squids. The
symbiosis is a useful model system that can provide insight into the ways which
animals prevent potentially pathogenic bacteria from developing disease.
Preliminary evidence indicates that cyclic AMP (cA MP), a regulator of bacterial
gene expression, is likely to mediate bacteria-animal interactions critical to
this symbiosis. Genetic experiments are designed to identify these interactions
and learn how cAMP works. Mutants of V. fischeri will be constructed that lack
the gene for periplasmic cAMP phosphodiesterase, the enzyme that breaks down
cAMP outside the bacterial cell, the gene for adenylate cyclase formation,
and/or the gene for cAMP receptor protein, which makes bacteria to respond to
cAMP. These V. fischeri mutants will be tested in squid to measure their ability
to establish symbiosis. Loss of this ability will help us find V. fischeri genes
necessary for the symbiosis to develop. This project is supported jointly by
programs of Metabolic Biochemistry (Molecular &amp; Cellular Biosciences) and
Ecological &amp; Evolutionary Physiology (Integrative Biology and Neuroscience)
***