* 9408254
* Third International Marine Biotechnology Conference to be   held August 8-12, 1994, at University of Tromso, Tromso,    Norway
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Harlyn Halvorson, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 07/31/1995
* USD 40,000.00

9408254 Halvorson This grant will provide support for U.S. scientists to attend
a five-day International Marine Biotechnology Conference to be held August 8-12,
1994 on the campus of the University of Tromso, in Tromso, Norway. The specific
objectives of the International Marine Biotechnology Conference are: (a) to
present the latest discoveries and applications of marine science with emphasis
on biotechnology; (b) to educate industrial scientists with the advances made in
marine science; (c) to bring together colleagues from all over the world so that
the science can be evaluated and criticized; (d) to present opportunities for
joint ventures and research partnerships by making contacts through scientific
discussions and informal gatherings; (e) to put together a volume of extended
abstracts so that the science presented at this conference will be available as
a reference book. (f) to provide material that will lead to creative new ideas
and applications. %%% This grant will provide support for U.S. scientists to
attend a five-day International Marine Biotechnology Conference to be held
August 8-12, 1994 on the campus of the University of Tromso, in Tromso, Norway.
The topics chosen for the conference reflect the great interest among scientists
in exploring the nature of biological interactions between organisms living in
the very diverse and often extreme habitats of the marine world. Basic research
on biological mechanisms and molecular interactions related to a life in aquatic
systems has yielded valuable information about fundamental biological
principles. Studies on the processes and products of marine organisms have
already opened new and sometimes very unexpected applications within many
sectors of society, including medicine, production of marine food and chemicals
and sequestration of mineral resources. Presently a major focus is on the
control of microbial diseases in aquaculture and in aquatic ecosystems. The
emerging science of marine bio technology is thus being applied in the
management of marine biological resources and in monitoring and remediating the
marine environment. The underlying philosophy of this conference to promote
rapid advances in the various sectors of marine biotechnology for the benefit of
mankind and in harmony with nature. ***