* 9408416
* Nanoporous Films for Molecular Recognition Optical and      Piezoelectric Sensors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Thomas Bein, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/1997
* USD 356,555.00

Abstract 9408416 Bein This research program focuses on the design of novel
nanoporous thin films with molecular recognition capabilities for stable
chemical sensors. Novel oriented zeolite films will be combined with optical
sensors based on fluorescence dyes stabilized in the zeolite matrix. Collisional
fluorescence quenching with oxygen and halogenated hydrocarbons will demonstrate
the concept of optical sensors with molecular sieving capabilities. In addition,
a number of novel size-selective mass sensors will be developed: (i) sensors
with preferred sorption of non-polar organic vs. polar compounds, and (ii)
selective sensors for aliphatic and aromatic amines. The exploration of
synthetic routes for novel thin films on sensors will also address fascinating
aspects of multifunctional molecular films, and nucleation and growth of
nanoporous structures. This work is important because there is an urgent need
for new families of selective sensors with long-term stability. %%% Rapidly
growing demands for comprehensive monitoring in the environmental, medical and
industrial field have stimulated efforts to develop high performance chemical
sensors. While many sensors show excellent sensitivity, their molecular
selectivity and long-term stability remain important challenges. This research
program focuses on the design of novel nanoporous thin films with molecular
recognition capabilities for stable chemical sensors. Novel oriented zeolite
films will be combined with optical sensors based on fluorescence dyes
stabilized in the zeolite matrix. In addition, a number of novel size-selective
mass sensors will be developed.