* 9408927
* Biogeochemical Influence of Cutter Ants on Secondary Forests of Eastern Amazonia
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Daniel Nepstad, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gaius R. Shaver
* 03/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract: 9408927, PI-NEPSTAD: Secondary forests are the by-product of increased
human clearing and utilization of land in the tropical regions of the Americas.
The limited time duration in which much of this land can be kept in agriculture
or pasture causes much of this land to revert to secondary forest. Much remains
to be learned about the formation and structure of these secondary forests.
Leafcutter ants are found to be incident at 10 to 100 fold higher numbers in
secondary forest compared to primary forest. They play important ecological
roles in defoliation of selected tree species and as modifiers of physical and
chemical nature of the soils. This project investigates the biogeochemical
influence of cutter ants by characterizing nest sites, soils, and tree growth at
sites with and without ant populations. This research is important because it
considers the role of the dominant herbivore in these ecosystems which are
recovering after human utilization and abandonment. Belowground processes in the
soils of tropical ecosystems are major controls on the recovery of these
ecosystems after disturbance. The leafcutter ant may well play a crucial role in
improving soil conditions to facilitate forest re-establishment. This research
will begin to address this potential interaction, and test the hypothesis that
this prolific invertebrate enhances tree growth in these transitional
ecosystems.