* 9408057
* Lycophytes, Bryophytes, and Charophytes:  Testing Morphology and Molecule-Based Hypotheses
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1994,03/31/1997
* Russell Chapman, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 03/31/1997
* USD 85,001.00

9408057 Chapman Molecular data from nuclear and organellar DNA, in conjunction
with numerical algorithms for phylogenetic analysis, have revolutionized the
study of plant evolution. Dr. Russell Chapman of Louisiana State University has
been a leader in the application of these molecular and taxometric methodologies
to the analysis of green algae and of so-called lower land plants such as mosses
and club-mosses. Focussing primarily on nuclear ribosomal gene sequences, he has
shown that the bryophytes (mosses, liverworts, and hornworts), while likely to
be the earliest diverging lineages of land plants, are themselves not a single
evolutionary unit but a series of terrestrial "experiments." Additional DNA data
are being collected to test the phylogenetic affinities of various bryophyte
groups, and in particular to assess the utility of the current classification of
mosses into 17 distinct suborders. As samples become available, molecular
analyses will also be applied to related groups of primitive vascular plants,
the lycophytes (club mosses and relatives). In association with morphological
and ultrastructural studies underway in other laboratories, the molecular
phylogenetic analyses of nuclear ribosomal DNA conducted by Dr. Chapman are
providing insight to the direction and tempo of change in plants as they adapted
to life on land.