* 9408438
* Proteins as Copolymers in Hydrophobic Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Alan Russell, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 11/30/1997
* USD 161,242.00

9408438 Russell This project is on research to study the behavior of enzymes in
organic media by attachment of an enzyme to an organic polymer. In particular,
an enzyme will be fixed to a hydrophobic matrix of polyethylene glycol (PEG)
chains. This would allow the enzyme to dissolve in an organic solvent while
maintaining activity. The enzyme would be attached to a polymer by: (1) direct
functionalization of the enzyme with an acrylate-terminal PEG to produce an
enzyme in an organic solvent, followed by (2) solution copolymerization of the
enzyme macromonomer with a vinyl monomer. Studies of the enzyme stability,
activity and specificity in this environment, as well as studies on the effects
of polymer macrostructure on the overall kinetics of the enzyme-catalyzed
reaction will be performed. Also, a study of protein activity as effected by
polymer porosity, enzyme loading, the extent of enzyme modification prior to
immobilization, polymer hydrophobicity, other physical properties, and mass
transfer will be performed. The particular enzyme to be used in this research is
organophosphorous hydrolase, and enzyme which can degrade certain insecticides
such as parathion, and certain types of nerve gases. This research could have
environmental impact through the biodegradation of highly toxic compounds. ***