* 9408835
* Strongly Correlated Electron Phenonema in Rare Earth and    Actinide Intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* M. Brian Maple, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 525,000.00

9408835 Maple This project investigates strongly correlated electron phenomena
in f-electron and d-electron systems. These phenomena include non-Fermi-liquid
low temperature characteristics associated with unconventional Kondo effects in
doped f-electron systems, superconductivity and magnetism in heavy fermion
compounds and the formation of small energy gaps due to hybridization between
localized f- and conduction-electron states in hybridization gap semiconductors
(also called Kondo insulators). Rare-earth and uranium intermetallic compounds
and alloys, in both polycrystalline and single crystal form, will be prepared
and characterized. Transport, thermal, and magnetic measurements will be made
over a wide range of temperatures. The research involves collaboration with a
number of other universitities and national laboratories, including the National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory. %%% This project involves the study of a group
of metallic superconductors called heavy Fermion superconductors. These
materials differ in some of their properties from normal superconductors and the
high-temperature copper oxide superconductors. The reasons for these differences
are not understood, so investigations of the heavy Fermion systems may shed
light on the perplexing problem of the high-Tc materials. New heavy Fermion
materials will be prepared and characterized by a range of techniques. While
these studies are of fundamental scientific interest, they are also of
importance in the development of useful materials for industrial applications.
The research involves collaboration with a number of other universities and
national laboratories, including the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory.
The research will contribute to the training of postdoctoral research scientists
and graduate students at UCSD and at the collaborating institutions. ***