* 9408833
* U.S.-South Africa Cooperative Research on Advanced Concepts for Flexible AC Transmission Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,02/28/1995
* Rene Spee, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 02/28/1995
* USD 5,000.00

INT 94-08833 Spee This collaborative research grant supplements Grant No. ECS-
93-01168 ("Intelligent Control of Complex Nonlinear Systems with Electric Power
Application"), which is studying Flexible AC Transmission Systems (FACTS) in an
effort also supported by the Electric Power Research Institute and the
Bonneville Power Administration. The current grant provides partial support for
a U.S. researcher, Dr. Rene Spee, of the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Oregon State University, to spend six months at University of
Stellenbosch, South Africa, to investigate a "next generation" FACTS device
which utilizes force commutated power converter technology. Activities proposed
include design, modeling and evaluation of this "Unified Power Controller" with
an emphasis on device performance in power systems representative of the western
United States and Southern Africa. The South African partner is Dr. Johan H. R.
Enslin, of the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering. The work at
University of Stellenbosch is supported by the South African national utility,
ESKOM. The collaboration includes a six-month stay at Oregon State U. by the
South African partner, with partial support from the South African Foundation
for Research Development. This collaboration promises benefits to both
institutions, which have ongoing research projects on system and device level
control of FACTS, and to the power needs of both countries. Devices and control
strategies not previously investigated in depth for the western North American
power system will be evaluated in a system setting very similar to the US, thus
speeding possible application and reducing development cost. The South African
utility is interested in the potential of FACTS for a number of reasons,
including: use in ESKOM's rural electrification program, as a technology for
improving quality of supply, and as a solution for present stability problems.
***