* 9408347
* Biogeography and Speciation in the Oyster Mushroom Pleurotus
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Rytas Vilgalys, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 10/31/1997
* USD 210,031.00

9408347 Vilgalys The oyster mushrooms, genus Pleurotus of the Basidiomycetes,
are important as wood degrading fungi, and some species are choice edible
mushrooms which are collected or cultivated in many countries. Professor Rytas
Vilgalys of Duke University is studying the patterns of species differences in
the genus throughout its worldwide distribution. Conventional taxonomic study of
morphology and of mating systems is being combined with modern analyses of
nuclear ribosomal gene sequences, using numerous samples collected from field
trips and from colleagues. Laboratory growth studies will be performed to
determine mating systems and the limits of intersterility groups. A simple yet
ingenious "spore trapping" technique is also being employed, whereby petri
dishes with several tester strains are exposed for 48 hours to the local spore
rain and results of hyphal fusion monitored. Concurrent molecular analyses focus
on DNA sequence data derived from the worldwide sample of Pleurotus. Results of
the studies will help answer several questions relevant to speciation in fungi:
(1) how old are different species groups, under a molecular clock model; (2)
what are the genealogical or phylogenetic relationships among the species; and
(3) what are the relationships between geographic distribution and levels of
morphological, molecular, and mating system variability. By providing
comprehensive taxonomic descriptions for each species from geographically
diverse regions, the study will also provide a baseline for developing
commercially useful strains of oyster mushrooms for cultivation and
biotechnology.