* 9408056
* Regional Vegetation Response to Human Disturbance in Central New England
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Michael Binford, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 07/31/1997
* USD 280,000.00

9408056 Foster The response of ecosystems and landscapes to disturbance has been
a major emphasis of ecological research with most focus on episodic or pulse-
type disturbances such as fire, wind, or forest cutting. Relatively little is
known concerning the impact of long-term disturbances that affect large areas,
such as regional land-use activity. Human activity is a critical disturbance
process to evaluate because it is ubiquitous. Understanding the impact of human
activity is important from an ecological perspective because it often involves
processes and a magnitude of impact that are novel to the impacted biological
systems. This research will address the following fundamental ecological
questions: How does the institution of a novel disturbance regime alter
vegetation organization in relation to prevailing environmental conditions and
disturbance processes? At what rate do species assemblages reorganize as the
intensity of disturbance changes? Following a decrease in regional disturbance
does the vegetation reorganize according to prevailing environmental conditions,
and does it revert towards its former composition? The primary data source for
this research is a 2000-year vegetation and fire history record derived by fine
resolution pollen and charcoal analysis of a network of 16 lakes in north-
central Massachusetts. This approach provides a long record of regional
vegetation pattern and dynamics, disturbance, and environmental relationships
prior to European settlement. Cultural data, including archaeological surveys
and decadal census data, will provide information on the pre-European context
and indices of regional variation in land-use intensity during the historical
period. %%% This approach of using long-term regional data on palaeoecology,
archaeology, and environment will yield a new understanding to broad-scale human
impacts on forested landscapes. These results will provide important insights
into the organization and dynamics of vegetation and will be of general inte
rest due to regional similarities with the land-use history of other areas. The
results will be specifically applicable to the understanding, management, and
conservation of the New England landscape.