* 9408708
* Infrastructure and Tools for Distributed Collaborative      Software Engineering
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* John Riedl, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/1998
* USD 183,868.00

This research covers two closely related areas of collaboration technology:
collaborative tools and infrastructures. In the area of collaborative tools, it
is addressing the potential of these tools for making distributed collaborative
software engineering tasks more concurrent, thereby allowing these time-
consuming tasks to be completed significantly more quickly. In the area of
collaborative infrastructures, it is addressing support for nearautomatic
generation of efficient, collaborative tools, thereby significantly reducing the
tremendous amount of effort required to program these tools manually. These two
efforts are related since the infrastructure is being used to build the tools
and the tools are being used to evaluate the infrastructure. Some of the
specific issues being addressed include security, consistency, computer support
for gathering software engineering requirements, and asynchronous software
engineering meetings. The research is using an experimental method wherein the
infrastructure and tools are being implemented and used in case studies. The
research results will include: taxonomies of collaboration scenarios;
principles, interaction models, software abstractions, and architectures that
support these scenarios; and evaluation of the infrastructure and tools being
developed.