* 9408837
* Missing Data Methods for Non-Random Attrition in            Longitudinal Studies
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Roderick J.A. Little, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1997
* USD 142,156.00

This project will develop new methods for multivariate longitudinal data with
nonrandomly missing data such as arise with attrition from the sample. Maximum
likelihood and Bayesian inference will be derived for a variety of pattern-
mixture models, which stratify the data by the pattern of missing data and
identify parameters by exploiting assumptions about the missing-data mechanism.
Methods will be developed for general patterns of missing data, normal repeated
measures models, multivariate t models that accommodate outlying values, and
data involving mixtures of continuous and categorical variables. The methods
will be compared with existing methods, including those based on stochastic
censoring models. Tests for the type of missing-data mechanism will also be
developed. Many important scientific studies involve repeated measures of
subjects over time. A common problem in analyzing such studies is that some
subjects are missing some of their measurements, because they miss visits or do
not stay in the study to the end. Discarding such incomplete cases is wasteful,
and can lead to erroneous conclusions when the cases that are completely
observed differ systematically from those that are incomplete. This grant
studies methods of analyses that include all the data and incorporate a variety
of reasons for why values are missing.