* 9408193
* Molecular Systematics and Evolutionary Relationships of the Green Algae in the Class Chlorophyceae
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Gary Floyd, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 04/30/1998
* USD 185,000.00

9408193 Floyd The green algae (known formally as the Chlorophyceae) are a
diverse group of organisms, placed together by biologists because of the nature
of their photosynthetic pigments and storage products. It has become clear that
they include several ancient evolutionary lines. The particular algal species
chosen for this study represent major groups within the green algae whose
origins and affinities are questionable. The analysis emphasizes molecular
characters as markers of evolution. The DNA sequences of genes which code for
the nuclear small subunit ribosomal RNA will be determined. These genes are
referred to as the 18S rRNA genes. Traditional approaches using morphological
and microscopic (ultrastructural) characters which can help to understand the
evolutionary pattern in these algae are either unavailable, uninformative, or
conflicting. Several interrelated topics are to be investigated. These include:
(1) the taxonomic relationships between members of the algal order
Tetrasporales, especially whether forms with four flagella on their zoopores
(called quadriflagellate) or two flagella (biflagellate) are closely related,
and whether the species of the Tetrasporales are closely related to other algal
groups; (2) the origin and affinities of two groups of filamentous algae, the
Chaetophorales and the Oedogoniales, including if they have a common origin, or
are derived from other types of algae; and, (3) the relationship between these
filamentous algae and a selected set of algae that do not produce motile cells
at any time in their life history, for which appropriate cell ultrastructure
information is unavailable. The 18S rRNA genes of approximately 40 species will
be studied by using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify copies of the
gene, then sequencing the DNA products. The results of the current project can
be compared with sequences of the 18S rRNA genes of the other algae already
studied and with published data on algal 18S rRNA gene sequences. The
relationships identified from the molecular analysis will be compared with those
based on traditional morphological characters, and on ultrastructural studies.