* 9408148
* An Evolutionary Analysis of Biparental Care
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1994,12/31/1999
* Douglas Mock, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 12/31/1999
* USD 117,243.00

Being unrelated genetically, monogamous mates have some interests in common,
others at odds. Where costly biparental care is provided to nidicolous young,
the sexual partnership is likely to be a complex mixture of cooperation and
selfishness: each individual may enhance its lifetime reproductive success by
getting its partner to supply the greater investment. Recent ESS models predict
that such a parent should compensate only partially for any shortfall by its
mate, yet should become more generous as its own future (its residual
reproductive value) diminishes. Because many factors influence life-history
parameters asymmetrically according to gender, the ESS approach leads to novel
predictions regarding the parental division of labor. The proposed field
observations and experiments on house sparrows will explore these dynamics.
Parental labor required for provisioning the brood will be artificially
increased (by slightly encumbering one parent with small lead fishing weights
affixed temporarily to the rectrices) and the food-delivery performances of both
the taxed parent and its mate will be recorded. At the same time their daily
energy expenditures will be assessed via the doubly-labelled water technique. At
other nests, the costs of parental care will be artificially decreased (via food
supplementations) and the impact on both male and female parents will be
determined. Because house sparrows are remarkably sedentary and breed multiply
within a season, it should be possible to make robust assessments of how
increased parental exertion affects both future adult reproductive performance
and current-brood recruitment. The overall goals of the initial support period
are: (1) to examine the separate costs of male and female parental care at three
levels (in terms of behavior, energy expenditure, and future reproductive
success); (2) to measure the impact of variable levels of parental provisioning
on whole broods of offspring; (3) to tailor ESS models of biparental care so as
to account for observed differences between males and females in this particular
system; (4) to test several key predictions from current ESS models about how
parental effort and sex differences in effort should relate to its costs; and
(5) to assess whether discontinuation of partnerships from one nesting cycle to
the next is contingent on disruptions of the relative workloads of each parent.