* 9408022
* Mathematical Principles of Reinforcement
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2000
* Peter Killeen, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/2000
* USD 477,267.00

IBN-9408022 Killeen Abstract It is indisputable that rewards and punishments
change behavior, but less certain is just what behavior they affect; just how is
"credit" (or blame) allocated to the stream of prior behavior? Dr. Killeen
posits that in order to be reinforceable, a behavior (response) must be in
short-term memory (STM) along with the incentive that rewards it. Because this
memory fades over time, more than just the most recent response is
reinforceable; the effects of a reward impinge on the previous stream of
behavior, with decreasing efficacy as the response-memories age. Dr. Killeen's
research will define the shape and extent of this response STM by a "resonance"
technique in which the correct characterization of the memory window is signaled
by a maximum in learning rate. There are many implications of this theory and
its perspective: It changes our understanding of how reinforcement schedules
affect behavior, provides a new model for temporal effects in classical
conditioning, reopens questions of chunking and automatization, clarifies how
incentives may at the same time reinforce a response and erase memory of that
response, and provides a new approach to the classic problem of response units.
The results of the research should help to significantly improve training
techniques; provide independent indices of memory, motivation, and response
facility; and reduce the plethora of scheduling techniques to a concise and
predictive mathematical system.