* 9408379
* Effect of Demographic and Economic Cycles on Migration      Timing and Regional Migraproduction
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Kavita Pandit, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1996
* USD 31,150.00

9408379 PANDIT This proposal will examine, theoretically and empirically, the
influence of demographic cycle cohort effects and economic cycle period effects
on migration timing. Previous literature has shown that these cycles are highly
influential in determining the "level" of migration: peak migration rates of
young adults tend to be lower for large cohorts and during recessionary economic
times because of competitive labor markets and depressed job opportunities. This
study suggests that demographic and economic cycles may also influence the
"timing" of migration. It builds on studies that have shown that individuals
born into large cohorts or those facing difficult economic conditions in their
early childhood frequently postpone their entry into the labor force. The first
part of the research uses 1948-1988 Current Population Survey data to
investigate (1) the effect of a cohort's location in the demographic cycle on
the timing of its peak migration, and (2) the effect of economic conditions and
trends at a given time on the timing of peak migration rates. The second part of
the research will explore how regional demographic and economic cycles, through
their effect on the level and timing of migration influence lifetime migration
expectancy or migraproduction. Using regional data on cohort size and economic
conditions over time, migration age-schedules and migraproduction rates are
estimated for the nine U.S. census regions. The findings from the first part of
the study will contribute to the theoretical literature on the influence of both
demographic and macroeconomic conditions on behavior. Findings from the second
part of the study will refine our understanding of macroeconomic influences on
spatial population flows. Overall, this study will make an important
contribution to the linkage of demographic and economic cycles to individual
behavior which, in turn, will provide new policy insights into the causes and
consequences of migration within the U.S. ***