* 9408905
* Physical Aspects of Self-Correcting Assembly and Force      Generation in Cytoskeleton Proteins
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Albert Libchaber, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Rolf M. Sinclair
* 06/30/1998
* USD 1,273,073.00

9408905 Leibler The cytoskeleton is a polymer structure made out of protein
fibers essential for intracellular transport, cell locomotion and division. This
structure is dynamical and highly regulated through the cell cycle. Assembly and
disassembly of the fibers and the action of associated motor proteins are out-
of- equilibrium processes. The necessary free energy is provided by the
hydrolysis of nucleotides (ATP, GTP) bound to the proteins. A Study will be
initiated from a physics point of view - of the following aspects of this
organization: o the dynamics of rigid and semiflexible protein fibers. The large
persistence length of f-actin and microtubules allows direct visualization and
study of their individual and collective behavior. o the non-equilibrium nature
of the fiber assembly. It leads, for example, to a unique dynamic behavior of
microtubules, called dynamic instability, in which the length fluctuations are
of the order of the mean length. o the regulation of the fiber assembly. The
dynamic instability, when regulated, is the basis of "trial and error", self-
correcting architecture. Despite progress in the biochemistry if the assembly
regulation, the spatio-temporal aspects (characteristic time and length scales)
are poorly understood. o the transduction of chemical to mechanical energy. Both
cytoskeleton fibers and associated motor proteins can be viewed as Brownian
machines which are chemical-mechanical transducers. The understanding of these
noisy machines must involve the methods of biochemistry and statistical
mechanics. The approach is both experimental and theoretical. It involves
physics and molecular biology departments, and the expertise of two industrial
laboratories. Given the complexity of the problems involved, this multi-
disciplinary approach seems necessary. ***