* 9408310
* Dissertation Research:  Mammalian Paleontology at an Old    World Monkey Locality, Wadi Moghara, Egypt
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* David Rasmussen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/1995
* USD 12,000.00

9408310 Tab Rasmussen/Ellen Miller During the lower Miocene, the African-
Arabian and Turkish tectonic plates collide, resulting in a land bridge between
Africa and Eurasia. For the first time in the entire Cenozoic, animal could move
between those two continents. Before then in Africa, the isolated animal species
were mostly primates, elephants, hyraxes, and cerodonts. In this new period, new
primates, carnivores, and hooved animals appeared for the first time, and much
of the present day fauna can be traced to that period, including the origin and
early evolution of the Old World monkeys. Many of these important early Miocene
animals are preserved as fossils in the rocks at Wadi Moghara, although most of
the African sites of this period are in the East African Rift Valley system. The
taxonomic diversity of the fossils at Moghara, coupled with the site's great
distance from most other early Miocene localities, makes the further study and
excavation at Moghara important. This project, by a graduate student, will
result in the collection of more fossil mammals from this important site, an
examination of all Moghara museum specimens and important comparative
collections, a revision of the systematics of the Moghara mammals, and an
investigation of the relationships between these mammals and other early Miocene
faunas. It will make important paleontological contributions as well as aiding
in the training of a new scientist.