* 9408165
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Science:  Quantum States of Shallow Impurities in Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Eugene Haller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/1999
* USD 30,000.00

9415824 Haller This Americas Program award will support collaborative research
between Dr. Eugene Haller, University of California, Berkeley, and Dr. Hugo
Navarro-Contreras, Instituto de Investigaciones Cientificas en Comunicacion
Optica, San Luis Potosi, Mexico, on the characterization and study of the
quantum states of shallow impurities in wide bandgap semiconductors. Techniques
to be used in this research are far-infrared and photothermal ionization
spectroscopy. The aim is to gain as much understanding as possible of the
impurities' quantum nature and to establish a possible association between
impurity atoms and other defects in the materials to be studied. Wide-bandgap
materials are potentially useful for demanding electronic applications and as
visible optical emitters. At present, many research groups are focusing on the
growth of wide-bandgap blue-emitting semiconductor materials that could be used
to fabricate blue light-emitting diodes and semiconductor lasers. The
application of these materials to light-emitting devices is hindered by several
factors, among them, the difficulties encountered in growing high quality single
crystalline epilayers. Recently, preparation of relatively good samples has been
achieved, but very little is known about the spectroscopic properties of dopant
impurities in these materials. The spectroscopic techniques to be used in the
present study will provide new and highly relevant information concerning the
nature of these impurities. ***