* 9408742
* Electrochemical Intercalation of Oxide Superconductors and  Mixed Metal Oxides with Perovskite and Related Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Allan Jacobson, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 06/30/1997
* USD 270,000.00

9408742 Jacobson Univ. of Houston Dr. Allan J. Jacobson, Chemistry Department,
University of Houston, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division and the Chemical
Reaction Processes Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division, under
the NSF/EPRI initiative on Electrochemical Synthesis, for the study of the
electrochemical synthesis of highly oxidized mixed metal oxides via oxygen
intercalation. Specific objectives are to advance the understanding of
fundamental aspects of oxygen intercalation in oxides and to assess the use of
intercalation chemistry for the synthesis and processing of new oxide materials.
Preliminary results on an electrochemically reversible La-Ni-O phase will be
extended to determine the detailed kinetics for oxygen intercalation. These
investigations will then be continued on ternary copper oxides, where the
physical properties will be correlated with precise electrochemical control of
composition. Finally, the technique will be applied to a wide range of systems
and electrolyte compositions to determine its generality. Chemical compounds
which contain several metals and oxygen have a number of uses, including as
electronic and superconducting materials, ceramics, and glasses. Often the
properties of these solids depends upon their exact oxygen content, which is
difficult to regulate using the methods which are presently available. In this
project a new technique for introducing oxygen into a "mixed metal oxide" will
be developed using an electrochemical method. This will permit the formation of
very oxygen rich materials under quite mild conditions. It will also allow the
oxygen content to be precisely controlled in order to tailor the properties of
the oxide.