* 9408420
* RUI:  Ion Implantation for Obtaining N-type Layers in       Diamond
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1994,03/31/1996
* Ravi Nadella, Wilberforce University
* Standard Grant
* Marvin H. White
* 03/31/1996
* USD 54,430.00

9410989 Brown This effort will examine failure modes and long term structural
stability of polysilicon microelectromechnical structures(MEMS). We find the
current absence of research on MEMS reliability striking given that many MEMS
are designed to last long periods of time under adverse conditions.
Specifically, we intend to address the following goals. 1. Identify failure
modes for polysilicon microelectromechanical structures. Long term performance
of MEMS cannot be achieved until possible failure modes are understood. 2.
Provide a protocol for accelerated testing of MEMS. Although MEMS are meant to
operate for decades, they cannot be tested for that period before being put to
use. Accelerated testing techniques must be developed to assess the long term
performance of the devices. 3. Characterize the reliability of polysilicon
structures as a function of processing and geometry. We have shown the
possibility of crack growth in a single crystal silicon microelectromechanical
structure due to environmental effects. In light of additional microstructural
features s such as grain boundaries, we may expect additional failure modes in
polysilicon. 4. Design test structures to indicate incipient or possible
failure. These structures are meant to be placed with operating MEMS devices to
detect crack initiation, permanent deformation, shock, or changes in structural
response. This work is essential to ensure reliable MEMS applications. ***