* 9408154
* Analysis and Development of Algorithms for Antenna Array    Based Communications Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Arnold Swindlehurst, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/1997
* USD 99,731.00

Communication systems employing antenna arrays are required in situations where
multiple co-channel signals are present simultaneously. The spatial
discrimination provided by multiple antenna elements allows spectrally
overlapping signals to be individually extracted. While such systems have
typically been proposed in the context of military applications, a number of
important commercial applications have recently gained attention. In particular,
it has been proposed that antenna arrays be used in land-based mobile radio
systems to provide enhanced spatial discrimination and hence increased capacity.
Such arrays could potentially provide frequency reuse in adjacent cells, or
within a communication cell itself. This research is examining signal copy,
interference cancellation, and source localization using antenna arrays, with
particular emphasis on scenarios that might be encountered in mobile radio
communications (e.g., multipath fading environments, certain signal formats such
as analog FM IS-3 AMPS, GSM, IS-54 offset QPSK, IS-95 CDMA, etc.). A focus of
this research is the development and analysis of algorithms that exploit all
available temporal and spatial information. Conventional techniques for
direction finding (DF) and signal copy (SC) rely on either spatial or temporal
structure in the data, but typically not both. In situations where both array
response data and information about the signal structure is available, it is
obviously suboptimal to ignore either. Consequently, several different
techniques that exploit both spatial and temporal signal structure for improved
DF/SC will be studies: iterative blindleast-squares; decision directed
algorithms array-based equalization of multipath channels; and optimal joint
DF/SC with parametric array uncertainty. Finally, special emphasis will be
placed in this research on the use f real mobile cellular radio data to test the
effectiveness of the algorithms developed.