* 9408474
* Partial-Melt-Regrown, Biaxially Aligned High-Tc             Superconductors:  Improving the Quality of Intergranular    Junctions
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Nathan Israeloff, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9408474 Markiewicz The feasibility of enhancing critical currents in bulk
polycrystalline samples of high temperature superconductors, via a process of
biaxial alignment, will be explored, with primary emphasis on a europium-barium-
copper-oxide superconductor. The quality of intergranular junctions produced by
a variety of annealing techniques will be examined by studying critical
currents, susceptibility, junction noise, high resolution transmission and
scanning transmission microscopy studies of grain boundaries, and microscopic
detection of the critical currents associated with individual grain boundaries.
Alternative approaches for maintaining oxygen stoichiometry in the densified
materials will be explored. Detailed pole figure analyses will be undertaken.
Enhancement of critical currents by pinning (second phase inclusions,
irradiation damage) will be explored. % % % % To reach the full potential of the
new high critical temperature superconductors for application in magnets and
energy transmission, superconductor wires or tapes must be able to carry large
currents at the temperature of liquid nitrogen and must be manufacturable at
reasonable cost. This program explores in depth the physical parameters
controlling a new fabrication process which has the potential for greatly
enhanced critical currents by reducing or eliminating harmful grain boundary
mismatch. In this process small grains are aligned both magnetically and
mechanically into a "brick-wall" like network, which is then consolidated by
heat treatments to form a high-density material. ***