* 9408366
* Modules and Modes in Foraging Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* William Timberlake, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 225,000.00

IBN 9408366 Timberlake The present research attempts to use the concept of
"behavior systems" to combine the ethological study of "instinctive" behavior
with laboratory research demonstrating the importance of learning in determining
purposive behavior. A "behavior system" refers to stimulus filtering,
preorganized response components, and motivational states organized around a
specific function, such as foraging for food. Dr. Timberlake assumes that
learning mechanisms evolved to alter behavior within the context of such a
functional system. He also assumes that the examples of learning produced by
familiar laboratory procedures, such as Pavlovian and operant conditioning, can
be profitably studied within a functional system. His experiments use prior
knowledge of the feeding-foraging systems of rats and pigeons to predict the
form of conditioned responding and the ease of learning under laboratory
procedures. At the same time, these experiments use the analytic power of the
laboratory manipulations to further develop and refine our knowledge of the
feeding-foraging system. The experiments focus on characteristics of the
sequence of motivational states related to foraging: the control of the general
search state, as measured by locomotor search of maze environments; the control
of the focal search state, especially as it relates to the conditioning of
"superstitious" behavior; and the relation of learned chains of behavior to
transitions between general and focal search states. The results should clarify
the contribution of learning to behavior in both the laboratory and natural
environments.