* 9408728
* Dictionary of American Regional English
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Frederic Cassidy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 232,000.00

9408728 Cassidy ABSTRACT The Dictionary of American Regional English, official
dictionary of the American Dialect Society, treats both regional and social
variation among speakers of American English. Based on an extensive program of
contemporary (1965-70) fieldwork in 1002 communities across the U.S., and an
equally extensive collection of written sources from the seventeenth century
through the present, DARE includes words, phrases, and pronunciations that vary
from one part of the country to another or from one social group to another. The
Dictionary provides full historical treatment, with pronunciations, variant
forms, etymologies, regional labels, social and usage labels, definitions, dated
quotations, and cross-references, as appropriate. A unique feature of DARE is
the inclusion (within the text) of maps showing the regional distribution of
words, phrases, and forms. Volume I, containing introductory matter and the
letters A-C, was published in 1985 to the acclaim of scholars, reviewers, and
the public as well. Volume II (D-H) was published in 1991, and Volume III (I-O)
is scheduled to appear in 1996. Three more volumes, the last of which will also
contain the bibliography, a cumulative index, contrastive regional and social
maps, and a summary of all responses collected in the fieldwork, will complete
the project. Volumes will appear at approximately five-year intervals. DARE will
not only provide a full record of regional American English, but will also
furnish, both in the Dictionary text and in the raw materials, the resources to
stimulate much further linguistic research. ***