* 9408120
* RUI: Testing Optimal Partitioning and Plant Strategy        Theories: Do Conclusions Differ When Functional Adjustments are Explicitly Distinguished from Ontogenetic Drift?
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1994,11/30/1997
* Samuel McNaughton, Bradley University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 11/30/1997
* USD 148,875.00

9408120 McConnaughay In plant ecological research, differences among plants of
different genetic identity (e.g., species) or among plants grown in different
environments are usually assessed by comparing plants at a single, often
arbitrary, point in time. This static view of plant responses does not recognize
the dynamic and indeterminate nature of plant development. Most characteristics
of plants change during growth and development; the ratio of root: shoot
biomass, for example, is usually high in seedlings ald then declines as the
plant grows in size. Furthermore, plants of different genetic identity or in
different environments may differ in rates of growth and development. Thus
differences observed at any one point in time may not represent an adapative
response to a given environment, but rather may be due, at least in part to
differences in the developmental stage or size of the plant. In the last several
years, there has been a widespread recognition that a broad understanding of
environmental and genetic differences among plants requires a dynamic
characterization of plant growth and development. We must shift our focus from
snapshots of plants at one point in development to the dynamics of development
itself. Biomass allocation patterns (i.e., relative amounts of biomass put in to
varying plant structures) have received considerable attention from plant
ecologists and plant evolutionary biologists. For example, these traits have
been used to describe functional adaptations to environmental constraints. Since
allocation patterns may change during plant growth and development, different
allocation patterns may result from flexibility in allocation per se (allocation
plasticity) or in overall plant growth (plasticity in growth or developmental
rates). In cases where allocational plasticity is strictly due to alterations in
growth or developmental rates, much of our current theory concerning optimal
growth patterns and functional adaptations of plants to variable environments
may need to be revised. We propose to separate the effects of resource
availability on plant growth rate and biomass partitioning. We will grow plants
in environments with different levels of resource availability (CO2, light,
nutrients and water) in order to determine if differences in biomass allocation
result from differences in growth rates, partitioning, or both. These
experiments will provide much needed information concerning plant functional
adaptations to environments differing in resource availability. ***