* 9408926
* Archaeology and Paleoenvironments of the Kapthurin          Formation, Baringo, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1997
* Sally McBrearty, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1997
* USD 49,922.00

McBrearty With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Sally McBrearty
will continue archaeological research in the Baringo Basin region of Kenya. In
particular she will focus on the Kapthurin Formation in the Tugen Hills.
Previous archaeological research in the area has yielded a stratified sequence
of archaeological sites as well as a small amount of hominid (human) skeletal
material. Building on previous work she will conduct archaeological, geological
and paleontological prospecting and mapping. Limited excavation will also be
carried out. Sediment samples will be collected to determine age by means of
argon dating. Geochemical fingerprinting will serve to check on field
stratigraphic correlations and x-ray fluorescence analysis will provide a
technique to provenience surface fossils whose stratigraphic position is
unclear. Dr. McBrearty will use stone artifacts and archaeological fauna in an
attempt to reconstruct human behavior. A number of techniques will be employed
to understand the fluxuating environment to which these hominids adapted. While
a number of lines of evidence - archaeological, paleontological and genetic -
suggest that anatomically modern humans first appeared in sub Saharan Africa
just when and where this occurred is unknown. What interests
paleoanthropologists most however is the process which lead to this emergence
and here also little evidence is available. Dr. McBrearty's research will
address this issue. Information to date suggests that the transition took place
during the Middle Pleistocene and the Kapthurin Formation encompasses this time
period. Prior work indicates that it contains archaeological materials and fauna
as well as human remains. Dr. McBrearty's work will increase this data base and
bring a wide range of modern scientific techniques to bear in order to make
interpretations. This research is important for several reasons. It will
increase our understanding of Africa's past. It will provide data of inter est
to a large number of paleoanthropologists and shed new light on the emergence of
modern humans.