* 9408561
* Star Porphyrazines, Solitaire Phthalocyanines and Related   Multimetallic Macrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Brian Hoffman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 01/31/1998
* USD 475,000.00

9408561 Hoffman Northwestern University Dr. Brian M. Hoffman, Chemistry
Department, Northwestern University, is supported by the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division for
a collaborative project with Dr. Anthony G. M. Barrett, Chemistry Department,
Imperial College of Science and Technology, London, England, for the synthesis
and study of star porphyrazines, solitaire phthalocyanines and related
multimetallic macrocycles. A series of porphyrazines bearing a variety of
ligating ring subsituents will be synthesized. These will be converted into
multimetallic arrays, with metals bound to the peripheral heteroatoms as well as
to the core of the central macrocycle. The resultant complexes may exhibit
unusual spectroscopic, magnetic, or electrical properties properties due to
electron delocalization and metal-metal interactions via the macrocycle pi-
system. Compounds in which contain several metals often have unique magnetic and
electronic properties. In this project a series of such materials will be
prepared. The specific design involves a central metal which is surrounded by a
rigid structure of other atoms (a macrocyclic ligand) to which additional metal
are attached. This results in star shaped or linear arrays of metal atoms which
are expected to have a diversity of applications in such areas as materials
research, catalysis, and diagnostic and therapeutic medicine.