* 9408391
* Mechanisms of Olfactory Communication
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Robert Johnston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

The goals of this research are to increase our understanding of the mechanisms
of social recognition and perception at the behavioral level of analysis. Since
this particular project involves communication by odors, another goal is to
increase our understanding of the functions and mechanisms of the olfactory
system. Recent biological theory has emphasized the importance of the individual
organism in the process of evolution, yet we still know very little about the
mechanisms of individual recognition and species similarities and differences in
the perception of individuals and knowledge of individuals. This project will
investigate some surprising new phenomena that suggest that animals have
specialized perceptual and/or cognitive strategies to discover a wide variety of
information about other individuals by investigation of the complex arrays of
scents that are left behind in the environment. These discoveries suggest
entirely new processes of olfactory perception and consequently of neural
mechanisms underlying these processes. Furthermore, characterization of these
strategies should provide insight into the features or aspects of individuals
that have proven to be important for animals to know about, and therefore that
have been important in the evolution of their behavior and of modules in the
brain to accomplish this kind of social knowledge. These experiments have
importance for at least three domains of science, and may well have some
practical applications in the future. First, they will be important for our
understanding of animal behavior, in particular about how scent is used to
regulate social interactions, but more generally about social recognition,
territoriality, dominant subordinate interactions, mate choice, and competition
for mates and other resources. The results may have practical implications for
how to maintain healthy animals in captivity in zoos, labs, and as pets, and it
could well be important in wildlife management in these times of shrinking
reserves for wildlife. Second, it is important for understanding higher-order,
cognitive processes in the sense of smell. Third, the results should contribute
to our knowledge and understanding of social recognition processes in humans and
other species, processes that are gaining increasing attention in areas such as
cognitive neuroscience, artificial intelligence, machine and/or computer
recognition processes, and security and law enforcement (e.g., evidence from
dogs or other animals about the identity of the perpetrator of a crime).