* 9408079
* SGER: The Interactions of Nitrogen Eutrophication and Fire  on Invasive Annuals in California Coastal Sage Shrublands
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Edith Allen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Joaquin Martinez Martinez
* 08/31/1996
* USD 69,436.00

9408079 Allen Exotic annuals have been invading southern California shrublands
at increasing rates over the past 40-50 years. A number of factors may be
responsible for the invasion, including fore, anthropogenic nitrogen deposition,
soil disturbance, grazing, and fragmentation. Of these potential causes, N
deposition has received no attention, and the effects of frequent fire are just
beginning to be realized. Southern California shrublands are subject to aerial N
deposition rates as high rates as high as 30 kg/ha/yr, with lower rates at a
distance from agricultural and urbanized areas. Many of the colonizing annuals
are probably nitrophilous, e.g., they have high rates of growth with added N. By
contrast, we hypothesize that the native shrubs have relatively little response
to increased N. Fire alone can explain the increased weediness and decrease in
shrub cover in some sites, but areas that have not been burned in 30-40 years
have and increase in exotics. These include primarily annual grasses in the
genera Bromus, Hordeum, and Avena. The native vegetation that is most subject to
weed invasion is the coastal sage scrub, a type that is limited in extent, is
threatened by urbanization, and harbors a number of sensitive species. %%% Our
objective is to examine the interaction between fire and nitrogen deposition on
plant growth. We request funding through the SGER Program to take advantage of
the recent fires in California. We have located two sites that were burned in
November, one with high and one with low N deposition. We propose to set up a
factorial experiment at each site, with burned and unburned vs. fertilized and
unfertilized plots. We hypothesize that annual grass growth will be increased
more than shrub growth after N fertilization, and that fire hastens the
conversion from native shrubland to annual grassland. This research has
important implications for the conservation of coastal sage shrub. A reduction
in the fire cycle will be important to prevent a rapid conv ersion to weedy
annuals, but we may also recommend a reduction in anthropogenic N deposition.