* 9408735
* RUI:  An Early Archaic Occupation on the Northeastern Plains
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1994,02/29/1996
* Michael Michlovic, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/1996
* USD 29,181.00

Michlovic With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Michlovic and
his colleagues will conduct archaeological excavation at the Rustad Quarry Site
which is located in southeastern North Dakota. The site is situated in an active
soil quarry and much of it has been destroyed by quarrying work. The portion
which remains intact however, contains a large sample of well preserved cultural
materials including stone tools as well as bone - primarily bison. Several
hearths are also present and these suggest the possibility of reconstructing
specific site specific behaviors. A date of 7240 BP (Before Present) has been
obtained and this, together with the nature of the lithic material indicates
that the Rustad site was occupied during the warm Altithermal period. Dr.
Michlovic and his students will complete excavation of the remaining portion of
the site. Specialists will analyze the animal bone to reconstruct hunting and
butchering patterns. The lithic material will be analyzed in an attempt to match
rock with source areas. In this way group range can be estimated. The team will
also employ a series of techniques, including soil, pollen and phytolith
analysis, to reconstruct the prehistoric landscape and environment. This
research is important for several reasons. It will increase our understanding of
the prehistory of the United States. Very few rich sites have been found which
date to the Altithermal and the results of this work will be of interest to many
archaeologists. Altithermal conditions resulted in drought over much of the
midwest and it is unclear how hunting and gathering societies at a simple level
of technology adapted to such an environment. The Rustad Quarry data should help
to address this question. Dr. Michlovic teaches at an undergraduate institution.
Many students are involved in the work and the project will provide a direct,
hands-on scientific experience. ***