* 9408019
* Phylogeny of Tribe Anthemideae (Asteraceae):  Molecular and Morphological Data
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Linda Watson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 195,000.00

9408019 Watson The sagebrush tribe, Anthemideae, of the sunflower family is the
focus of extensive molecular phylogenetic analyses by Dr. Linda Watson of the
University of Oklahoma, to acquire new data for taxonomic and genealogical
study. Data from restriction enzyme mapping and gene sequencing of chloroplast
DNA are being collected from representatives of the ca. 1740 species of the
tribe, from throughout the world. These will be used to assess mutational
differences among species and genera, and to construct hypotheses of
phylogenetic relationship. In turn, such molecule-based phylogenies will be
compared with current morphology-based inferences, and areas of disagreement
subjected to further study with additional DNA datasets. Corroborated patterns
of evolutionary history will provide test cases for evaluating changes in mating
systems, pollination (whether by wind or insects), geographic distribution, and
growth form in this widespread tribe. The Anthemideae provides an opportunity to
examine patterns of evolutionary relationships using modern molecular techniques
and to make direct comparisons to an existing morphology-based phylogenetic tree
and thereby assess the reliability of traditional taxonomic characters. The
combined datasets will lead to a comprehensive taxonomic account of an
economically and ecologically important group of plants.