* 9408129
* Development of a Scanning Near-field Infrared Microscope    Based on a Free Electron Laser
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Mi Hong, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/1996
* USD 364,999.00

Funds are provided for the development of a state-of-art scanning near-field
infrared microscope that involves the use of highly collimated, tunable infrared
sources such as free electron lasers. This instrument is expected to have many
applications in both materials science and biological systems, because it
combines the exquisite spectral resolution of infrared spectroscopy with high-
resolution imaging down to 0.05 micrometers without compromising on the
frequency resolution of conventional IR spectroscopy. Furthermore, the
intrinsically large characteristic absorption coefficients in the infrared mean
that it is possible to obtain images with contrast as large as 1 part in 105
without resorting to any staining procedures. The proposed microscope should
satisfy a long-felt need for an imaging technique that is capable of non-
destructive identification of the chemical composition of surfaces. %%% It has
long been appreciated that the combination of infrared spectroscopy with imaging
would provide a valuable technique for examining surfaces non-destructively.
However, the promise of this technique was limited by the poor spatial
resolution set by the long wavelengths of the infrared radiation when used with
conventional imaging techniques. In this work, the recent breakthroughs in
optical near-field scanning probe microscopy, and the availability of highly
collimated, tunable infrared sources such as free electron lasers, are used to
construct an infrared near-field microspectroscope that can achieve a spatial
resolution of 0.05 micrometers. This novel instrument has the potential for
revolutionizing the characterization of materials.