* 9408613
* Discrete and Extended Arrays of Main Group Elements and     Transition Metals
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1999
* Kenton Whitmire, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 01/31/1999
* USD 346,500.00

This project, in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program, is concerned with the synthesis, and the physical and chemical
characterization of polynuclear compounds that contain both transition elements
(M) and heavy non-transition metal elements (E) as an integral part of the
cluster framework. Synthetic strategies to be followed include 1) substitution
of E-bound halide in existing cluster compounds, 2) homolytic bismuth-carbon
bond cleavage in metallated bismuth compounds to reactive fragments for coupling
reactions, 3) redox reactions on existing stable small clusters to generate
reactive fragments that may couple to give larger fragments, 4) reactions of
known Group 9 and 10 metal clusters with "bare" bismuth atoms generated by
thermal decomposition of bismuth hydride, 5) the reactions of bismuth and
antimony Zintl ions with transition metal compounds that have readily
substituted ligands, and 6) cathodic dissolution of bismuth alloys in the
presence of ligands to trap the anticipated small anionic clusters. It is
increasingly clear that alloys and compounds that contain transition metals and
non-metallic elements have interesting and potentially technologically important
electronic and magnetic properties, and unique catalytic properties. However,
the fundamental aspects of the bonding interactions between transition metals
and heavy non-metallic elements has received little attention so that
interpretation and prediction of properties are currently impossible. This
project has as its primary objective the acquisition of information concerning
interactions of such elements through the study of cluster compounds that
contain bonds between transition metal atoms and non-metallic elements.
Decomposition reactions of these clusters may also lead to new alloys with
useful properties.