* 9408678
* The Influences of Chemical Microstructure and Pressure on   the Mechanisms of Crystallization in Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Paul Phillips, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1997
* USD 242,200.00

Phillips There are many variables that influence the physical and mechanical
properties of crystalline polymers through the processing and fabrication stages
of manufacture. Four of the most important are temperature, pressure, molecular
weight, and chain microstructure. The long-term objective of this research is to
understand the ways in which all four of these variables interact in determining
the details of the crystallization process. Building on past work, the
synergistic effects of these variables will be investigated for several
carefully chosen systems. Whereas much of past work has concentrated on cis-
polyisoprene, polyethylene, and polypropylene, the proposed research will
continue with polypropylene and its copolymers with ethylene. It will introduce
copolymers of nylon- 6,6 as a new group. This latter group will permit a wider
range of copolymer structures to be considered; in particular, there will be
available a series of copolymers in which there is evidence for the comonomers
being incorporated into the unit cell of the homopolymer. The research will
permit a quantitative comparison to be made of crystallization theories and will
enable us to look in a thorough manner at the existing theories of copolymer
crystallization. The research will help us unravel some of the aforementioned
complicated synergisms. In addition we will continue to investigate the details
of the formation of the gamma phase in polypropylene at elevated pressures and
the conditions governing its equilibrium with the alpha phase. It is also
expected that this research will extend to the copolymers of polypropylene. The
study of copolymers is one of the few methods available for the study of the
critical secondary nucleus in polymers and many of the results will be applied
to elucidating more information on this least explored of the important physical
features of crystallization in polymers. %%% This research, by studying the
crystallization behavior of important po lymers, will provide a more thorough
understanding of how morphology influences observed bulk properties.