* 9408684
* Assessing Uncertainty
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Amos Tversky, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1997
* USD 162,182.00

We live in an uncertain world where the consequences of our actions are not
always predictable. Therefore, the decisions to invest in the stock market, to
undergo a medical treatment, or to go to court depend on our assessment of the
chances that the market will go up, the treatment will be successful, or the
court will decide in our favor. Because in general we do not have objective
methods for computing the probabilities of such events, we must rely on human
judgment as the major instrument for assessing uncertainty. Hence, the question
of how people evaluate evidence and assess uncertainty is highly relevant to
many aspects of our lives, from the diagnosis of a patient to the evaluation of
expert judgment. An extensive body of research on judgment under uncertainty
indicates that intuitive judgments of both laypeople and experts are often at
variance with accepted normative principles of probability and statistics (see,
e.g., Arkes &amp; Hammond, 1986; Camerer, 1993; Dawes, 1988; Kahneman, Slovic,
&amp; Tversky, 1982). These findings have commonly been attributed to cognitive
limitations, and explained in terms of judgmental heuristics or simplifying
strategies. This proposal presents a new approach to subjective probability
based on the notion of evidential support. It gives rise to a formal
representation that is compatible with heuristic process-based accounts, and
encompasses a wide range of phenomena within a unified theoretical framework.
The proposal is divided into four parts. Part 1 presents a new model of belief,
called support theory, in which the judged probability of an event depends on
the specificity of its description. In particular, judged probability is
increased by unpacking the focal hypothesis and decreased by unpacking the
alternative hypothesis. Part 2 describes a series of experiments designed to
test the major predictions of support theory, including the subadditivity of
probability assessments, and the difference between probablity and frequency
judgments. Part 3 extend s the theory to the analysis of conditional probability
and evidential support. In this account, judgments of conditional probability
depend not only on the co-occurrence of the relevant events; it also depends on
their correlation. This prediction will be tested in both knowledge-based and
data-based judgments. Part 4 addresses the problem of ambiguity or vagueness,
and provides a method for assessing the imprecision of belief in terms of upper
and lower probability judgments. These will be compared to standard measures of
reliability, and their implications to decision making will be explored.
Theoretical and practical implications of the present approach to the
representation and the elicitation of belief are discussed throughout.