* 9408317
* RPG:  Molecular Evolution of Gene Transcription in Evolved  Strains of Yeast
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Celeste Brown, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 12/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9408317 Brown Differences in gene regulation in natural populations of organisms
may serve as the most important source of genetic variation for the process of
natural selection. The purpose of the proposed research is to investigate one of
the molecular aspects of gene regulation, namely gene transcription, in response
to positive selection, neutral mutation, and purifying selection. In a glucose-
limited environment, genes engaged in glucose metabolism are under strong
selection, and the genes for galactose metabolism are not used. Positive
selection for enhanced glucose utilization may lead to increased activity of
genes involved in galactose metabolism leading to the loss of galactose
inducibility in these genes. In this environment, the sole nitrogen source is
ammonium sulfate, and yeast must metabolize all amino acids. Genes for amino
acid metabolism are critically important for cell growth, and their regulation
is subject to purifying selection. The first objective of the proposed work is
to assess the effect of positive selection on transcriptional regulation of
genes whose products are involved in glucose metabolism; the effect of neutral
mutations on the inducibility of genes whose products are involved in galactose
metabolism, and the effect of purifying selection on the transcriptional
regulation of genes involved in amino acid synthesis. The second objective is to
determine whether nucleotide sequence differences in the promoter regions of
genes may account for the transcriptional differences.