* 9408957
* High Speed Wireless Communication Using Non-Directed        Infrared Radiation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Joseph M. Kahn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Magdy F. Iskander
* 08/31/1997
* USD 396,374.00

9408957 Kahn Non-directed infrared radiation is a promising medium for high-
capacity, short-range indoor communications. Infrared possesses several
advantages over radio, including an enormous unregulated bandwidth and the fact
that infrared radiation cannot pass through walls. As a result, high-speed links
can operate in each room of a building without interference. There are now
available commercially several infrared-based local-area networks for portable
computers, which use diffuse transmission to achieve network capacities as high
as 4 Mb/s per room over a range as long as 15m. The optical systems and
modulation techniques used in current infrared will probably permit network
capacities to be increased to about 10 Mb/s per room. Achievement of higher bit
rates will require new solutions to overcome the noise induced by intense
ambient infrared radiation, signal distortion due to multipath propagation, and
interference from other users. The project will investigate components and
techniques to enhance the performance of non-directed infrared communication
systems operating at bit rates for 10 to 100 Mb/s, or even higher. To provide
concrete guidance, the research will address the full-duplex communication
requirements of a representative application in wireless multimedia computing.
This application involves simultaneous transmission of multimedia from a base
station to as many as 50 portable terminals within a single room, requiring an
aggregate downlink bit rate of 50 to 100 Mb/s. As the portable terminals will
not source video and most computations will be performed by servers on a
backbone network, uplink requirements are modest, of the order of 10 Mb/s per
room. For this application, it is desirable minimize the complexity and power
consumption of the portable infrared transceivers, at the possible expense of
increased of increased base-station power consumption and complexity. The
research will encompass transmitter and receiver optical design, theoretical
performance s tudies of modulation and detection techniques in the single-and
multi-user environment, and experimental demonstration of full-duplex
communication between a base station and portables. The first two years of
activity will focus on study of key components and communication techniques, and
with the third year devoted to constructing a prototype link incorporating the
optimized components and techniques ***