* 9408389
* Development and Support for MUSE and the MUSE User Community
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,11/30/1996
* Julian Humphries, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* None
* 11/30/1996
* USD 422,106.00

9408389 Humphries The MUSE Project is a long term effort to support the
computerization and management of natural history museum collection resources.
For the past six years the MUSE Project has designed, coded, and distributed
software for the management of biological collection materials to over 70
individual collections around the world (Table 1). The range of services
provided includes user training, workshops on museum computerization, network
resources, and data models and data standards, participation in international
efforts to facilitate the exchange of biological collection information,
newsletter production, and maintenance of network resources (e.g., Gopher,
World-Wide-Web and FTP servers and a MUSE list serve). The goals of the next
phase of the MUSE Project include five primary objectives: (1) Continuation of
support for existing MUSE users as well as assisting new sites with the adoption
of MUSE. The largest single activity of the MUSE Project is support for existing
sites. (2) Improvements to the MUSE suite of software including improved support
for features of the Association of Systematics Collections data model, addition
of geographic authority file verification, new forms of user security, new data
logging features (allowing the permanent tracking of all data changes),
improving the ease with which users can themselves make changes in MUSE data
dictionaries, means for associating research data with specimen records, and
improved support for international users. (3) Development of MUSE for new
taxonomic disciplines and improving features of MUSE for currently supported
disciplines. MUSE has been modified to deal with all vertebrate groups and is
currently being modified for herbaria. We would like to continue adding support
for invertebrate collections as well as more diverse types of herbaria. (4)
Development of direct network access methods for MUSE databases. Data are
currently exported from MUSE databases to provide Internet access. We will
develop tools for direct access to PC servers located on the net. (5) Continued
porting of the MUSE environment to Windows. The Windows version of the MUSE
program itself is nearing completion, but all of the additional software and
access tolls need to be ported to Windows.