* 9408178
* The Role of Transmission in the Dynamics of Infectious      Disease
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Gregory Dwyer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1997
* USD 347,832.00

Much of our understanding of the population dynamics of host-pathogen
interactions is based upon mathematical theory. This theory is in turn based
upon particular assumptions about how the density of host and pathogen
populations affects the rate at which new infections accrue. Specifically, the
instantaneous rate of horizontal transmission is assumed to be proportional to
the product of the densities of healthy and infected hosts, or the densities of
healthy hosts and the infectious pathogen particles. There is, however, little
evidence that this assumption is correct. and in fact, alternative models
typically have very different dynamics. Most such alternatives, however, are
either ad hoc, or were developed for human diseases, for which experimental
tests of model assumptions are not ethical. In this research, the PI's will
explore the conditions under which this basic assumption of the mathematical
theory of disease is violated. These researchers will use the gypsy moth-nuclear
polyhedrosis virus (NPV) system as a model system because the simplicity of this
system makes it ideal for performing ecological experiments. The approach builds
from earlier work in which the PI's demonstrated that a model using estimates of
transmission from small-scale field experiments provides a reasonable
approximation of the dynamics of disease at a large scale. Both the small-scale
experiments and the model suggest that there is significant heterogeneity in
transmission with respect to host and pathogen density, and that this
heterogeneity is essential to understanding the dynamics of the gypsy moth-NPV
system. The PI's will develop a set of alternative models that incorporate this
transmission. The plan is to parameterize alternative models using small-scale
transmission experiments, and test the different models using large-scale
experimental epidemics. %%% The type of heterogeneity in disease spread is
believed to be of fundamental importance for understanding the nature of
infectious diseases, but this a spect has been rarely studied and is poorly
understood. Ultimately, this research will not only provide details of the
dynamics of disease spread in this particular system, but will also explore the
foundations of the mathematical theory of infectious diseases, in general,
bringing together theory and experiment in a way that is impossible for most
host-pathogen systems.