* 9408771
* The Influence of Large Herbivores on Nitrogen Cycling Using Natural 15N Abundance
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Douglas Frank, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/1998
* USD 305,000.00

9408771 Frank Analysis of the natural abundance of stable isotopes has recently
emerged as a powerful tool to understand complex ecological processes. the
simple elegance of the technique stems from relatively easy and inexpensive
measurements of naturally occurring stable isotopes providing information on the
origin and key chemical transformations of organic matter. Here I will apply the
method to study the effect of large herbivores on rates of gaseous nitrogen loss
via denitrification and ammonia volatilization. In Yellowstone National Park,
large herbivores (elk and bison) increase the abundance of 15N, a rare nitrogen
isotope, relative to 14N, the most abundant isotope, in a dominant grass
species. This finding, in addition to an understanding of how herbivores impact
nitrogen cycling and during which transformations the isotopic composition of
nitrogen is altered, suggests that analysis of nitrogen isotopes may provide
information on the effect of herbivores on rates of denitrification and ammonia
loss, two processes that are currently labor intensive, expensive, and
problematic to measure. The goals of the study are to further describe the
influence of large herbivores on the nitrogen isotope composition of grazed
grassland, and examine the mechanisms responsible for this isotopic response to
herbivores. Specific objectives are: (1) measure isotopic composition of soil
and several dominant plant species in Yellowstone National Park, (2) measure the
effect of herbivores on rates of denitrification and ammonia volatilization in
Yellowstone, and (3) determine the effect of herbivore urine and dung amendments
on the isotopic composition of soil and plants. Large herbivores have many
indirect effects on nitrogen cycling that go well beyond their direct removal of
plant material. Since up to 50% of the Earth's terrestrial surface is rangeland,
including grassland, savanna, and open woodland that support grazing mammals,
grazers may have a profound effect on the global nitrogen budget. This study
will examine the long-term effects of herbivores on gaseous nitrogen loss from
grazed habitat, and the applicability of using 15N abundance to study nitrogen
cycling in terrestrial ecosystems.