* 9408427
* Endogenous Modulation of Catecholamine Release
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* August Epple, Thomas Jefferson University
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 246,000.00

9408427 Epple Until about a decade ago, it was believed that morphine and the
closely related codeine are only produced by the poppy plant, and no other plant
or animal species. However, recent research revealed that both opiates are
actually produced by a variety of animals, including the human. Particularly
high concentrations were found in certain regions of the central nervous system
and in an endocrine organ, the adrenal medulla. These surprising findings raised
the question of the functions of the endogenous opiates, and they also raised
the question how these opiates interact with the opioid peptides, totally
unrelated substances which are common in various reigons of the nervous system,
and in endocrine glands. Before the discovery of animal-produced opiates, it was
assumed that the psychological and analgesic effects of morphine were due to
actions on organs that normally respond to endogenous opioid peptides. Now, it
has become critical to separate the specific actions of the endogenous opiates
and opioids from each other. Without this information, we will not clearly
understand the basis of the therapeutic and abusive effects of both codeine and
morphine. The issue is very confusing since certain cells produce and release
both opioid peptides and opiates, which in turn interact with additional
regulatory substances released from the same cells and from neurons. Using an
ideally suited animal model, the chromaffin cells of the American eel, Dr.
Epple's NSF-supported research has shown, inter alia, that codeine and morphine
interact with each other in the control of opioid peptide (enkephalin)
secretion; and that enkephalin, in turn, controls the secretion of
catecholamines (adrenaline and noradrenaline) which are the actual hormones of
the chromaffin cells. Thus, the chromaffin cells use substances that affect the
cells themselves ("autocrine secretions") to control release of hormones which
then largely act on distant "target" organs. In teresingly, these actions occur
at opiate concentrations that are far below those needed for therapeutic or
abusive effects. The specific aim of the proposed investigations is to further
unravel the complex interactions in the control of catecholamine release, with
particular emphasis on the interaction with the innervation. The expected data
should provide once more "unconventional" insights into the self- regulations of
both neurons and endocrine cells, and thus have important implications for both
basic research and therapeutic strategies. ***