* 9408151
* Mathematical Sciences:  Parallel Algorithms for Surface     Water Flows and Transport
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Mary Wheeler, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1996
* USD 340,000.00

Wheeler The investigator and her colleagues study scalable parallel algorithms
for the solution of the hydrodynamic flow and transport equations. The
mathematical model is based on the generalized wave-continuity equation for wave
height, the non-conservative form of the momentum equations for velocity, and
the advection-diffusion equation for transport. The numerical solution
techniques are based on mixed and Galerkin finite element methods. For advection
processes they study both characteristic and higher-order Godunov methods. These
algorithms are implemented on parallel platforms, including clusters of
workstations and massively parallel systems. Domain decomposition techniques are
used to achieve parallelism. Once the codes are developed and validated, they
are applied to bay and estuarine modeling and modeling of storm surges along the
Gulf of Mexico. The objective of this research is to formulate, analyze and
implement accurate and efficient parallel algorithms for modeling flow and
transport in surface water environments. The impetus for this research is the
need for state and federal agencies and private industry to understand the
effects of tides on coastal regions and offshore structures, and to study the
effects of industrial and municipal development on bays and estuaries. More
specifically, this work has applications in several areas, including 1)
calculating tidal ranges and surges caused by extreme storm events such as
hurricanes in order to plan development in coastal areas and predict potential
hazards from flooding; 2) modeling tidal fluctuations for those interested in
capturing tidal energy for commercial purposes; 3) estimating forces on offshore
structures; 4) predicting influence of dredging of intercoastal waterways or
constructing breakwaters; 5) studying effects of pollution on bays and
estuaries, including possible remediation strategies; and 6) allocating
allowable discharges for municipalities in order to meet spec ific water quality
objectives. The algorithms developed under this grant improve upon existing
algorithms by effectively using massively parallel computers to increase
resolution and reduce the computational time for a simulation. The code to be
developed serves as paradigm for a new generation of software that takes
advantage of the trend in high-performance computing toward massively parallel
architectures.