* 9408779
* Laser-Induced Particle Desorption from Silicon Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Zhen Wu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/1998
* USD 180,000.00

9408779 Wu A study will be carried out of the desorption of alkali metal ions
and hydrogen ions (protons) from the (100) surface of silicon under the
irradiation of low fluence pulsed laser beams. The focus of this investigation
is on the case where desorption results from valence instead of core level
electron excitation. The motivation for this study is to understand the nature
of the interaction between photons and the surface atoms and to explore the
possibility of using a laser beam to modify the silicon surface by selectively
desorbing certain types of adsorbed atoms. High resolution time-of-flight
techniques will be used to measure the kinetic energy of desorbed ions. Doppler
shifted laser-induced fluorescence techniques will be used to study the relation
between desorbed neutral alkali metal atoms and their ions. % % % % Laser light
has been shown to be able to deposit very fine metal lines on semiconductor
wafers. This phenomenon, which is usually referred to as laser writing, has
important applications in semiconductor technology. The current investigation
will examine the ability of a laser beam to modify silicon surfaces by
selectively removing certain types of atoms adsorbed on the silicon surface. The
initial study will concentrate on the simplest and yet technologically important
alkali metal and hydrogen adatoms. ***