* 9408147
* Americas Program:  Enhancement of Solvent Production by     Clostridum Acetobutylicum
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Eva Kashket, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 05/31/1997
* USD 20,169.00

9408147 Kashket This Americas Program award will support Prof. Eva Kashket,
Boston University, in a research collaboration with Prof. Dolly Montoya,
Biotechnology Institute, National University of Colombia, Bogota. The overall
objective of the research is to enhance the production of the valuable
fermentation end products, n-butanol and hydrogen by Clostridium acetobutylicum,
with the goal of finding a cost- effective way of utilizing renewable biomass,
instead of petrochemical sources, for the fermentation process. Enhancement of
hydrogen production will be sought by isolating mutants of the C. acetobutylicum
deficient in butanol and acetone production; the mechanism of butanol resistance
will be determined by studying resistance of membrane function and composition
to butanol. The proposed research will be of fundamental importance to
understanding how microorganisms survive under stress of membrane-damaging
solvents in the environment. Isolation and cloning of butanol- tolerant mutants
will be an important achievement. The biotechnology industry will benefit
greatly by the development of improved technologies for conversion of biomass to
commercial solvents, such as acetone and butanol. In countries where excess
biomass is available, the clostridial process would be of benefit to the economy
and also to the environment.It should prove useful to the biotechnology
industry, particularly in the area of industrial fermentation processes. ***