* 9408392
* RIA:  Allocation and Replication for Distributed Database   Systems on General Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Keith Humenik, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sanya Clark
* 07/31/1995
* USD 18,383.00

Research is proposed to investigate how copies of a data object in a
distributed database system should be placed on the nodes of a network, in order
to maximize data availability and reliability and reduce communication cost.
This work is an extension of work that has been done by the investigator and
colleagues in the more specific cases of ring, tree, and hypercube networks.
Although the general problem cannot be efficiently solved for arbitrary
networks, many solvable, open sub-problems remain. There are two related
questions that must be studied. The first is, "Where should the copies of data
objects be placed (i.e., at what sites of the distributed database), in order to
maximize the probability of a successful read-only, write-only, or read-write
transaction? A ring, tree, hypercube, or other well-structured network, such as
a toroidal mesh, can be studied to suggest solutions to the more general problem
of optimal placement of copies on an arbitrary network. Another question primary
to the solution of the placement problem is, "What is the optimal number of
copies of a data item to maximize the probability of a successful transaction or
minimize communication cost?" In fact, these two questions must be studied
together. This research will explore the more general question of how many
copies of a particular data item should be placed on the network and where they
should be placed. The research will use combinatorics, probability theory,
linear algebra, and database concepts to study these questions, in order to
determine how to maximize the availability of data requested by transactions,
where the objects requested by the transactions and the sites at which the
transactions originate are defined by two (usually different) probability
distributions. The two major thrusts of this work will be to utilize the concept
of eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix of a graph to study data availability on
general networks and to employ the conjecture that well- structured networks
(rings,trees, hypercubes, etc.) can be used to suggest heuristics for general
networks. The primary applications of the work proposed are in the area of
information retrieval, specifically digital libraries and remote sensed data and
mobile computing. The solution to these problems will decrease the average time
required to access information in a distributed database and increase the
probability that a successful transaction occurs when links in the network fail.