* 9408698
* Americas Program:  International Syposium on Biomonitors andBiomarkers as Indicators of Environmental Change; Windsor,  Ontario, June 5-9, 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1995
* Francis Butterworth, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1995
* USD 12,750.00

9408698 Butterworth This Americas Program award will partially support a
symposium in the field of biomonitoring technologies. The symposium, organized
by Dr. F. M. Butterworth, Oakland University, Michigan, Dr. Dieter Reidel,
University of Windsor, Ontario, and Dr. Judith Guzman Rivera of the Instituto
Nacional de Investigaciones Nucleares (ININ) in Mexico City, will take place in
conjunction with the annual conference of the International Association of Great
Lakes Research, in Windsor, Ontario, June 1994. The major objectives of the
symposium are to identify deficiencies and problems with current monitoring
strategies; to present novel state-of-the art biomonitoring methods and
applications, and to stimulate new associations and collaborations between North
American Free Trade (NAFTA) countries to respond to the challenges of increased
pollution rates. Routine monitoring using biological test systems is critical in
the surveillance of aqueous environments to identify hazards to human health.
The traditional method of using biomonitors in conjunction with chemical
analysis to detect pathologies caused by toxic contaminants is hampered by the
presence in the environment of complex mixtures of these pollutants. There is,
therefore, an urgent need to accelerate research in developing improved and new
systems to detect new hazards resulting from increased industrial development of
the NAFTA countries. The work presented and the standards recommended at this
symposium will be published as a reference resource for the benefit of the
scientific community, regulatory agencies, and the public. ***