* 9408443
* 19th Nathiagali Summer College on Physics and Contemporary  Needs/International Workshop on Laser and Quantum Optics,   Pakistan, June 23 - July 14, 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1995
* Marlan Scully, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/1995
* USD 15,000.00

9408443 Scully Description: This proposal supports the travel of a delegation of
U.S. physicists to Pakistan to participate in the 19th International Nathiagali
Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs/International Workshop on Laser
and Quantum Optics, to be held at Nathiagali, Pakistan, June 23-July 14, 1994.
The meeting is an annual activity organized by the Pakistan Ministry of Science
and Technology and arose out of a vital need for communication among scientists.
It offers participants a forum to discuss advances in physics and their
relationship to modern needs, particularly issues and concerns of developing
countries. The first two weeks will cover the general aspects of Particle
Transport, and Laser Physics and Applications. The last week will be devoted to
an International Workshop on Lasers and Quantum Optics. Scope: The proposed
summer college has been held annually in Nathiagali, Pakistan with participation
from scientists throughout Asia and Africa and with lecturers from the western
world. Each year, a number of women scientists are also invited both as
lecturers and participants. It has received strong endorsement in the past from
participants from these countries as well as from international organizations
including the Inter- national Center for Theoretical Physics in Trieste. It
received partial support from that center as well as from the Chinese Academy of
Sciences in Beijing. ***