* 9408061
* Hormones and Avian Life Histories: Exploring the Mechanisticand Functional Bases of Fecundity Trade-offs in a Male Bird
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Val Nolan, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/31/1998
* USD 290,435.00

9408061 Ketterson Animal species differ greatly in body-size, life span, and
numbers of offspring produced. Large-bodied species tend to die younger but have
fewer offspring, while smaller- bodied species tend to die younger but to
produce more offspring per reproductive attempt. Patterns in which one component
of fitness is gained at the cost of another (long life or large broods, but not
both) are referred to as trade- offs in order to strive to understand the
physiological bases for trade-offs in order to understand species differences in
aging and reproduction. Another kind of trade-off is observed in reproduction.
Adults, particularly males, can gain in fitness either by mating with multiple
females or by behaving parentally towards their offspring by a single female.
Because time is limiting and behavior that leads to successful mate attraction
often differs from behavior that favors offspring survival, male animals often
allocate time to parenting but not to both simultaneously. This too is a trade-
off, and there is evidence to suggest that the male hormone testosterone
controls whether males specialize in one form of reproduction or the other.
Birds are unusual among vertebrates in that almost all species of birds provide
some kind of parental care, and male care of offspring is much more common among
birds than it is among other vertebrates. Presumably this is true because males
that are parental leave more offspring than those that are not, but this needs
to be tested experimentally. It is also important to understand the
physiological underpinnings of male parental care. To address the mechanisms of
trade-offs in avian life- histories, and how they are maintained, free-living
male dark-eyed juncos (Junco hyemalis) are treated with implants of
testosterone. Treated males are then compared with controls. Because hormones
affect so many attributes of the animal, some of the induced alterations may be
detrimental to fitness, othe r beneficial. Only by considering the net effect of
testosterone on an array of traits and a variety of fitness measures can the
maintenance of existing phenotypes be understood.