* 9408719
* Mechanoreceptive and Nociceptive Coding in Spinal Cord      Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Joel Greenspan, SUNY, Upstate Medical University
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 03/31/1996
* USD 87,391.00

9408719 Greenspan Somatosensory nerve cells convey information about touch,
temperature, and noxious (irritating or painful) stimuli. The cutaneous
somatosensory system involves the senses for mechanoreception, thermoreception,
and nociception coming from the skin and surface of the body. We know far less
about somatosensory processing than we do about the major senses of sight or
hearing. To understand how the brain receives and represents somatosensory
information, we must know how well the neural components of this system can
discriminate among the various physical dimensions of stimulation. The nerve
fibers coming from the skin, called the primary afferent fibers, generally are
selectively responsive to only a single modality of these stimuli. Many of the
nerve cells within the spinal cord, though, receive input converging from
different afferent classes, and so respond to multiple types of cutaneous
stimuli. This project uses a novel precisely controlled method for stimulation
to get a new level of quantification of stimulus-response functions. The
discrimination capabilities of these neurons then are analyzed in the context of
signal detection theory. Comparing the responses of spinal neurons with the
primary afferents under identical conditions allows the identifying how sensory
coding transforms signals at this level of the central nervous system.
Comparison of the neural activity with psychophysical data gathered using the
same stimulus parameters allows determining which neuron classes can
discriminate at levels comparable to human perception. Results will add a new
level of sophistication to our knowledge about somatosensory capabilities, and
also will be important to all neuroscience and to neuroengineering in clarifying
principles of information coding.