* 9408186
* Regulation of the Structure and Function of Protein Kinase  C by Lipid
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Alexandra Newton, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 07/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9408186 NEWTON The project is about the interaction of protein kinase C with
phosphatidyl serine and diacylglycerol. Results of studies with several protein
kinase C isozymes have already been published. These studies will build on this
information and use modeling based on crystal structures to predict sites of
interaction for the lipids. The critical experiments involve expressing mutated
forms of protein kinase C in a bacculovirus system and using the proteins to
measure affinities for the ligands. The regulation of protein C isoforms is a
very important mechanism for regulating signal transduction. %%% Cells are known
to respond to a variety of extracellular signals by altering the activity of a
key enzyme known as protein kinase C. This enzyme is in turn regulated by
interactions with lipids. This is the first known link between lipids and
intracellular regulation. The ability of different forms of protein kinase C to
interact with different lipids seems to be a key aspect of regulating how a cell
responds to a particular stimulus. This project will accomplish a detailed
biochemical analysis of the strength of interaction between normal and mutant
forms of the enzyme and various lipids. The use of recombinant DNA to mutate and
express the genes for protein kinase C is a key aspect of the project. ***