* 9408923
* Controlled Nucleation and Growth of Molecular Crystals at   Molecular Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1999
* Michael Ward, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 615,007.00

9408923 Ward This research describes strategies for controlled heterogeneous
nucleation and growth of organic crystals at molecular interfaces, with emphasis
on the use of substrates based on specific crystal faces of molecular crystals,
and self-assembled films prepared from organosulfur and organosilane reagents.
The proposed work will demonstrate that enhanced nucleation rates, specific
growth orientations, and polymorph selectivity can be achieved through the use
of properly designed substrates. In the case of molecular crystal substrates,
these characteristics will be examined in the context of ledge-directed
epitaxial nucleation, in which prenucleation aggregates are stabilized and
oriented by interfacial interaction between two low energy planes of the
aggregate and a geometrically similar substrate ledge. Organosulfur and
organosilane films provide molecular functionality capable of specifically
interacting with functional groups of molecules in the prenucleation aggregate.
Atomic force microscopy of dynamic, in situ, crystal growth will also be
examined. It is anticipated that these studies will lead to greater
understanding of the critical factors responsible for nucleation and growth of
organic crystals, and the rational design of solid substrates for controlled
crystallization of technologically important reagents and materials. %%%
Molecular crystals, defined as solids consisting of molecular components
assembled in the crystalline state by weak, but numerous intermolecular
interactions, exhibit numerous properties of fundamental and technological
interest. These include electrical conductivity, superconductivity and
ferromagnetism, nonlinear optical behavior, pharmaceutical activity, and
photographic sensitizers. The interest in these materials also stems from the
ability to rationally control bulk properties through molec ular design, a
strategy commonly referred to as "crystal engineering." While there has been
considerable study of the intermolecular interactions that direct solid-state
packing in molecular crystals, investigations of their nucleation and growth,
particularly at the molecular level, has been rather limited. This research
describes strategies for controlled heterogeneous nucleation and growth of
organic crystals at molecular interfaces, with emphasis on the use of substrates
based on specific crystal faces of molecular crystals, and self-assembled films
prepared from organosulfur and organosilane reagents. The proposed work will
demonstrate that enhanced nucleation rates, specific growth orientations, and
polymorph selectivity can be achieved through the use of properly designed
substrates. ***