* 9408920
* Dissertation Research:  Microfaunal Indicators of           Paleoenvironment from El Juyo
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1995
* Leslie Freeman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1995
* USD 11,573.00

9408920 Freeman Under the direction of Dr. Leslie Freeman, Mr. James Pokines
will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze microfaunal
materials excavated from the archaeological site of El Juyo which is located in
the Santander region of Spain. The site was occupied by Paleolithic hunters and
gatherers about 14,000 years ago and the intermittent habitation spans a period
of approximately 1,000 years. The extremely rich lithic and faunal remains
recovered provide a unique insight into human adaptation at the end of the last
Ice Age. Mr. Pokines wishes to use the abundant micromammal remains which are
also present to reconstruct environment and determine how it changed over time.
Because larger mammals entered the cave as food and therefore reelect human
selection, they do not provide an accurate environmental signal. The
incorporation of micromammals however results from a different process: owls
which inhabited the cave during human absence regurgitate pellets which contain
the bones of prey. Studies of modern owl behavior indicate that their prey
selection closely mirrors natural abundances of small mammals in a region. Mr.
Pokines will collect modern pellets to determine the present day species
composition. With this as a baseline, he will then study the archaeological
sample. This work is important for several reasons. Archaeological data provides
excellent insight into human-environment interactions over long periods of time.
They shed light on how humans both adapted to and in turn effected the natural
surroundings on which they depended for survival. The data collected by Mr.
Pokines will shed light on this relationship during an important period of human
prehistory. The research will also assist in the training of a promising young
scientist.