* 9408304
* Dynamic Heterogeneity in Optically Perfect Bulk Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Gary Patterson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/1998
* USD 271,000.00

Patterson The molecular dynamics of bulk polymers can be characterized by
mechanical processes with a distribution of relaxation rates. The measurable
properties of amorphous polymers are determined by the coupling of the
macroscopic variable with these microscopic processes. The goal of this research
is to explain the behavior of longitudinal sound waves in optically perfect bulk
polymers in terms of the longitudinal relaxation processes in the material. The
knowledge of the distribution of relaxation rates for the processes which
determine the longitudinal modulus will then be used to predict the mechanical
properties of these materials. Many applications, such as optical fibers,
require polymeric materials which scatter only the minimum amount of light
determined by the compressibility of the liquid. A series of n-alkyl
methacrylate(n=1,2,4,6) samples which achieve this limit of clarity will be used
in the research. The optical perfection of the samples will be measured by
Rayleigh-Brillouin spectroscopy. The Rayleigh-Brillouin spectrum depends on the
frequency of the longitudinal sound waves responsible for the light scattering.
When there are microscopic processes with relaxation rates lower than the sound
frequency, the spectrum displays a central peak whose shape is determined by the
relaxation strengths and rates associated with these motions. In the frequency
regime important for mechanical processes such as toughness, (106 to 10-2 Hz),
the measurement of dynamic light scattering is carried out using photon
correlation spectroscopy. The relaxation function for the longitudinal density
fluctuations which give rise to light scattering will be measured as a function
of termperature, pressure, and chemical structure. The samples will be
maintained in the equilibrium liquid state above the glass transition. The light
scattering data will be used to calculate the distribution of relaxation rates
associated with the longitudinal modulus. The resulti ng distribution will be
correlated with the chemical structure of the molecules. The study of the shape
of the distribution as a function of pressure will allow identification of modes
of motion that couple weakly to the volume of the liquid. These processes retain
their relaxation strength in the glassy state and are less subject to physical
aging. %%% Typical tough polymeric materials are sufficiently structurally
heterogeneous that they are opaque. One of the most important new applications
of polymers is optical fiber. In order to be useful in this application, the
material must be sufficiently optically homogeneous. The challenge is to produce
a material which is optimized both for optical clarity and for mechanical
toughness. The research will employ bulk polymer samples that have been prepared
in optically perfect form. Light scattering spectroscopy is well suited for the
study of both the optical and mechanical properties of amorphous polymers.