* 9408267
* Computerization of Mollusk Collections of the Western North Atlantic of the Academy of Natural Sciences
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1996
* George Davis, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 11/30/1996
* USD 142,515.00

The recent mollusk collection at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
(ANSP) is the oldest mollusk collection in the country, and the second largest
catalogued one in the world. It currently has more than 430,000 catalogued lots
containing about 12 million specimens, including 30,000-35,000 lots preserved in
alcohol that provide excellent material for anatomical and genetic studies. The
Academy has specimens from virtually all parts of the world; it is unrivaled for
shallow-water marines mollusks from the tropical Indo-Pacific. Other strengths
are shallow-water Western Atlantic marine mollusks, and worldwide freshwater and
land mollusks. Many of the land and freshwater mollusks are species now
endangered or extinct. In the past five years, almost 300 loans totaling more
than 40,00 specimens have been made, and more than 200 scientific articles have
acknowledged use of collection resources. This award provides support for
computerizing the collection of Western Atlantic marine mollusks includes
computerization of the estimated 50,000 lots of North American freshwat er
mollusks and 45, 000 lots of Western Atlantic marine mollusks will help in
determining changes in the historical distribution patterns of species. Little
such information is currently available, but is needed not only by scientists
conducting basic systematic and ecological research on mollusks, but to provide
baseline data for monitoring the health of important North American ecosystems
in lakes, rivers, estuaries, and along seacoasts.