* 9408475
* Radiocarbon Dating of Middle Woodland, Kansas City          Hopewell, Maize
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Mary Adair, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 2,761.00

9408475 Adair This grant permits Dr. Mary Adair to obtain radiocarbon dates on
domesticated maize specimens excavated from the archaeological site of
Trowbridge. The materials were collected from an ancient trash pit which was
excavated by an amateur archaeologist. Ceramics also recovered in the pit
suggest a date of Middle Woodland times, ca. A.D. 250-400. However such
contextual dating is not definitive and a series of radiocarbon dates on the
maize itself will solve the issue. If the material in fact is Middle Woodland,
it will represent the earliest domesticated maize found on the Great Plains.
Small quantities of maize associated with the late Woodland period (ca. A.D.
700-900) have been recovered but earlier materials are unknown. Archaeologists
know that a high degree of social complexity developed in prehistoric North
America and that sites such as Cahokia brought together large numbers of people
at places that may be termed "cities." They believe that the local domestication
of some crops and the importation of others such as maize played a central role
in this process. However because floral materials are not well preserved in the
archaeological record, it is difficult to substantiate this hypothesis. The
Trowbridge maize kernels and cobs which were discovered in an unexpectedly early
context will shed new light on this issue and provide data of interest to many
archaeologists.