* 9408629
* Dissertation Research:  Teotihuacan Imperial Relations in   the Yautepec Valley, Morelos, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Michael Smith, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1996
* USD 11,012.00

9408629 Smith Under the direction of Dr. Michael Smith, Ms. Lisa Cascio will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological
research in the Yautepec Valley of Morelos Mexico and focus on sites from the
Classic period when the nearby Teotihuacan expire reached its maximum extent.
She, her advisor Dr Smith, and crew will conduct a pedestrian survey of the
entire valley floor and foothills. All sites will be identified and mapped.
Surface collections of ceramic and other cultural materials will be made and
test pits will be placed in a representative series of sites. Artifact analyses
will be conducted and ceramics identified by type. X-ray florescence will be
used to analyze chemical composition and determine sherds of non-local origin.
Based on these data, Ms. Cascio will examine the relationship between the
Yautepec region and the Teotihuacan empire of which it formed a part. In
prehistoric times, empires which incorporated large geographical areas and
diverse peoples under their control developed in many parts of both Old and New
Worlds. While archaeologists have documented this phenomenon, relatively little
is understood about how central control was established and maintained. Prior
research has indicated that the Yautepec Valley lies at the edge of Teotihuacan
control and therefore it provides an excellent context to examine this issue.
Based on the archaeological literature, Ms. Cacsio has formulated several models
and the data she collects will allow her to evaluate these. This research is
important for several reasons. Very little archaeological work has been done in
this region and the results will be of interest to many archaeologists. The work
will shed new light on how complex societies develop and are maintained and will
assist in the training of a promising young scientist. ***