* 9408409
* Instabilities in Draining Films with Heat and Mass Transfer: Fully-Nonlinear Secondary Flow Developments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Trilochan Singh, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* ASHLEY F EMERY
* 07/31/1997
* USD 308,239.00

Liquid films on a substrate can become unstable due to various effects that
exist in many engineering processes. These include gravity, temperature
gradients, and interfacial effects. Through many analytical and experimental
studies, the initial development of the instabilities has been well understood.
The main objective of the proposed research is to examine the flow behavior
beyond the initial instabilities. To achieve this goal the conventional weakly-
nonlinear analysis, such as the dynamical-system approach will be extended, and
a finite-element method introduced. The secondary and, for the first time, the
fully-nonlinear behavior of three-dimensional films through a careful interplay
of nonlinear analysis and full-scale computation will be investigated. In
particular, focus will be placed on the wave-breaking of isothermal films and
the rupture of heated films. The new information on these critical flow
behaviors obtained through the proposed research will provide substantial
contributions to the development of modern materials-processing technology. The
vectorized numerical code developed will solve the coupled hydrodynamic,
thermal, and mass-transfer system with free boundaries, and will serve as a
platform for further generation to non-Newtonian materials processing with phase
changes.