* 9408937
* Dissertation Research:  Indus Tradition Craft Production    and The Distribution of High Temperature Manufacturing at   Harappa, Pakistan
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Jonathan Kenoyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1995
* USD 11,995.00

9408937 Kenoyer Under the direction of Dr. Jonathan Kenoyer, Ms. Heather Miller
will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Working at the site of Harappa,
located in the Indus Valley of Pakistan, she will conduct a surface survey of
this large urban center. The fieldwork consists of two parts. First she will
note and map the location of craft activities such as smelting, ceramic and
shell production, and stone tool use. She will then conduct a proton gradiometer
survey to plot the distribution of underground pyrotechnological indicators.
These data taken together will allow her both to reconstruct the organization of
craft activities and to determine the relationship between subsurface and sub-
surface materials. Sites such as Harappa are of major archaeological interest
because they attest to the rise of a civilization, apparently independent of
those from China and the Near East. By the third millennium BC large urban
centers arose in the Indus valley, flourished and then disappeared. It appears
that salinization of fragile desert soils played a major role in their demise.
The trajectory of development appears different in the Indus than other regions
because, in contrast to the latter, it is not clear that an elite ruling class
emerged. Archaeologists wish to understand what factors led to the rise and
maintenance of this phenomenon. Through her analysis of craft production, MS
Miller will look at one aspect of this issue. Through an examination of the
production process and its spatial distribution, MS Miller hopes to determine
the extent to which it was subject to centralized control. This research is
important for several reasons. It will shed new light on an extremely important
archaeological site. It will increase our understanding of the processes which
led to the rise of complex society and will assist in the training of a
promising young scientist. ***