* 9408064
* Japan STA Program: Nucleation and Growth of High Quality    Diamond Thin Films for Electronic and Optical Uses
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Paul Dennig, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Randall Soderquist
* 10/31/1996
* USD 7,250.00

9408064 Dennig This award supports a 12-month Science and Technology Agency of
Japan Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Paul Dennig, Department of Materials
Science and Engineering, Stanford University, at the National Institute for
Research in Inorganic Materials (NIRIM), Tsukuba, Japan. Dr. Dennig will work
with Dr. Mutsukazu Kamo in the Advanced Materials Research Center, NIRIM, on a
research project entitled, " The Nucleation and Growth of High Quality Diamond
Thin Films for Electronic and Optical Use." The research project focuses on the
most recent methods of producing thin polycrystalline diamond films. Since
formation of diamond thin films begins with the nucleation of many individual
crystallites on a substrate surface, the researchers will explore the erratic
nucleation behavior of diamond crystals. The team will study nucleation as a
function of electric fields, carbon bond ration of initial carbon layers,
substrate materials, gas phase chemistry and substrate temperature. If
nucleation can be controlled, then morphology and film properties can also be
controlled. Such control over diamond growth onto non-diamond substrates would
permit the fabrication of diamond electronic and optical devices of the highest
quality. ***