* 9408667
* RIA: Strategies for Contraction-Based Distributed           Automated Deduction
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Maria Paola Bonacina, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1997
* USD 69,407.00

9408667 Bonacina This is a project on contraction-based distributed strategies
for automated deduction. Since inference systems are non- deterministic, i.e.
they do not specify an order of execution of the inferences, the computer
applications of deduction, e.g. logic programming and automated theorem proving,
have been regarded by many as natural candidates for parallel execution. A large
amount of research has been done in the parallelization of logic programming,
functional programming (which can be viewed as a form of equational deduction)
and subgoal-reduction theorem proving strategies, e.g. Prolog technology theorem
proving. Most of these works adopted fine-grain parallelism in shared memory.
The concern of this project is different, because it focuses on a different
class of strategies, contraction-based theorem proving strategies, and on a
different type of parallelism, coarse-grain parallelism in distributed memory.
The distinguishing feature of these strategies is the use of high-priority
contraction inference rules to delete generated clauses. This project considers
four problems: partition of the search space among concurrent processes,
contraction with respect to a distributed data base, duplication of clauses in a
distributed data base and unstability of distributed derivations. It will study
ways to address these problems, to be designed in detail and implemented in new
distributed strategies. The project also comprises a theoretical part, which
aims at initiating the mathematical representation and analysis of search in
theorem proving. ***