* 9408018
* Phylogenetics of Epichloe Species and Related Grass         Mycosymbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Malcolm Siegel, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 185,000.00

9408018 Schardl Drs. Schardl and Siegel at the University of Kentucky in
collaboration with Swiss colleagues are studying a fascinating group of
ascomycetous fungi that invade or infect grasses and sedges, fungi usually
treated in the genus Epichloe. The grasses infected include commercially
important turf grasses. The taxonomy and classification of the fungi is
complicated by the occurrence of asexual forms and by a general paucity of
reliable morphological characters for distinguishing species. Yet Epichloe
strains are known to inhabit grass plants internally, where they may function
either as mutualists or as pathogens. The mutualistic endophyte fungi are
transmitted through the hosts' seeds and they provide protection from insect
herbivores and drought. The pathogenic Epichloe inhibit seed production by the
host and are able to produce infecting spores in large quantities. The
investigators are studying patterns and mechanisms of fungal speciation, mating
systems, and hybridization, while also seeking to determine whether the fungi
coevolve with their grass hosts. Primary objectives are (1) to use DNA sequence
analysis as a tool for determining phylogenetic relationships of Epichloe
species and relatives, both teleomorph and anamorph taxa; (2) to determine the
number and pattern of origins of mutualism and pathogenicity in these fungi; and
(3) to correlate these patterns with the known phylogeny of the grass hosts. The
possibility of hybridization between Epichloe strains leading to the formation
of asexual "species" will also be examined.