* 9408094
* Nitrogen Regulation of Gene Expression in Bacillus subtilis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Susan Fisher, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 304,000.00

Fisher 9408094 In the gram-positive sporulating soil bacterium Bacillus
subtilis, the synthesis of some permeases and nitrogen degradative enzymes is
derepressed during nitrogen-limited growth. These changes in gene expression
promote logarithmic growth on compounds which are slowly degraded to nitrogen-
containing metabolic intermediates. In this project, the regulation of the
dicistronic nrgAB operon in response to nitrogen availability is being studied.
Expression of the nrgAB operon is derepressed over 4,000-fold during nitrogen-
limited growth. Nitrogen regulation of nrgAB ( and of all other known nitrogen-
regulated genes in B. subtilis) expression requires the wild-type glutamine
synthetase protein, butnot the glutamine synthetase repressor protein, GlnR.
Thus, nitrogen regulation in B. subtilis is mediated by a unique global
regulatory system which is distinct from the Ntr regulatory system present in
Escherichia coli. The cis-acting site(s), nrgO, required for nitrogen-regulation
of nrgAB expression will be identified by deletion and mutational analysis. Two
trans-acting gene products are known to be required for nitrogen regualation of
nrgAB expression. Mutants deficient in glutamine synthetase (glnA) express
derepressed levels of nrgAB during growth in the presence of excess nitrogen.
The role of the glutamine synthetase protein in nitrogen regulation will be
studied by isolating mutations which suppress the nrgAB derepression in glnA
mutants. This experiment should identify gene products which transduce the
glutamine synthetase-dependent nitrogen signal to the nrgAB regulatory proteins.
Secondly, tnr mutants are unable to derepress nrgAB expression during growth on
any nitrogen source. Thus, the tnr gene product(s) may mediate nitrogen
regulation of nrgAB expression. DNA complementing the trn mutations will be
cloned and sequenced to identify the trn gene products. The ability of the Tnr
gene products to bind at the nrgO site will be examined in gel mobility shift
assays . %%% An understanding of the role of the glutamine synthetase protein in
nitrogen regulation in B. subtilis should identify novel mechanisms of gene
regulation and provide insight into the regulation of cellular metabolism in
gram-positive bacteria. In addition, these studies should provide genetic tools
for the production of useful products in Bacillus spp. during fermentation or
growth in the soil, where nitrogen-containing nutrients are relatively scarce.
***