* 9408271
* Market Structure and Business Uses of External              Telecommunications Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/1995,09/30/1997
* Robert Kraut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Les Gasser
* 09/30/1997
* USD 160,000.00

This is the first year funding of a two-year award. The objective of the
proposed research is to better understand the effects of using external
telecommunications and data networks on firm performance and the nature of
relations among trading partners. The research will contribute to the base of
knowledge in this area by studying external network usage across firms and
across industries, using both qualitative case studies and quantitative survey
methodologies. In particular, the research will empirically test a model that
proposes that the effects of external network usage on firm performance and
buyer-seller relationships are dependent upon the attributes of the networks
used, firms, products, and the business context. The research will focus on the
openness of the telecommunications networks and on the degree to which they
carry computerized data. These contingent influences of network usage will in
turn have their effects on performance and buyer-seller structures through a
number of mediating factors, which the research will explicitly measure.
Mediating factors include the various type of costs firms incur in the process
of making transactions with trading partners, the nature of the interpersonal
relations that exist between buyers and sellers, and the types of services and
products that are exchanged.