* 9408216
* Ecological and Evolutionary Physiology of the Stress        Response and Stress Proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Michael Dickinson, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/1998
* USD 280,750.00

9408216 Feder Almost all organisms synthesize a number of characteristic
proteins in response to high temperatures and other stresses; these are termed
"stress proteins" or "heat-shock protein". In the laboratory, improved
resistance to stress coincides with the synthesis of these proteins. At present,
major gaps in scientific knowledge include: (1) Whether the conditions that
induce these proteins in the laboratory are ever encountered in nature; (2)
Whether the proteins are adaptive under natural conditions; (3) How these
proteins actually improve resistance to stress. This project will contribute to
the filling of these gaps by examining strains of fruit flies (Drosophila) that
have been genetically engineered to synthesize very different levels of a key
stress protein, hsp70. The project first will document natural exposure of wild
Drosophila to two likely stresses (temperature and ethanol), and measure
corresponding hsp70 concentrations in these organisms. Next, it will use this
information to design laboratory experiments in which Drosophila strains
differing in hsp70 expression undergo exposure to each stress. After first
confirming that the expected differences in hsp70 actually occur under
experimental conditions, the project will assess the consequences of
differential hsp70 expression for the ability of Drosophila to grow and
reproduce successfully under stress. Finally, the project will engineer
Drosophila cell lines differing in hsp70 expression with a light-emitting
protein to test whether hsp70 can repair a stress-damaged protein. The proposed
research is significant because (1) it will gather basic but presently
unavailable data on the natural conditions experienced by Drosophila, one of the
primary models in modern biological research; (2) it will assess the linkages,
if any between manifestations of the stress response at the molecular/cellular
level and organismal performance; (3) it will prospectively identify candidate
mechanisms for study at the cellular/molecular level; and (4) it will lay the
groundwork for a priori predictions and test of the evolution of physiological
characteristics. ***