* 9408676
* Towards a Model of the Biogeochemistry of Continental-Scale River Basins:  An Amazon Case Study
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1998
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 10/31/1998
* USD 1,050,000.00

Richey Research is proposed her to consider the dynamics ogf large-scale
drainage basins, using the Amazon Rivet system as a test case. The central
question to be addressed in this proposal is, How does a large river system
obtain and subsequently modify its biogeochemical composition? The question and
hypothesis will be divided into parts: (1) How is the biogeochemical stay of the
river system influenced by the land surfaces? (2) How are the land effects
modified during transit through the river system? The summaty working hypothesis
is that, "The quantity and composition of dissolved and particulate bioactive
materials in a parcel of water at any downstreasm node in the river system is
predictable as the product of a common set of processes which occur
differentially according to upstream conditions of relative typography, soil
organic content and texture, water and residence time, and floodplain extent."
To test this hypothesis the research objectives are to: (1) Implement and carry
out a field sampling program that will efficiently provide samples from
throughout the basin, including from the mainstem, from transects along major
tributaries, and into headwater regions of Peru and Bolivia. Ultrafiltration
techniques will be used to process water across a spectrum of particle and
molecular sizes. (2) Develop a quantitative model based on routing water and
particulate and dissolved substances through the rivernetwork. This effort will
couple the hydrology and chemistry models we have previously developed with our
new information. (3) Conduct experiments to determine terrestial effects on
organic matter composition. Using a modeling approach, upper bounds of fine
organic material thwt exist in the fine particle fraction will be determined as
will the chemical selectivity. Simulated absorption experiments will be the
third test for active partioning within the drainage basin. (4) Controls on
particulate export will be investigated using measurments and modeling of
sediment mobil ization and routing. Isotopic tracers will be used to determine
the location of material origin. (5)