* 9408024
* Alternative Reproductive Strategies and Cooperative         Colony Initiation
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1996
* Peter Nonacs, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* George W. Uetz
* 05/31/1996
* USD 27,598.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY Nonacs, IBN 9408024, Alternative reproductive strategies
and cooperative colony initiation There are thousands of social species in the
animal kingdom, ranging from molds to insects to birds to mammals, including
humans. A central theoretical and practical concern in the study of animal
behavior, therefore, is how and why cooperative groups of animals are formed.
Many of our insights into the biology of cooperation have come from the study of
social insects such as paper wasps, which also can provide a model system in
which experimental studies of cooperation are possible at relatively low cost.
Two of the factors which affect cooperation in many species are the degree of
relatedness among individuals and ecological pressures (especially restricted
resources) that favor cooperation. In this research, Dr. Nonacs will examine the
decision that female paper wasps make to either be cooperative or not to be
cooperative when founding their colonies. A combination of DNA fingerprinting
and behavioral observation will be used to determine how genetic relatedness
determines the formation of cooperative units, affects the levels of aggressive
conflicts between female wasps founding new colonies and influences the
decisions of the wasps to feed different young within the nest. The resulting
data will allow the measurement of the relative importance of genetic
relatedness and ecological pressures in the formation of cooperative groups.
This research will also increase our understanding of where and how wasp
colonies are started. While wasps in the right places are important control
agents of pest insects, wasps nesting near humans are a nuisance and a danger.
Therefore, this research has the potential applied benefit of giving us more
information about how to encourage wasps to nest where needed and not where they
are unwanted.