* 9408796
* Hudson Museum Collections Documentation Project
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Sherrie Smith-Ferri, City of ukiah -- Grace Hudson Museum
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1997
* USD 75,000.00

Smith-Ferri With National Science Foundation support, the Grace Hudson Museum,
which is located in the city of Ukiah, California, will curate the Pomoan
materials collected during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Pomoan
Indians inhabited this region of California, to the North of San Francisco and
Grace Hudson, her father and later her husband collected Pomoan materials in a
careful and systematic fashion. The documentation which accompanies the
collection is, in most cases, detailed and the scientific value of the materials
is increased by photographs, systematic ethnographic investigation and related
correspondence. Unfortunately the collection suffers from disorganization and a
lack of cataloguing and cross-referencing that renders much of these important
holdings inaccessible to all but the most knowledgeable and persistent
researchers. With NSF support, the museum will: re-transcribe linguistic
manuscripts into a universal phonetic transcription system; catalogue and
annotate photographs; catalogue baskets and other ethnographic artifacts; work
with manuscripts and correspondence to increase their general availability. The
last native speaker of Pomo is extremely old and much of what is known of early
historic Pomoan lifeways is contained in the collections of the Hudson Museum
and a few other institutions. Not only are these materials of great historical
significance, but they are also invaluable scientific resources. In their
current condition however they are very difficult to use and this grant will
significantly increase their access to the scientific community.