* 9408816
* Nature of Quantum Localization Probed by Exciton Dynamics   in II-VI Semiconductor Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Jingyu Lin, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 06/30/1996
* USD 55,000.00

9408816 Lin Technical abstract: It is proposed to investigate the nature of
Anderson localization in II-VI semiconductor alloys. In the alloys the lifetime
of a photogenerated electron-hole pair, or exciton, near the mobility edge is
directly correlated to its localization length. Thus the exciton system in these
materials represents a model system for studying quantum localization. The
dynamics of exciton localization will be probed by time resolved
photoluminescence spectroscopy. The exciton localization length, mobility edge,
and the critical exponent of the localization length will be measured under
different conditions including temperature and the degree of alloy disorder. The
universality of the critical exponent and the fundamental differences between
charge carrier localization and exciton localization will be investigated. These
studies can provide new insight into the physics quantum localization. Non-
technical abstract: Disorder in solids can cause a remarkable effect that is the
spatial localization of electronic charge, which is called Anderson
localization. Since dome degree of disorder is a nearly universal feature of
real materials, the Anderson localization is likewise a ubiquitous ingredient in
determining electrical, optical, and other physical properties of condensed
matter. Therefore, Anderson localization is recognized as one of the most
important subjects in condensed matter physics. This proposed research is to
study the properties of Anderson localization in certain semiconductor alloys
(containing elements from groups II and VI of the periodic table) which have
important applications in optoelectronic devices. ***