* 9408643
* Systematic Vertebrate Collections in Archaeological         Research:  Stabilization and Reorganization of The          University of Tennessee Comparative Vertebrate Collection
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Darcy Morey, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1997
* USD 120,385.00

Klippel With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Walter Klippel and his
colleagues will work to improve the curation of the zooarchaeological collection
at the University of Tennessee. These materials were acquired over a two decade
span and the collection continues to grow. The 8,000+ skeletons include fish,
reptiles, amphibians, birds and mammals. The 1,148 species represented are
weighted heavily towards taxa native to eastern North America with an emphasis
on species most frequently recovered in regional archaeological sites. Ten
represented species, obtained in the early years of collection development, have
been placed on the Federal Endangered or Threatened Species lists. While the
collection is widely used by archaeologists curatorial problems both threaten
the materials themselves and impede efficient use. With NSF support, Dr. Klippel
and colleagues will implement a fumigation program to control pest infestation.
Materials will be re- boxed and stored in new cabinets. Catalogue information
will be entered into a computer system. Faunal remains are frequently recovered
in archaeological sites and are extremely important to scientists for a number
of reasons. They permit the reconstruction of past environments and provide
insight into diet. They often allow archaeologists to reconstruct other aspects
of social behavior such as exchange and population movement. Key to faunal
analysis are collections of known species which serve as standards of
comparison. The large and carefully documented Tennessee collection is widely
used for this purpose and constitutes a valuable archaeological resource. With
NSF support, its utility will increase significantly.