* 9408596
* Metal Complex Activation of Dioxygen
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Joan Valentine, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 01/31/1998
* USD 407,500.00

9408596 Valentine Univ. of Calif. - Los Angeles Dr. Joan S. Valentine, Chemistry
Department, University of California - Los Angeles, is supported by the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division for research into the activation of dioxygen by metal complexes. A
central theme will be the development of analogs of biological reactions which
are catalyzed by metal containing oxygenase enzymes. The reactions of peroxides
in the presence of non-porphyrinic metal complexes will be investigated in hope
of developing metal mediated olefin epoxidation and alkane hydroxylation
processes. The oxygenation of organic substrates in the presence of alpha-
ketoglutarate will then be investigated. Next similar reactions of
metalloporphyrin peroxo complexes will be studied. Finally, this chemistry will
be moved into aqueous solution. In biological systems, enzymes catalyze the
incorporation of oxygen into a variety of different species. This study is a
systematic investigation of model compounds which are designed to mimic the
behavior of the biological systems. Based on the known behavior of oxygenase
enzymes, simple systems will be designed to test ideas of how these enzymes
operate. The result will be a better understanding of how living systems utilize
oxygen and the development of new laboratory and industrial processes for
activating oxygen so that it can be incorporated into various products.