* 9409133
* Structure and Function of Prolactin Releasing Factor
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Nira Ben-Jonathan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1997
* USD 201,399.00

Prolactin is a pituitary hormone that is involved in multiple functions,
including reproduction, immune regulation, and growth and the development of the
young. The synthesis and secretion of prolactin are regulated by a complex
interaction between releasing and inhibiting factors and gonadal steroid
hormones. These investigators have discovered the presence of prolactin
releasing factors (PRFs) in the posterior pituitaries of all species that they
have examined, including humans. PRF increases the expression of the prolactin
gene and is critical for stimulating prolactin release during lactation, the
ovulatory cycle and in response to estradiol. To further evaluate the
physiological importance, tissue distribution and mechanisms of action of PRFs,
it is critical to determine its chemical structure and generate a synthetic
peptide. The research to be done is to purify PRF from pituitary tumors of
transgenic mice and to determine its primary structure. Following that PRF will
be synthesized and its biological activity will be determined using both
cultured cells and in vivo assays. The results of this investigation will extend
our understanding of the mechanisms which govern the synthesis and release of a
major pituitary hormone that participates in a broad range of important
functions.