* 9409007
* Engineering Research Deployment Teaching Initiative:  Designand Scheduling of Cellular Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Rasaratnam Logendran, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* georgia-ann klutke
* 07/31/1996
* USD 30,000.00

9409007 Logendra This projects is aimed at developing instructional materials
for the design and control of cellular manufacturing systems. The target
instructional audience are undergraduate and graduate students and industrial
personnel. Eleven separate topics that affect cellular manufacturing will be
covered in the instructional materials. Instructional materials to be prepared
will consist of lecture notes, handouts, laboratory exercises, and software. A
step by step description of methodologies (mostly heuristics and optimizing
algorithms) used in the design and operation of cellular manufacturing and group
technology based systems will be written manuscript will be bound in a workbook
form and distributed to students as a source of reference. Results will be
shared with other universities that offer courses in manufacturing. To ensure a
wide dissemination of the outcome of this research, in addition to the
instructional materials mentioned above, results of the research will be shared
with other academic institutions and industry through presentations at the
National Conference of the American Society of Engineering Education. Letters
outlining the deployment activity will be sent to universities that have
accredited programs in industrial and/or manufacturing engineering. Following
this, a detailed course outline, developed tools, handbook, and lab exercises
will be sent out to universities interested in the deployment activity.