* 9409263
* RIA:  A Testbed for the Application of Corpus Linguistics   to Information Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Susan Gauch, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 08/31/1998
* USD 104,925.00

Rapidly increasing storage media capabilities and spreading interconnectivity
have heralded the arrival of the information age. Unfortunately, accessing
online information remains an inexact science. While valuable information can be
found, typically many irrelevant documents are also retrieved and many relevant
ones are missed. Terminology mismatches between the user's query and document
contents are one cause of retrieval failures. Expanding a user's query with
related words can improve search performance, but the problem of identifying
related words remains. This research uses corpus linguistics techniques to
automatically discover word similarities directly from the contents of an
untagged textual database and to incorporate that information in an information
retrieval system. These similarities are calculated based on the contexts in
which the words appear. Using these similarities, user queries are automatically
expanded, resulting in conceptual retrieval rather than requiring exact word
matches between queries and documents. The effects of using different algorithms
to calculate the similarities and the effects of expanding different sets of
query words is evaluated. In addition, the search performance of the retrieval
engine serves as a task-based method for comparing the quality of word-word
similarities calculated using different corpus linguistics techniques.