* 9409225
* Political Accountability and International Crisis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Randolph Siverson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1996
* USD 102,992.00

9409225 Siverson Do the domestic political processes and institutions of states
influence their choice of foreign policies? The answer to this question is
almost certainly in the affirmative, but balance of power accounts of
international politics have emphasized the effects of the structure of
international power on the strategies pursued by states and have deemphasized
the effects of domestic variables. Some extreme accounts have even gone so far
as to deny entirely the relevance of domestic political factors in accounting
for, to take one example, international war. Yet clear cut evidence indicates
that democracies have not fought each other in a serious war, a fact that is
clearly not in accord with balance of power theories. Contrary to structural
theories, this research begins with the hypothesis that domestic politics do in
fact have an important effect on the foreign policy of a state. The main element
of this can be substantiated by showing that political leaders are held
accountable for their failures in foreign policy. Of course, considerable
evidence tells us that United States presidents benefit or suffer politically
because of the success or failure, respectively, of their policies, but evidence
for such an effect in other political systems is either fragmentary or
anecdotal. To address this question, the researchers will identify all state
political leaders in the twentieth century and collect data on the extent to
which their state participated in international crises during their tenure, what
the outcome of the crisis was, and what the costs of the crisis were. The
investigators will also collect data on the basic characteristics of the
political system, recording for example, whether there was a legislative body
that served as a check on the executive, how competitive elections (if any)
were, how the leader came to power and how long they had been in power. The
application of several powerful statistical methods will enable the r esearchers
to assess the extent to which political leaders are held accountable for their
foreign policy actions across time, societies and political systems. Evidence of
such accountability, particularly in non-democratic systems, will not only
inform the theoretical investigation of international politics, but can provide
important evidence to United States policy makers about the possible constraints
under which the leaders of other states operate. The researchers also hope to be
able to shed light on the likely expansion of the "democratic peace".