* 9409707
* Refinements for Generalized Method of Moments Estimation    and Testing
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Whitney Newey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1997
* USD 203,891.00

9409707 Newey This project develops improved inference procedures for some
frequently used econometric methods. The goal is to find approximations that
improve on the usual large sample approach, and that are easy to implement. The
proposal includes two specific projects and extensions. The projects are:
bootstrapping for generalized methods of moments estimation and selecting the
number of instrumental variables. Generalized method of moments estimation is
widely applied in econometrics, so that reliable inference methods are needed.
It is known that the usual large sample inferences do not work well in some
cases. This project develops an improvement using bootstrap methods. The
improvement will require a modification of well known bootstrap methods. It is
based on sampling from a distribution that imposes the same moment restrictions
as the estimator, which is different than the usual bootstrap. The usefulness of
the proposed methods will be illustrated by empirical and simulation examples.
The proposed research will also consider extensions of the approach to other
models such as those where conditional moment restrictions are imposed. The
project also considers inference with instrumental variables. Instrumental
variables estimators are one of the most widely applied types of generalized
method of moments estimators. An important practical problem is the choice of
the number of instrumental variables to use in particular applications. The
problem is of particular interest in the recent literature on estimation of
"program evaluation" models, where instrumental variables are used to
approximate the conditional probability of being treated. This research will use
an asymptotic mean-square error criteria to derive some simple rules for
choosing the number of instrumental variables. The efficacy of the selection
rule will be considered in empirical and simulation examples. Also this research
will be extended to consider rules for choosing the number of variables in other
models, such as the sample selection model that has been widely used in
econometrics.