* 9409982
* Neuronal Synchronization in the Visual Cortex of the Alert  State
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Charles Gray, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1997
* USD 248,747.00

An important part of vision is pattern recognition, so that a visual scene that
contains many combinations of visual features is perceived as a coherent
collection of objects. Sets of local features making up the objects in an image
must be grouped according to some criteria and segregated from one another to
prevent inappropriate feature conjunctions. The pattern of images falling on the
retina of the eye is encoded by many thousands of nerve cells sending signals
into the brain, and it is not clear how the brain integrates the information
that is sent to different parts of the visual cortex. One alternative commonly
accepted is that some neurons are selectively responsive to certain features of
a stimulus, and the outputs from these neurons, even from widely separate areas,
converge on other cells that represent "feature detectors" in a hierarchical
organization of complex processing. An alternative that has recently been raised
is that the integrated features that make up objects are coded by a distributed
population of neurons that share synchronous activity. There is some evidence
for both processes, but the mechanisms underlying the latter remain unclear.
Synchrony has been observed in some cases in the visual cortex of cats and
monkeys. This study determines the incidence, properties and spatial extent of
neuronal synchronous firing of neurons in the visual cortex of alert animals
trained to fixate their eyes on a target object. A novel multiple electrode
array records the simultaneous responses of several single cells to a variety of
different visual stimuli. These recordings allow tests of how well responses
from different cells are correlated, and to what degree synchronous activity is
present among cells in several different cortical areas. Results will be
important for understanding cortical function, for sensory neuroscience and
perceptual psychology in general, and for potential use in the engineering
design of artificial visual systems.