* 9409749
* Signal Processing and coding for High Density Magnetic      Recording Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* William Ryan, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 07/31/1998
* USD 109,989.00

William E. Ryan RIA: Signal Processing and Coding for High Density Magnetic
Recording Channels In this project we first take a closer look at previously
reported results on the performance of error control codes on high density
magnetic recording channels (MRCs). In particular, we derive optimal code rates
(in the sense of maximizing coding gain) and then examine the gains afforded by
optimal rate codes assuming both infinite and finite decoding effort. Previous
work examined coding gains of non-optimal rate codes assuming an infinite
decoding effort. We will compare the performance of maximum likelihood sequence
detection (MLSD) of a coded MRC with that of an uncoded MRC equalized to partial
response shape of equivalent complexity. Such partial response shapes are to be
determined by this research. This work has applications in very high density
recording systems where codes may in fact be responsible for a performance loss.
We will seek to find partial response shapes appropriate for commonly used
constrained codes which, when combined with MLSD, provide an improvement over
today's bit-by-bit detectors. The study will include both computer simulations
and analysis and will examine the effectiveness of coding and partial response
techniques on actual recorders. In particular, we will examine the immunity to
nonlinear interference, overwrite, and increased track density.