* 9409873
* Synthesis of Model Amphipathic Cyclic Peptides and their    Potential to Induce Leakage in Liposomes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Maria Ngu-Schwemlein, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 08/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9409873 Ngu-Schwemlein Louisiana State University PI: Ngu-Schwemlein Louisiana
State University Cyclic amphipathic octapeptides with alternating D- and L-amino
acid residues will be synthesized. The opposing polarity faces in these peptides
will be studied as models for interactions in phospholipid bi-layers. Cyclo
(L-Xxx-D-Xxx)2-(L-Leu-D-Leu)2 , where X = Ser, Lys or Glu, will be prepared and
characterized by NMR and high resolution mass spectroscopy. The potential of
these cyclic peptides to induce leakage in a phospholipid bi-layer will be
explored by measuring the change in fluorescence intensity of carboxyfluorescein
due to leakage from liposomes. This Research Planning Grant from the Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor Maria Ngu-Schwemlein at Louisiana
State University. Cyclic peptides with alternating D- and L- amino acid residues
will be prepared. These molecules that have alternating "right hand" and "left
hand" amino acid residues bonded into a cyclic array will be characterized by
spectroscopic methods. Interactions across the ring of opposing charged residues
is expected to display unique physical properties in these cyclic peptides. The
possibility of these peptides inducing leakage in biologically important
phospholipid membranes will be explored.