* 9409778
* SGER: Analysis and Paleohydrologic Application of           Sedimentary Deposits of the Record Breaking 1993            Mississippi River Flood
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1994,02/28/1995
* James Knox, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 02/28/1995
* USD 38,062.00

9409778 Knox The general objective of this project is to quantitatively analyze
the field stratigraphic record of the record-breaking 1993 flood on the middle
reach of the upper Mississippi River upstream and downstream of Keokuk, Iowa.
Analysis of flood records for the Keokuk River gage indicates that the 1993
flood had an expected recurrence frequency of only once in 500 years for this
reach of the river. Analysis of the stratigraphic record resulting from this
1993 flood therefore provides an opportunity to establish quantitative
documentation of sedimentological and geochemical properties of a rare flood
event that is seldom witnessed in historical records. Project-specific
objectives include (1) engineering surveys to quantitatively determine
relationships between depths and volumes of sediment deposition in relation to
relative heights of depositional surfaces with respect to main currents of flood
flow; (2) analysis of sedimentological properties of flood depositional units,
including grain size characteristics and sedimentary structures; (3) analysis of
vertical variations of organic carbon and calcium and magnesium carbonate in
flood depositional sequences; and (4) analysis of slackwater sedimentation in
sidevalley tributaries to evaluate sedimentation characteristics as influenced
by: tributary size and gradient, tributary flooding history during and since the
1993 Mississippi flood, and tributary junction angle with mainstream Mississippi
Valley. Analyses of the 1993 flood deposits need to be undertaken as soon as
possible because most are located on land that is under agricultural
cultivation. Therefore, it is unlikely that many of the excellent depositional
sequences will be available beyond the beginning of the coming growing season
when cultivation for spring planting of crops will take place. Results of the
search will significantly improve the methods of paleoflood hydrology which are
based on the geological record of flood events bec ause natural bioturbation and
geochemical alterations of sediments in humid climate regions, such as
represented by the upper Mississippi Valley, normally make the fine-grained
overbank stratigraphic record difficult to interpret in the geological record.
Hence, documentation of fresh, unweathered, and relatively undisturbed sediments
from the rare, large-magnitude 1993 flood will be particularly beneficial for
improved understanding of key physical evidence that should be sought in the
geologic record where emphasis is on reconstructing past histories of flood
magnitudes and frequencies. Finally, given the important role that river
sediments play in geochemical cycles, the results of the research will also
contribute significantly to improved understanding of long-term sediment
mobility and storage in alluvial systems.