* 9409040
* Estimation and Visualization of Nonlinear Structural Models
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1994,09/30/1998
* George Tauchen, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1998
* USD 204,435.00

9409040 Tauchen It is quite common across many research areas in empirical
economics for there to be an accumulated body of knowledge regarding the
statistical characteristics of the relevant data. This knowledge is acquired
from the years of experience of many investigators using statistical models to
describe the data. The models are termed statistical because, with rare
exceptions, the parameters have no direct behavioral interpretation. A structure
model, such as an equilibrium asset pricing model or an equilibrium business
cycle model, stands in sharp contract to a statistical model. A structural model
typically provides a complete description of the underlying dynamics, and many
parameters have behavioral interpretations. Estimating a modern stochastic
structural model presents formidable computational and statistical challenges. A
reasonable principle for structural estimation is to bring to bear on the
problem the accumulated stock of knowledge regarding the reduced form
statistical models that have been found by others to work well. The proposed
project undertakes extensions and refinements of new estimators for dynamic
models based on this principle. The proposed work is in two parts: a
methodological section and an empirical section. The methodological work entails
development of reliable methods for statistical inference, comparative work with
other estimators, and visualization work to learn more about the dynamics
embedded in the model and the characteristics of the objective function of
estimation. The empirical work applies the new estimators to address issues in
asset pricing, financial volatility, and empirical auction research. The main
research tools are nonlinear estimation, Monte Carlo simulation, and the AVS
visualization package. The results of the project will be of interest to
empirical economists and statisticians, and in particular to researchers doing
simulation work or to researchers becoming interested in interactive v
isualization of structural models.