* 9409776
* Autoxidation of S(IV) and N(III) in Frozen Solution--       Possible New Role for Glaciated Clouds in Aerosol Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Eric Betterton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/1997
* USD 143,065.00

9409776 Betterton Dilute aqueous solutions of sulfite and nitrite can be rapidly
oxidized in high yields to sulfate and nitrate, respectively, simply by freezing
the sample. Since the yields and rates of oxidation induced by freezing are high
compared to their oxidation pathways in hydrometeors, and since many clouds
become glaciated at some point during their life cycles, a study of the
"freezing effect" could lead to the discovery of significant new pathways for
aerosol formation and acid precipitation. For example, it could provide a new
feedback mechanism between the release of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) by
evaporating clouds and the processing of precursors by existing glaciated
clouds; it could provide a further link between cloud formation and the global
concentration of aerosol particles (thereby affecting the global radiation
budget); and it could affect cloud droplet size distributions and therefore
cloud albedos and the radiation budget. The "freezing effect" could also play an
important role in the formation of acid precipitation since precursors of both
sulfuric and nitric acids can be oxidized during freezing. Also of concern is
the possible influence this effect could have on the integrity of cloud- and
rain-water samples preserved by freezing. This research will examine the
hypothesis that the "freezing effect" is in fact a concentration effect that
occurs when reactants are concentrated into liquid micro-pockets as the solution
freezes. The resulting high concentrations of reactant and dissolved oxygen
could then lead to rapid auto-oxidation. This study will focus on a series of
laboratory experiments designed to test the hypothesis and to improve our
understanding of the "freezing effect". The stoichiometry and kinetics of the
auto-oxidation of S(IV) and N(III) upon rapid freezing will be studied by means
of ion chromatography and capillary electrophoresis.