* 9409815
* Risk Exposure Analysis for Process Reengineering
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Laura Lally, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 08/31/1995
* USD 17,584.00

This research planning grant (RPG) addresses the problem of risk analysis for
the reengineering of organizational processes. Reengineering is a popular new
method of re-designing work in organizations. Reengineering involves: 1) the
combination of previously fragmented functional tasks into integrated processes,
2) the use of information technology within the processes to increase
efficiency, and 3) a reliance on deferred methods of control to decrease
supervisory costs. Proponents of reengineering cite several examples of firms
significantly decreasing their costs while simultaneously increasing the
efficiency with which their work gets done. This study regards reengineering
from the perspective of Perrow's theory of "normal accidents." Perrow states
that as systems become more complex and tightly coupled, the likelihood of minor
"incidents," turning into major "accidents," increases significantly. Perrow
argues that such systems require built in control systems that immediately make
human operators aware of the location of the incident. This study proposes that,
given the complex, tightly coupled nature of integrated processes, reengineering
is likely to create organizational systems more vulnerable to accidents.
Furthermore, because of the deferred control methods, managers may not be aware
of accidents for longer periods of time, exacerbating the damage. Finally, the
information technology used in reengineering may be a source of new, damaging
incidents. This research argues that these risks must be weighed against the
potential benefits od reengineering. The goal of the planning stage of this
research is a comprehensive literature review in the areas of: reengineering,
risk management, risk analysis involving various forms of information
technology, risk impacts related to increased spans of control, and systems
theory. The literature should provide a full understanding of the dimensions of
reengineering related risk and provide the basis for developing a longer-term
res earch program to test the relationships between reengineering and risk
empirically.