* 9409231
* Parental Coaching and Children's Reports of Nonexperienced  Events:  The Contributions of Forgetting, Source Monitoring, and Acquiesence
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* D. Stephen Lindsay, Central Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1996
* USD 90,000.00

9409231 POOLE This project will use a powerful new suggestibility manipulation
to examine several important issues concerning the strengths and weaknesses of
children as witnesses. The technique, an analog of parental involvement in false
allegations of abuse, is fully piloted and involves no deception. In Phase 1,
children between the ages of 3 and 8 years will participate in a series of
events and will be interviewed to determine what they can report about those
events. Three months later, parents will read the children a story that includes
descriptions of events the children had experienced and events they had not
experienced. The children will then be reinterviewed on two occasions with a
stepwise procedure in which nonsuggestive questions are followed by leading
questions and a series of questions that specifically ask the children to
distinguish between events they experienced and events they only heard
described. Because the interview procedures yield information about individual
differences in recall, forgetting, acquiescence (i.e., saying "yes" to a
suggestion), and source monitoring (i.e., distinguishing between memories from
several sources), these data will be a first step in constructing a systematic
theory of the factors responsible for developmental changes in suggestibility.
This project will accomplish the following goals: (a) trace developmental trends
in susceptibility to false information provided by parents; (b) evaluate the
types of false reports that are elicited by interview procedures with varying
degrees of prompting; (c) evaluate developmental changes in recall,
acquiescence, and memory source monitoring; and (d) test the adequacy of various
causal models that specify the contributions of these processes to children's
suggestibility. The resulting data will have important implications for how
investigations of child abuse allegations are conducted, and will contribute to
the development of interview procedures that more adequat ely test alternative
hypotheses about the sources of children's reports. ***