* 9409158
* Feasibility in Chemical Process Design and Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Angelo Lucia, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/1997
* USD 130,446.00

Abstract - Lucia - 9409158 Limits of feasibility for mathematical models of many
problems in science and engineering are characterized by smooth turning or
bifurcation points, which are the singular points of some associated Jacobian
matrix. These turning and bifurcation points, as well as the solutions
themselves, can be real or complex-valued and many numerical methods for
obtaining them can experience periodic, aperiodic or divergent behavior.
Accordingly, the PI plans to build a better understanding of the role and
utility of singularity in defining and determining limits of feasibility in
chemical process design and simulation by: 1. Conducting numerical studies that
revolve around the use of (a) nonsingular implicit composite equation systems to
define turning and bifurcation points, (b) trust region methods in the complex
domain to compute these turning and bifurcation points, and (c) hybrid methods
consisting of approximating some of the first partial derivatives of the
implicit equations. 2. Developing the necessary mathematical framework for
understanding the convergence and rate of convergence of complex domain or
extended trust region methods for calculating limits of feasibility. Problem
specifications in science and engineering applications always give rise to
either feasible or infeasible sets of model equations. Feasible specifications
always give rise to zero-valued minima in the two-norm, while infeasible ones
correspond to nonzero-valued minima and singular points in the norm. Information
regarding feasibility or infeasiblity, whether a priori or concomitant, is
important to equation-solving tasks in design and simulation. The PI plans to:
1. Conduct numerical investigations on the use of (a) extended trust region
methods for identifying and calculating conditions of feasibility or
infeasibility and (b) accelerating convergence to singular points using complex
domain quasi-Newton updates to build a quadratic model in the null space. 2.
Study t he convergence and rates of convergence of the methods developed above.