* 9409464
* Behavioral and Morphological Variation in Garter Snakes:    The Role of Genes and Hormones
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Richard King, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1998
* USD 254,000.00

King 9409464 Genes and hormones strongly influence animal behavior and
morphology. As a consequence both are likely to be important in producing
differences in behavior and morphology among individuals, among populations, and
among species. Unfortunately, information on the interplay between genes and
hormones in generally lacking. This study addresses this need by focusing on the
effects of genes and hormones on the behavior on the behavior of the garter
snake, Thamnophis sirtalis. The research combines methods from quantitative
genetics and endocrinology by coupling hormone manipulations with analyses of
behavioral, morphological, and hormonal variation within and among families of
laboratory-reared garter snakes. Because hormonal influences on behavior and
morphology may occur before birth, data on the in utero hormonal environment of
developing offspring will be included in these analyses. To determine whether
patterns observed in the laboratory parallel those seen in nature, a comparable
analysis of wild-caught garter snakes will conducted. Understanding the
mechanisms by which variation in behavior and morphology arise is of basic
significance in biology. This research will contribute to such an understanding
by answering questions such as: (1) Is genetic variation in behavior and
morphology mediated through hormonal mechanisms? (2) Do hormones affect multiple
traits simultaneously, thus generating correlations among traits? (3) Are the
processes giving rise to variation among individuals the same as those giving
rise to differences between genders? The results from this research are likely
to be broadly applicable to a wide variety of organisms. The genetic principles
underlying this research hold for all organisms and the hormonal processes under
investigation are similar for all vertebrates. With further study, this research
may have applications ranging from assessment of the effects of hormone-
mimicking chemicals released into the environment to treatment of geneti c
disorders affecting hormonal pathways.