* 9409712
* RIA: Real-Time Discrete Event Control and Its Application toAutomated Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Ratnesh Kumar, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/1998
* USD 69,982.00

Kumar 9409712 Discrete event systems are those systems which involve quantities
which take on a discrete set of values and which are constant except at discrete
times when events occur in the system. Examples include communication networks,
intelligent vehicle highway systems, manufacturing systems and computer
programs. Supervisory control theory was developed to provide a mathematical
framework for the design of controllers for such systems in order to meet
various qualitative or untimed constraints. A unified approach in which both
logical as well as performance specifications can be achieved has been proposed.
We propose to use timed state machines to represent the real-time plant as well
as the desired behavior. Prioritized synchronous composition of timed state
machines has been proposed as the mechanisms for representing interaction among
various subsystems of the plant and the controller, and also as the mechanisms
of representing composition of various qualitative specifications. The proposed
supervisor is also able to react to changes in control specifications since it
computes the control policy based on variable limited look-ahead; such time-
varying specifications are quite common in a practical setting. The issues of
failure detection and recovery will also be investigated by defining "safe"
behavior and considering "convergence" to such behavior upon occurrence of
failure. In order to apply our theory to the automated manufacturing facility,
we will obtain timed state machine models of various machines on the factory,
formulate appropriate qualitative and quantitative control specifications, and
develop control policies using our theory. We will also investigate the
computational complexity of this approach. ***