* 9409770
* RIA:  Linear Constraint Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Alexander Brodsky, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

The incorporation of constraint technology in programming languages, although
very recent, is a promising and effective tool for the development of software
solutions to problems with complex modeling requirements. This research
incorporates successful constraint technology (involving linear inequalities,
linear programming, finite domains, and incremental constraint maintenance) with
database technology, in a new framework of Linear Constraint Databases. These
Linear Constraint Databases are motivated by and aimed at a number of
application domains that require large persistent storage and are characterized
by (1) spatio-temporal features, (2) constraint-based design and planning, and
(3) large-scale (usually linear programming) optimization and analysis. The
challenge in the proposed research involves achieving both efficient and
declarative querying of large data sets involving constraints. A successful
integration of constraint programming techniques with object-oriented or
relational database systems is possible, given the current programming and
database state-of-the-art. Also, it is challenging, given the demands for
efficiency and high level specification. The impact of a successful integration
could be significant in a number of important application areas. Moreover, it
has the potentialto be an integral part of a new eneration of database
management systems.