* 9409394
* Research Initiation Award:  Single Particle Studies of      Particle Morphology Evolution During Spray Processing of    Inorganic Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Timothy Ward, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 12/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT Timothy Ward CTS-9509394 The objectives of this research are: (1) to
advance the understanding of the physical and chemical processes which govern
the particle morphology (e.g. dense, hollow particles or porous) and
microstructure (e.g. find-grained or single crystal) of inorganic (ceramic or
metal) powders produced by spray processes, and (2) to utilize that
understanding to develop and test strategies for producing desired, or avoiding
undesired, morphologies for several representative materials and precursor
types. The basic experimental approach will be to utilize an electrodynamic
balance to levitate individual solution precursor particles, and then observe
the morphology evolution of the individual particle as the temperature and/or
humidity are changed in a controlled fashion. As the temperature is changed (up
to 800{SYMBOL 176 \f "Symbol"}C or higher in some cases), solvent evaporation,
precursor decomposition, gas evolution, melting, sintering,
evaporation/condensation and other processes contribute to the final morphology
and microstructure. Morphology evolution will be followed visually using a video
camera and light scattering, and mass changes will be monitored using a video
camera and light scattering, and mass changes will be monitored using the
particle levitation voltage. Both single-phase and multicomponent/multiphase
particles will be investigated utilizing precursors which have been reported to
yield different particle morphologies in powder synthesis by spray pyrolysis.
Specifically, metallic Ag and zirconia will be studied using nitrate, chloride,
organometallic and colloidal precursors. Metal/ceramic composite particles
(zirconia/silver) and multicomponent mixtures containing a volatile component
(PbO) will be investigated. The results of this project will enable better
control over particle characteristics in materials produced by spray processes.
Inorganic materials which might be good candidates for production by spray
processes include: elec tronic ceramics such as superconductors and
ferroelectrics, fullerenes, nanophase materials and composites, and metal
powders. ***