* 9409688
* RIA:  Channel codes for digital communications and storage  systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Alexander Vardy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana Alexander Vardy RIA: Channel Codes for
Digital Communications and Storage Systems Reliable transmission and storage of
information requires the use of error correcting channel codes to protect the
data against errors introduced by the channel noise or imperfections of the
recording medium. Error correcting codes are implemented in most of the modern
communications and storage systems ranging from household compact-disc players
through telephone line modems, computer memories, and mobile radio networks to
satellite and deep space communications. In this project we investigate two
general types of error correcting codes, known as block and lattice codes, using
a novel dynamical approach. Since a block code is essentially subset of finite
field, while a lattice is a discrete collection of dimensional real points with
certain prescribed distance properties, they have been conventionally treated as
geometric or algebraic entities. However, as is just now being realized, block
and lattice codes may as well be regarded as dynamical systems. The latter
approach has several profound advantages over the conventional practice. One of
the objectives is to exploit these advantages in an attempt to find new codes,
better than presently known. Another objective is to provide bounds on the
decoding complexity and develop more efficient maximum-likelihood decoders,
which substantially advance the current performance achievable for a given
decoder complexity. Furthermore, we study the precise trade-off between
complexity and performance in block and lattice error correcting codes, from
both theoretical and practical standpoints. Progress along these lines would
enable the designer of a communication system to obtain larger coding gains for
the same bandwidth, power, and complexity constraints. Also treated are
modulation codes for input constrained channels used to encode information into
a particular set of sequences admitted by the channel. These codes have
widespread use in a variety of information storage applications, such as
magnetic or magneto-optic recording systems. New multi-dimensional modulation
codes are currently being developed for the emerging technology of holographic
storage. Most of the modulation codes in use today are constructed using tools
from symbolic dynamics. Taking the point of view of block codes as dynamical
systems makes it natural to consider applying results from algebraic coding
theory for the design of modulation codes. We will use this approach to develop
more efficient encoders for high order spectral null codes and multidimensional
modulation codes for holographic recording. The possibility of integrating a
prescribed error correcting capability within such modulation encoders will also
be studied.