* 9409139
* Leaf Structural Properties that Influence Photosynthesis:   Interactions Between Gradients of Light and Photosynthetic  Capacity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Thomas Vogelmann, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Hans J. Bohnert
* 07/31/1996
* USD 82,983.00

9409139 Vogelmann Functional significance has not been ascribed to many leaf
structural features such as palisade and spongy mesophyll. These tissues
presumably optimize photosynthesis, possibly by maximizing overlap between
internal concentrations of light and carbon dioxide. The proposed research will
examine the relationship between leaf anatomy, internal gradients of light,
carbon dioxide and the distribution of photosynthetic activity within the leaf.
In most leaves, light enters from the top whereas carbon dioxide enters
primarily from the bottom where the majority of the stomata occur. This may
create two opposing internal gradients, either one of which may limit
photosynthesis of the individual cell layers. In turn, such internal limitations
could influence photosynthetic performance at the level of the whole-leaf. Leaf
anatomy (sun vs. shade leaves) and the placement of variable numbers of stomates
on the lower and upper leaf surfaces (hypo- vs. amphistomy) could influence
internal limitations to light and carbon dioxide, and affect whole-leaf
photosynthetic performance. By using radiolabeling and microautoradiography, it
is proposed to examine more directly the interactions between light and
gradients of photosynthetic performance within the leaf. These experiments will
comprise a first step towards understanding the importance of leaf structure to
photosynthetic performance in both agricultural and native species. ***