* 9409577
* Research Initiation Award:  "On-Line Optimization of Batch  Reactors:  Experimental Implementation to Polymerization    Reactors"
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Srinivas Palanki, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 04/30/1998
* USD 86,640.00

Abstract - Palanki - 9409577 A large variety of specialty chemicals are produced
in batch reactors. Since batch reactors are transient in nature, the major
objective is to optimize a performance index (such as yield) at the end of the
batch cycle. A major problem in batch reactor operation is that changes in
initial conditions and environmental conditions can cause significant batch-to-
batch variations leading to significant losses in resources and time. For this
reason, it is necessary to develop optimization strategies that can be
implemented on-line. In this study a methodological framework for on-line
optimization of batch processes with multiple inputs will be developed. The
emphasis is on the experimental implementation of optimal state feedback laws in
industrially important batch polymerization reactors. The copolymerization of
styrene with methyl acrylate in toluene using aso-bis-iso-butyronitrile (AIBN)
has been selected as a model experimental system to demonstrate the application
of the on-line optimization strategy. In Phase I of the research, a mathematical
model of the experimental system will be developed. In Phase II, optimal state
feedback laws will be developed for end-point optimization of batch reactors
with multiple inputs. The efficacy of the optimal state feedback in optimizing
the performance index will be tested on the mathematical model by computer
simulations. In Phase III, the on-line optimization strategy will be implemented
experimentally. Several batch and semi-batch experiments will be conducted to
demonstrate the ability of the optimal state feedback to calculate, on-line, the
optimal operating policy when there are batch to batch variations in initial
conditions and process disturbances.