* 9409302
* Endogenous Rates of Experimentation; Dynamics in            Non-Partition Information Models; and Competition in        Herd/Cascade Models
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1994,09/30/1998
* Eddie Dekel, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1998
* USD 190,959.00

9409302 Dekel This project focuses on three research topics: (1) Experiments and
or mutations are an important ingredient in the models used in the recent
research on learning and evolution in economics. The proposal develops models
where rates of experimentation are themselves learned or mimicked and then
explores how different aspects of the environment influence the rate of
experimentation that arises in the long run. (2) Models where the possible
information received by an individual does not partition the set of states of
the world have been used to introduce various elements of bounded rationality
into decision making and game theory. However, these models implicitly assume
that players are unaware of their information sets, while the applications in
games often implicitly assume that the information structure is common
knowledge. The research explores this apparent conflict by explicitly developing
a dynamic process of how players use their information. A related objective is
to develop an explicit model of forgetfulness to see how it corresponds to the
general models without partitions. (3) Models of herds, or informational
cascades, where buyers mimic preceding buyers rather than using their own
private information ignore the fact that sellers have strong incentives to
entice buyers to create a herd/cascade for their own product. The research will
explore the extent to which this can happen, what types of sellers will invest
in falsely creating herds/cascades, and whether more or less information is used
when sellers are activity trying to create herds/cascades.