* 9409560
* Regularities in Recognition Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Murray Glanzer, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 12/31/1997
* USD 198,329.00

The proposed research will examine the role of attention in acquiring automatic
skills and transferring them within and between tasks. The main theoretical
focus will be on developing a theory that explains how acts of attention during
training encode traces into memory to build up a task-relevant knowledge base,
and how acts of attention at transfer retrieve traces from memory to support
automatic performance. The theory will build on existing theories of attention
and automaticity, extending and generalizing them. The main empirical focus will
be on visual search, which is a dominant paradigm in research on attention and
automaticity that has important practical implications (e.g., for driving,
navigation, and supervisory control). Experiments will address how automatic
skills acquired during training on visual search transfer to and from other
tasks (counting and categorization) performed on displays similar to and
different from the ones experienced during training. The proposed research is
significant theoretically and practically. The ability to perform automatically
is a major factor underlying skilled performance and it is important to
understand it better. The proposed research will increase our understanding by
distinguishing between competing theories of automatization and integrating
previously unrelated theories of automatization, attention, and categorization.
The experimental and theoretical results on transfer will have important
implications for education and industrial training, providing a principled way
to determine whether experience gained in one setting (e.g., the classroom) will
generalize to another (e.g., the workplace) and a principled way to design
training programs and select training examples to maximize generalization and
optimize skilled performance.