* 9409736
* Research Initiation Award:  Efficient Algorithms for        Automatic Parallel Program Decomposition
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Craig Chase, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 06/30/1997
* USD 98,220.00

Parallel program decomposition is the process by which a single application is
decomposed into multiple processes for execution on parallel hardware. For real
programs, the execution speed of a good decomposition can exceed that of a poor
decomposition by factors of ten or more. Unfortunately, optimal program
decomposition is known to be an NP-hard problem, and efficient exact solutions
are unlikely to exist. Hence, the key to finding automatic approaches to the
program decomposition lies in discovering efficient algorithms that produce
approximate solutions. A novel decomposition algorithm with nearly linear time
complexity is explored. The algorithm initially decomposes the program into a
sequence of small, parallelizable sections of code, known as partitionables. A
locally optimal decomposition is selected for each partitionable based on
information contained in an empirically derived database. Dynamic data
redistribution is combined with a static technique called decomposition
smoothing to produce a good global decomposition. The principal contributions of
the research are: (1) to define new methods for program decomposition that go
beyond simply minimizing communication and consider aggregate parallel execution
performance, (2) to establish the extent to which fast decomposition strategies
can produce acceptable solutions for practical applications, and (3) to collect
and disseminate a database of performance results from kernels of scientific
applications.