* 9409845
* RIA:  Resource Management in Parallel Database Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Valery Soloviev, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/1998
* USD 96,409.00

Multiprocessor database machines, with their promise of high availability,
scalability and performance, are increasingly the systems of choice for large
applications. Efficient resource utilization is crucial for maximizing both a
response time of individual queries and the overall system throughout. Resource
utilization issues include how to allocate memory to workload components, how
many and which queries to run in parallel, how to share the system resources to
improve the system performance. We restrict our attention to parallel shared-
nothing database systems. In our previous research, batch scheduling of the
query workload was studied. We demonstrated that sharing low-level query
operators can provide significant savings. In this project, we shall perform
research into the following areas: 1) Memory Management for Mixed Workloads.
These workloads mix simple queries and short ad-hoc read transactions. We shall
study an incremental memory allocation method for processing a mixed workload.
2) Data Placement. For a system consisting of several hundred nodes, full
declustering can lead to a performance degradation. Alternative placement
methods will be examined. The proposed research will involve both the
development of algorithms for problems in these areas and their experimental
analysis using a precise simulation of a parallel shared-nothing system.