* 9409856
* Research Initiation Award - Microscopic Study of the Phase  Behaviour of Liquid Crystalline Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Arun Yethiraj, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1997
* USD 98,728.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9409856 University of Wisconsin Madison P.I.: Arun Yethirajo Recent
advances in computer simulation algorithms and liquid state theory have made
possible a microscopic study of flexible polymer melts and solutions. The
purpose of the proposed work is to extend these methods to the study of liquid
crystalline polymers. Using computer simulation and density functional theory, a
fundamental understanding of the phase behavior of these systems is sought, thus
assisting the engineering of new polymers for specific applications. Monte Carlo
simulations of dense melts of polymers will be performed using first a simple
semiflexible chain model and then more realistic rotational isomeric state
models. These simulations will be used to test the approximate theories and
suggest new approximations if necessary. Several theoretical approaches will be
investigated. These will include an Onsager theory with a renormalized self-
consistent intermolecular potential, and a density functional theory with an
excess free energy functional obtained via an extension of the generalized Flory
theory of fully flexible polymer melts to nematic fluids. There are several
aspects to the proposed research. (i) Large scale computer simulations will be
performed in conjunction with the investigation of approximate theories thus
allowing for considerable interfacing between the two. (ii) Some of the most
difficult aspects of the theories will be performed exactly via simple two
molecule computer simulations. (iii) Theoretical techniques will be developed
that are equally applicable to both thermotropic and lyotropic liquid
crystalline polymers. (iv) Chemically realistic models will be investigated
which will facilitate comparison with experiment without adjustable parameters.
If successful, the theories could be useful for the design of new materials by
providing means of predicting the equilibrium properties from the chemical
structure. The possible disadvantage of our pr oposed work is that the
techniques we hope to develop might prove to be too computationally intensive
for routine use in industry. Even so, we will have obtained valuable insight
into the behavior of liquid crystalline polymers that should assist the design
of new materials.