* 9409570
* Partial Support of the Core Activities of the Committee     on National Statistics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Miron Straf, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/1998
* USD 2,666,483.00

This award continues NSF support for the core activities of the Committee on
National Statistics (CNSTAT), a National Science Foundation standing committee
at the National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council (NAS-NRC). CNSTAT
was established in 1972 at the recommendation of the President's Commission on
Federal Statistics to fill a major gap in a highly decentralized federal
statistical system. The Committee focuses on improving the statistical methods
and information on which public policy decisions are based. The Committee
strengthens the development of data for social science research, makes such data
more accessible for research, and furthers the development of measurement and
analytic methods for analysis and research. The Committee identifies problem
areas in which statistical questions are important to public policy and carries
out studies within these areas by itself or by convening panels of other
experts. Distinguished statisticians and other scientists, who volunteer their
services, are selected and appointed to the Committee by the NAS-NRC. The
Committee directly benefits the social sciences by (1) improving national
statistics and furthering the development and application of statistical methods
for social science research, (2) linking the federal statistical system and the
social science research community, (3) involving academic scientists in research
to improve national statistics, (4) providing forums for the exchange of
information and ideas, and (5) advancing the social and economic sciences within
the NAS-NRC and through the Committee's relationship with the Congress, OMB, and
many research and program agencies. With support for core activities, the
Committee identifies important problem areas and establishes priorities,
develops panel or workshop studies, selects participants, reviews study
activities and reports, disseminates widely study results, and serves as an
integrative force for the highly decentralized federal statistical system. The
NSF suppor t allows the Committee to identify and develop scientific studies for
which federal agencies do not provide the leadership. In addition, the NSF
investment supports a unique process of intellectual development that is
critical in a decentralized statistical system. The Committee provides
leadership over interdisciplinary areas by bringing together methodologically
oriented statisticians along with federal agency staff and quantitatively
oriented social scientists to work on real problems. The Committee's reputation,
credibility, and influence are widely known throughout the federal government
and are the reasons why Congress, OMB, NSF, and other federal agencies turn to
the Committee for advice.