* 9409192
* The Stability of Autonomous Agents in Dynamic, Complex      Manufacturing Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1996
* K. Suzanne Barber, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 05/31/1996
* USD 49,999.00

9409192 Barber This award, in the Small Grants for Exploratory Research mode,
funds initial exploration of artificially-intelligent agent-based architectures
for manufacturing automation. Manufacturing automation engineers agree that the
manufacturing domain is complex and dynamic. Manufacturing solutions must move
toward agent-based architectures which better model real world behaviors and
knowledge at any instance in time. Agents perform a particular task or
responsibility to achieve a specified goal. A multi-agent system is comprised of
these intelligent agents responsible for their own communication, diagnosis,
repair, control and configuration. One of the critical considerations for
sensible agent behavior is level of autonomy. The extent of autonomy can be
distinguished from locally-autonomous to consensus (negotiation) to command-
driven. The level of autonomy describes the ability of an agent to execute
behaviors independent of approval or direction from other agents within the
system. This research addresses two topics vital to the success of manufacturing
automation: formal engineering methodologies and the distribution of planning,
monitoring, and control through autonomous agents. The proposed research
objective is to develop a theoretical model for the stability analysis of
autonomous agent behaviors operating in distributed, multi-agent systems.
Responsibility-driven object-oriented methodologies will serve to provide a
formal procedure by which agents are identified, specified, modified, and
maintained. The theoretical stability analysis model promotes the practical
deployment of autonomous agents in manufacturing solutions by enabling agents to
analyze and consequently behave sensibly incorporating an understanding of both
global and local goals.