* 9409244
* Up-Conversion in Bridged Binuclear Complexes of the         Lanthanide Ions: An Investigation of Cross-Relaxation       in a Molecular Beam Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1997
* Mary Berry, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 01/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

In this proposal research planning grant Dr. Mary Berry will explore the
dynamics of cross-relaxation up-conversion in bridged binuclear complexes of
lanthanide ions isolated in a molecular beam. Several bridged complexes will be
studied to determine whether up-conversion in condensed phases will actually
occur and to investigate their suitability for volatilization. The apparatus
used in these studies includes a molecular beam instrument with heated nozzle
sources as well as equipment for performing ring-down spectroscopy and laser-
induced fluorescence experiments. If successful, these experiments will provide
a better understanding of cross relaxation up-conversion than is obtained from
condensed phase studies. In this project fairly large molecular entities called
binuclear complexes will be examined in an environment called a molecular beam.
Under these conditions each complex is isolated from other molecules, and
therefore the outcome of stimulating the complexes with light depends only on
the nature of these complexes, and not on the species in their immediate
surroundings. Interpretation of the processes involved in transferring energy
gained from absorbing the light is simplified relative to examining those
processes in condensed phases, since complications arising from interactions
between the complexes and the host crystal, for example, are eliminated.