* 9409782
* Efficient Formulation and Solution of Equations of          of Motion for Optimal Parallel Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Kurt Anderson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 02/28/1998
* USD 97,615.00

7 # 9 9 $ $ $ $ $ 2 D D D D N X X $ | x D 6 * ` $ 6 * 6 6 ` . 6 6 6 6 6 6
9409782 Anderson The prime objective of this research is to advance the state of
the art for the efficient modeling and simulation of the dynamic behavior of
complex multibody systems. This will be accomplished through a formulation of
the equations of motion which is highly coupled with the node topology/internode
communication architecture of the parallel computer system on which it will be
run. This work will be initially directed towards systems which allow for the
use of explicit temporal numerical integration schemes. Once accomplished,
attention will be turned towards applying beneficial computational aspects of
this work to applications which result in stiff systems of equations, and thus
are confined to the use of implicit temporal integration procedures. The effort
will be to take advantage of aspects of O(N) and other low order dynamic
equations formulation procedures (e.g. use of recursive relationships to reduce
operations), as well as descriptor formulations which are highly parallelizable.
The intended result is the development of a multibody procedure/code which
automatically produces equations of motion and associated simulation code for a
specific complex multibody system which is the optimal ( in the sense of
maximizing throughput) combination of low operations count and concurrent
equations form for implementation on prescribed parallel computing system. This
will result in the maximum possible aggregate thoughput, and consequently,
maximum overall speed for the simulation of the system on the available
concurrent processing system. *** u to advance the state of the art for the
efficient modeling and simulation of the dynamic behavior of complex multibody
systems. This will be accomplished through a formulation o f the equations of 9
< @ 5 9 ! ! ! 9 9 9P < 9 ! 9 :~ H H ( F G ( H H ( d ' @ = / R B H -:LaserWriter
Times E e E P . Anderson.abs Alicia Harris Alicia Harris