* 9409300
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Elected Politicians and     Unelected Bureaucrats: Agency Rulemaking and Medicare       Physician Payment Reform
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* John Aldrich, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/1995
* USD 6,460.00

9409300 Aldrich This Doctoral dissertation Research Support project examines
congressional oversight of federal bureaucratic agencies. It aims to answer
several questions, including: To what extent do members of Congress engage in
supervision of bureaucratic behavior themselves, as opposed to delegating
oversight authority to interest groups affected by agency decisions? How
effective are various forms of oversight in constraining agency discretion? The
project's central hypothesis is that political influence on bureaucratic
behavior is most prevalent and effective not through formal mechanisms such as
congressional subcommittee hearings, but through informal channels such as
meetings between bureaucrats and interest groups affected by agency rules. The
project tests this theoretical proposition by focusing on a major health care
issue: payments by the Medicare program to physicians treating Medicate
patients. In 1989, Congress mandated the development of a fee schedule, a
payment mechanism which prospectively sets the amounts that Medicate pays for
all physician services. Through a series of regression equations, this project
assesses the impact of various types of formal and informal oversight on the
setting of payment levels. These results are significant in that they represent
one of the first empirical examinations of congressional oversight and provide
insight into the politics of health care reform.