* 9409722
* RIA:  Resource Management for Networks:  Service            Provisioning, Flow Control, and Robustness
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Gustavo de Veciana, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 05/31/1998
* USD 99,122.00

University of Texas at Austin Gustavo A. de Veciana RIA: Resource Management for
Networks: Service Provisioning, Flow Control, and Robustness This focus of this
work is the development of resource management schemes for communication
networks. Model based approaches using effective and decoupling bandwidth
constraints that guarantee both individual and aggregate quality of service
requirements are investigated. The emphasis is on practical issues, as well as
on understanding the accuracy of these approximations at the network level.
Further study of these concepts should elucidate the impact of flow control on
network capacity. Since, in practice, traffic statistics and demand may be
unknown or time varying, methods for on-line estimation and control are also
investigated. For example, a self-tuning rate control throttle is proposed which
could in principle minimize a traffic stream's burstiness subject to a loss or
delay constraint by monitoring the arrival process. This is a first step towards
intelligent networks that monitor, learn, and adapt to the traffic statistics
and demands. The final goal of this research is to develop comparison methods
based on the "robustness" of a performance guarantee for a given traffic stream.