* 9409486
* Fundamental Limits and Practical of Integrated All-Optical  Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Richard Barry, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1997
* USD 99,999.00

The George Washington University Richard A. Barry RIA: Fundamental Limits and
Practical Designs of Integrated All-Optical Networks In an All-Optical Network
(AON), the signals remain in the optical domain from the origin to the
destination. Since electronic packet or circuit switched routing cannot be
implemented in an AON, other routing methods are required. Wavelength Routing is
an attractive option where the path of a signal through the network is
determined by the wavelength of the signal, the state of the network switches
and wavelength changing devices. The focus here is on Wavelength Routing AONs
which support multiple point and multiple rate sessions. So far only single rate
point to point networks have been investigated. In the point to point case, many
switching topologies can be implemented all-optically in a straightforward
manner. This is not the case in the multi-point environment and new design
methodologies are required. AONs supporting heterogeneous users with widely
varying bandwidth requirements pose interesting questions requiring innovative
engineering solutions. This research considers two network models: 1) passive
networks which do not contain any switches or configurable devices, and 2)
configurable networks which use switches and/or configurable wavelength changing
devices to alter the paths of wavelengths through the network. Passive AONs are
suitable for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks, while configurable AONs will
find applications in Wide Area Networks. Recently it has been shown that
wavelength routing can significantly increase the capacity of a passive AON over
a broadcast star in the point-to-point single rate environment. It is likely
that this conclusion will hold in an integrated environment, and how to achieve
this performance advantage is a question which will be addressed. Configurable
AONs are scalable and therefore appropriate for a Wide Area Network. Previous
studies have shown that for "irregular" topologies, wavelength changing devices
can dramatically increase throughput. What is not understood is what topological
properties make wavelength changers useful. The fundamental issues in the design
of networks with and without wavelength changers and the practical trade-offs
will be investigated.