* 9409559
* Political Economy, Collective Choice, Regulation, and Public Economics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* David Baron, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Monique C. Williams
* 08/31/1997
* USD 214,800.00

9409559 Baron This research program has four parts. The first part of the study
involves a more complete exploration of information hierarchies. Information
hierarchies include public hierarchies, such as, Congress, bureau, state agency,
etc. and private hierarchies, such as, manager, foreman, headquarters, etc. The
model that is developed addresses current debates about the delegation of
authority. It looks at the problem of contracting and subcontracting when
information is incomplete and unobservable to at least one of the parties
involved. The second part of the study involves the development of collective
choice theory from a sequential choice perspective. It focuses on the provision
of collective goods rather than particularistic goods. It attempts to include
the electorate in the model and addresses questions concerning the amount of
information the electorate has about collective goods programs. The third part
of the study deals with interest groups and their influence at the electoral and
legislative stages of the policy process. The fourth part of the study involves
empirical tests of the sequential choice models of collective goods provision
using data on entitlement expenditures. This project is of significant interest
because it attempts to develop further a relatively novel approach to modeling
political institutions, to integrate legislative and electoral determinants of
policies, and to provide insights into the nature and evolution of entitlement
programs.