* 9409977
* RIA:  Trading Packet Headers for Packet Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* George Varghese, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 06/30/1997
* USD 100,000.00

Washington University at St. Louis George Varghese RIA: Trading Packets Headers
for Packet Processing In high speed networks, packet processing is relatively
expensive while bandwidth is cheap. The central thesis here is that if suitable
header fields can be added to packets, then mechanisms to speed up packet
processing can be devised. Several ideas are advanced to support the above
thesis. First, data manipulation (e.g. data copying, checksumming) is a major
bottleneck of end system packet processing. The approach taken here suggests
adding a data manipulation header to an easily accessible portion of each
packet. This header contains pointers to fields (in various layers) required for
data manipulation. This information (e.g. a pointer to data to be encrypted)
allows implementations to efficiently combine data manipulation steps (e.g.
encryption and copying). Prior work has shown that combining data manipulation
steps can yield order-of-magnitude performance improvement. The present approach
can yield similar improvements in a more uniform and structured fashion. Second
the work studys adding index fields to protocol identifiers at all layers (e.g.
connection identifiers, network addresses) to reduce lookup costs and generic
protocol processing. Several new ides to utilize these index fields (threaded
indexing, index passing, and source hashing) are studied. It is known that the
use of Virtual Circuit Identifiers (VCIs) on virtual circuit packets simplifies
lookup and packet processing. In source hashing and threaded indexing, the added
indices essentially serve as VCIs, but for flows in a datagram network. In
source hashing, for example, the "VCI" is a consistent random label chosen by
the source. OUr new methods provide the benefits of normal VCis without
requiring a round trip delay for set up. The methods can lower uorst case
datagram lookup times form O(log(n) to O(1), which may be important for gigabit
routers. IN this project we design, analyze, and implement these new ideas and
search for other techniques that arise from the basis thesis. The current
climate of transition (in which transport, routing, and data link protocols are
changing) provides an opportunity to apply these techniques to influence real
protocols.