* 9409579
* Research Initiation Award:  Study of Maragoni Driven        Fingering Instability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Sandra Troian, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1997
* USD 99,941.00

SUMMARY OF PANEL DISCUSSION Proposal Number: CTS-9409579 P.I.: Saundra M. Trioan
Institution: Princeton University Dr. Troian proposes a theoretical and
experimental investigation of novel fingering instabilities in Marangoni-type
spreading of liquid drops on thin films of higher surface tension. Emphasizing
surfactant solutions near the critical micel concentration, theory will reduce
the film depression at the base of radially spreading drops and vertical
diffusive transport of soluble surfactants, with the drop acting as a reservoir.
Seeks to determine the dominant through analysis of competition of stabilities
and destabilizing effects. Experimental flow visualization is based on image
processing. Pauley strongly supports identification and insightful analysis of
important new elements of a problem that has old origins. Excellent work by PI
with excellent background. Potential applications well motivated; but some of
them a bit removed from engineering, or else it is not clear that the pertinent
Marangoni instability is dominant or major effect (e.g., droplet inhalation-
very complex). well written proposal covers insightful asymptotic theory and
experiments. Some concern that appropriate collaborator for theory is at post
doctoral level, and not in realm of graduate {SYMBOL 222 \f "Symbol"} Ph.D.
education - made as a general comment. But area is definitely ripe for training
chemical engineers in very sound fundamentals. Overall, impressive physics.