* 9409506
* Mathematical Sciences: Optimal Design of Sensors and        Actuators for Robust Control of Partial Differential        Equation Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1997
* Belinda Batten, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/1997
* USD 17,573.00

9409506 King The goal of the projected research is to develop rigorous
theoretical and computational methods for optimal sensor and actuator design.
The investigation will concentrate on systems governed by partial differential
equations (PDEs). Many feedback control design methods yield a solution (i.e.,
an optimal control) which is written in terms of a feedback operator and the
optimal state. For finite dimensional systems, this control can also be written
as a product of gains and states and decisions regarding sensor design can be
made using the form of the gains. In many PDE control problems, the gain
operator is a bounded linear transformation between Hilbert spaces.
Representation theorems often can be applied to obtain an Rintegral
representationS of the gain operator that provides the basis for numerical
approximations and analysis. Initially, the investigator will consider the
problem of finding the optimal gain operator without prior assumptions regarding
actuator type. Robust control designs will be used to formulate the
corresponding sensor design problem. The optimal sensors/actuators for the PDE
systems may be spatially distributed, though one may wish to approximate the
optimal designs and implement a finite number of sensors and actuators. This
requires approximation theorems for the various types of control operators. ***