* 9409395
* Collaborative Research:  Developmental Ecology of Mayapple
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1994,12/31/2000
* Maxine Watson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2000
* USD 310,520.00

9409395 Watson Persistence of plant populations in nature is partly due to their
success at sexual reproduction --i.e., their production of seeds. Among the
determinants of plant reproductive success are (1) their schedules of
reproduction through time, or life histories, and (2) the amount of resources
available to them at critical points in the expression of these life histories.
Because plants grow and reproduce by building new leaves and flowers, the
expression of a plant's life history is the result of on-going developmental
decisions about the type of structures it makes. And because a structure cannot
both be vegetative and flowering, there is an inherent trade-off between plant
growth and reproduction. The trade-off between growth and reproduction is
complicated be the interaction between (1) the expression of the plant's
developmental program, which specifies when and what type of new structures may
be made, and (2) the efficiency of a particular type of structure in resource
accumulation. Some structures will add to the plant's future growth potential,
others detract, thus influencing the course of subsequent development and
reproductive success. In producing vegetative structures, for example, plants
may increase their lifetime seed production through increases in plant size and
vigor. Little is known about how the interaction between developmental program
and resource use actually results, mechanistically, in the expression of a
particular life history. The interactions between developmental program,
seasonal patterns of resource uptake and use, and life history in the herbaceous
perennial, mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum) will be studied. Mayapple is an ideal
plant for such studies because each year its rhizome faces a simple
developmental decision whether to produce a reproductive shoot or a single leaf;
only one such structure is made. Longterm studies of native populations are used
to (1) construct a developmental timetable for shoot type determination, (2)
examine the interaction between the degree and pattern of resource uptake and
use and shoot determination, and (3) determine whether differences in the timing
of developmental events, as manifested by different clones, affect longterm
demography and, hence, fitness. This study also will reveal at what points
selection may act to alter the timing of developmental events, thus contributing
to understanding of how different life histories evolve -- a critical issue for
plants facing rapidly changing environments, as well as for the modification of
crop plants for higher productivity.