* 9409630
* Heterogeneity and Adjustment:  Fixed Costs, Renovation, and Diffusion of Ideas
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Ricardo Caballero, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1997
* USD 188,044.00

9409630 Caballero This research will study the process by which firms adjust to
new conditions and renovate the institutions and constraints that accelerate and
depress such a process. The study is divided into three parts. The first part
develops a microeconomic model of investment with fixed costs and it examines
how firms adjust to micro-level shocks, and have different time-varying
adjustment costs. This part of the study uses U.S. investment data at the
sectoral level to examine how firms adjust their employment levels. The second
part of the study develops a model of creative destruction. Creative destruction
refers to a setting where the loss of jobs and plant closings involve
inefficiencies due to externalities in job search and externalities due to
changes in production techniques. The third part of the reserarch focuses on the
diffusion of ideas and their contribution to economic growth. The main goal is
to generate empirical estimates of the impact of knowledge spillovers on
research's productivity and economic growth. This study is of significant
interest because it provides results that improves our understanding of how a
wide range of labor market inefficiencies could affect sectoral restructuring
and reallocation of resources from shrinking industries to growing industries,
among other things.