* 9409924
* RIA:  Cooperation Support Systems for Group Problem Solving
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Ai-Mei Chang, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/1997
* USD 93,073.00

IRI-9409924 Chang, Ai-Mei University of Arizona $29,691 - 12 mos. RIA:
Cooperation Support Systems for Group Problem Solving This is the third year
funding of a three-year continuing award. Many problems that are encountered in
an organizational setting are large and complex enough that they require a
team/group effort for efficient and effective resolution. These problems are
usually decomposed into subproblems which allows team members, each of whom is
responsible for a distinct subproblem depending on their area of expertise, to
work on subproblems and resolve the overall problem through coordination with
each other. In some cases, the problems are well-structured so that a
decomposition of the overall problem will result in relatively independent
subproblems, which may facilitate concurrent resolution of subproblems. This is
followed by information exchange and cooperation between team members to resolve
the overall problem. In some cases, problems may be ill-structured, ill-defined,
and/or subproblems may be highly interdependent so that team members may have to
collectively deliberate on the various aspects of the problem to resolve it.
Most other problems are usually in between these extreme cases. Examples of such
problems range from engineering and software design, project planning to project
selection, product design and marketing, make or buy decisions, audit going
concern decisions, and many other organizational decisions that involve an
interface of different organizational functions. This project addresses the
issue of designing information sharing and cooperation mechanisms to support the
overall problem resolution process using AI techniques and Argumentation Theory.