* 9409623
* Molecular Genetics of the Drosophila Sulfakinin (Dsk) Gene
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Ruthann Nichols, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 07/31/1997
* USD 315,218.00

IBN-9409623 Ruthann Nichols Over the past few decades researchers have
discovered numerous peptides present in the central nervous systems of
vertebrates and invertebrates. These peptides are referred to as neuropeptides.
Frequently similar neuropeptides are found in widely divergent species of both
invertebrates and in vertebrates. While the function of a few of these
neuropeptides has been determined, very little is known about the role that the
vast majority of neuropeptides play in the nervous system. The goal of this
research project is to determine the physiological function of a neuropeptide
called sulfakinin in the fruitfly, Drosophila. Sulfakinin is very similar to
another peptide, cholecystokinin, that is found in the brains of vertebrates.
The fruitfly is an excellent animal in which to do these studies because it is
possible to look at Drosophila that have mutations in the genes that code for
the neuropeptide sulfakinin. By determining the effect these mutations have on
the behavior of the animal, one can hope to figure out what role this
neuropeptide plays in the central nervous system. Since similar peptides exist
in a wide variety of animals and humans, the results of these studies will be
applicable to those organisms as well.