* 9409297
* RIA: Coherent Control of Engineered Semiconductor           Heterostructures Using Ultrafast Optical and Electrical     Fields
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* David Reitze, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/1998
* USD 87,960.00

9409297 Reitze A three year project is proposed to experimentally and
theoretically investigate the applicability of using phase and amplitude,
tailored, ultrafast(<10 ps) optical and electrical fields to selectively
manipulate electronic states in engineering semiconductor heterostructures.
Precise control of electronic and optoelectronic devices, including terahertz
sources, and terahertz speed modulators and electronic switches. Directing the
evolution of electron and hole distributions in these systems requires synthesis
of the appropriate fields to interact coherently with the electronic wavepacket
over time periods longer than characteristic dephasing times. One of the key
issues which must be addressed is the extent to which dephasing via phonon and
other scattering mechanisms limits the time period in which the wavepacket
coherence can be maintained. In order to carry out these challenges, An
innovative approach is proposed which uses ultrafast shaped optical and
electrical waveforms to manipulate electronic states in an asymmetric coupled
quantum well structure. Initial efforts will first be directed at generating and
characterizing tailored electrical pulses by combining well established
stripline propagation techniques with femtosecond and picosecond pulse shaping.
Later in the project, the methods of quantum optimal control theory will be
applied to guide the design of fields which minimize the influence of dephasing
effects and maximize wavepacket coherence. The proposed research will identify
the potential physical controlling mechanisms, determine the extent to which
dissipation can be controlled and minimized, and asses the feasibility of
applying optimal control methods to these systems. ***