* 9409586
* Dissertation Research:  Imperial Conquest and Consolidation and Forced Migration in the Saraguro Region, Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Katharina Schreiber, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 11,320.00

9409586 Schreiber Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, Mr. Dennis
Ogburn will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct
archaeological fieldwork in the Saraguro region of highland Ecuador. Centering
the study on the known Inca sites of Ingapirca and Tambo Blanco, Mr Ogburn and
colleagues will conduct a survey of a 150 - 300 square km area. Prehistoric
sites will be recorded, photographed and mapped. Architectural data will be
noted and all ceramics and artifacts will be collected. If necessary, limited
excavation will also be conducted. Available museum collections will be
examined. Mr Ogburn will attempt to determine the changes which occurred when
Incan peoples conquered the region. To accomplish this, he will reconstruct both
pre-Inca and Incan settlement and subsistence systems and compare the two.
Through study of ceramics he will gain insight into the extent of population
continuity or change. The goal of this research is to understand how, at a
simple technological level, empires are established and maintained. Historic and
ethnohistoric evidence demonstrate that within a relatively short period of time
Incan peoples from highland Peru expanded their area of control to include most
of the Andes. It appears that they employed a number of methods to incorporate
conquered territories into their empire and to control them. One of these
included wholesale movement of peoples. Mr. Ogburn wishes to gain insight into
such strategies through the intensive study of one such area. This research is
important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists. It will shed light on mechanisms of social control and
organization, and will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
***