* 9409448
* Preconscious Determinants of Social Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* John Bargh, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/1998
* USD 339,178.00

9409448 Bargh ABSTRACT Recent research has demonstrated the automaticity of much
of social perception. Stereotypes have been found to become active automatically
upon the presence of the group features (e.g., skin color, gender), and
behaviors have been found to be automatically categorized in trait terms. The
current research project expands on these findings to investigate other direct
and preconscious effects that the social environment has on psychological
phenomena. Specifically, we examine preconscious evaluation of people, objects,
and events, building on encouraging recent findings of an immediate and
reflexive classification of stimuli as either good or bad. Another preconscious
effect is the activation of one's chronic goals and motives by features of the
social situation in which they have been chosen frequently and consistently in
the past. Thus, goals to achieve or to be patient, and so forth may become
automatically tied to certain kinds of social situations, so that those
behaviors are triggered subsequently without conscious choice. Finally, the
special role that power features of a situation play in automatically triggering
one's goals is examined, especially in the context of examining the role of
power-goal links in the misuse of power for private ends. This program of
research considers the extent to which our emotions, judgments, and even
behavior may be outside of our conscious control. A considerable amount of
thought processes occur prior to one's conscious awareness of what is happening
in one's environment. We know a chair is a chair without having to think about
it, but this "given" of our conscious experience represents a good deal of very
fast mental work. This research examines the influence of fast, "preconscious"
thought processes on emotional feelings, motivations, and behavior. For example,
we may have immediate bad feelings just from seeing the name of a country where
we didn't ha ve a good experience, without any intention of remembering that bad
experience. And if one always pursues the same purpose within a type of
situation, such as at a party or a meeting with the boss, over time this goal
can be triggered just by being in that situation, without one needing to
consciously decide to pursue it. Using an experimental technique called
"priming", this research investigates the influence of preconscious thought
processes, such as those triggered by particular situations and racial groups,
on behaviors, such as task persistence and hostility, which occur without the
person's awareness of why they are behaving that way. As such, this research is
studying the mechanism of unconscious motivations. Among the implications of
this work will be insights into the pervasiveness of discrimination against
certain groups and the prospects for change.