* 9409319
* RIA: Coupled State-Space Filtering with Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Ali Sayed, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

The purpose of this research is to develop modular and parallelizable algorithms
for problems in adaptive filtering, robust estimation, control, and structured
matrix computations. A major motivation for this work is the need to properly
identify, model, and exploit convenient structures that might exist in a
particular problem in order to develop a computationally effective solution. An
intrinsic and relevant part of the proposed work is to first identify common
ingredients, as well as to explicitly clarify, the interrelations and interplays
that exist among several problems in the disciplines of control, signal
processing, and mathematics. In this regard, the proposed research develops a
unifying point of view that simultaneously addresses a variety of seemingly
unrelated problems in estimation, control, adaptive filtering, and matrix
computations. It shows that the solutions to many applications in these areas
turn out to share a key and surprisingly simple ingredient, namely, that of
computing the triangular factors of matrices that exhibit structure. The
significance of this particular fact and, more generally, of the proposed
research as a whole, is that it enables several well-understood concepts from
matrix theory and linear algebra to be applied in order to simplify the
derivation of a variety of algorithms, to propose new computationally efficient
variants, and to exploit new forms of structure. The proposed research consists
of theoretical investigations and algorithm implementations. The techniques
developed in this work have applications in several areas including, among
others, new windowing schemes for adaptive RLS filtering, analysis of gradient-
based algorithms, and modular and square-root algorithms for instrumental
variable methods, robust estimation, and control. Equally important is the
development of a systematic and unifying methodology.