* 9409697
* Research Initiation Award:  Job Scheduling and Memory       Management in Message-passing Multicomputers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Sanjeev Setia, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 08/31/1998
* USD 88,352.00

The main goal of this project is to investigate multiprogramming based task
scheduling in multiprocessor environments. This is based on the belief that,
like uniprocessors, multicomputers have to be multiprogrammed in order to
achieve a performance to cost ratio. Existing policies for resource sharing in a
multicomputer among multiple applications are static. This project will examine
issues that arise in the design and implementation of alternate job scheduling
policies that have a better performance than static policies. As a first step,
the workload on multicomputers will be characterized through experimental
measurement and analysis. The insights gained from this study will be used in
the design and implementation of adaptive and dynamic partitioning policies. In
particular, implementation issues involved in making adaptive and dynamic
partitioning transparent to the applications programmer will be examined. As a
part of the research, a run time system that provides support for application-
directed dynamic reconfiguration will be implemented. Another goal of the
research is to examine the impact of the introduction of virtual memory in newer
multicomputer systems on the performance trade-offs between various scheduling
policies. The working set sizes and memory reference patterns of several
scientific applications will be determined through simulation and analysis. This
information will be used in a simulation based study that examines the
interactions between processor allocation, node scheduling and memory management
in multicomputers that support virtual memory on each node of the system. ***