* 9409218
* The Third International Conference on Bioinformatics and    Genome Research at the Augustus B. Turnbull III, Florida    State Conference Center, Tallahassee, Fla., June 1-4, 1994
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1995
* Hwa Lim, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah A. Joseph
* 05/31/1995
* USD 5,000.00

The Supercomputer Computations Research Institute (SCRI) at the Florida State
University is organizing a conference entitled "The Third International
Conference on Bioinformatics and Genome Research", to be held at the Augustus B.
Turnbull III Florida State Conference Center, Tallahassee Florida, from June
1-4, 1994. This conference is the third biennial conference since it was started
by SCRI in 1990. The aim of the Third Conference is to provide a forum in which
experts from both the academic and industrial sectors, including young
researchers and students, can gather to interact. It is hoped that this will
afford them an opportunity to gain first-hand knowledge of the scope, direction,
and future prospects of informatics, computing and analysis techniques in genome
related areas. Speakers and participants will be computational experts,
experimentalists and technologists from around the world. The interdisciplinary
nature of the conference is designed to: o foster an exchange of ideas and
information among disciplines; and o lead to a transfer of technologies,
especially from the academic sector to the private sector. The focus of the
conference will be on the computational and experimental aspects of genome and
genome-related analyses. The subject areas cover: o Nucleic acid and protein
sequence research (Chairperson: Andrzej Konopka) o Computational/theoretical
integrative approaches to gene regulation and metabolism (Chairperson: Collado
Vidas) o Genome rearrangement (Chairperson: Pavel Pevzner) o Database
integration/interoperability (Chairperson: Hwa Lim) o Molecular informatics of
HIV (Chairperson: Hans Sieburg) o Linguistics approaches (Chairperson: Sarah
Barron) o Methods for understanding genetic data through graphic displays
(Chairperson: Janan Eppig) o Visualization of biological processes (Chairperson:
Heinrich Giese n). Leading experts in the field have committed to participate,
and four publishing companies have expressed interest in publishing the
conference proceedings. This is a proposal to seek funding to help support
conference speakers, post-doctoral fellows and students.