* 9409499
* The Distribution of Education Resources and Outcomes:       Lessons from 25 Years of Reforms
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Robert Schwab, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 06/30/1998
* USD 209,438.00

The purpose of this project is to analyze three sets of major policy issues in
education: 1) the distribution of education resources, 2) the distribution of
educational outcomes, 3) and the distribution of the benefits of education
reform. Regarding the distribution of educational resource, special attention
will be paid to the move in recent years to equalize school expenditures across
taxing jurisdictions. The questions to be addressed include to what extent has
the inequality of spending been reduced, and what evidence is there that
changing the distribution of spending has had important education benefits. With
respect to the second issue, the distribution of educational outcomes has
changed significantly over the past 25 years. For example, the gap between black
and white test scores and high school graduation rates has narrowed sharply.
Special attention will be focused on the determinants of these patterns. The
third issue of education reform will focus on the implication of increasing
school choice and increasing the role of the private sector in providing public
education. In particular, little is know about who the likely winners and losers
would be if the choice movement continues. Special attention will focus on the
analysis of the distribution of benefits from expanded choice.