* 9409587
* RIA: Hierarchical Decompositions for Adaptive Image and     Video Compression
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Kannan Ramchandran, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

This research is investigating a new and innovative class of adaptive and
hierarchical methods in image and video compression. It has two primary
objectives: (1) to develop a powerful and flexible infrastructure for addressing
new and challenging image communication applications, targeted at overcoming the
drawbacks of current state-of-the-art methods; and (2) based on this, to
formulate novel, optimal, fast algorithms using joint optimization methods. A
novel compression framework based on wavelets and efficient, flexible signal
descriptions using adaptive wavelet packets and adaptive quantization is being
explored. This research is also studying motion compensation in a new
hierarchical estimation- theoretic framework, and is formalizing the fundamental
subject of optimal resource allocation in a dependent coding environment. Joint
optimization of the source-coder functional components is being considered
throughout, and is being extended to include the channel for transmission
applications. The significance of this proposal lies in its laying the
theoretical framework for next-generation high-performance coders, which, we
conjecture, will need to be hierarchical and adaptive in their description and
will exploit interdependencies among their functional components optimally.
Results of the proposed study provide a new and useful knowledge-base for
current and future applications requiring scaleable and flexible architectures,
transcodability, and compatible subchannels, formats and displays.