* 9409829
* Medullary Electrosensory Processing
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1994,01/31/2000
* David Bodznick, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Avijit Chaudhuri
* 01/31/2000
* USD 355,168.00

When an animal moves around in its environment, the movement itself generates
stimuli that can affect all the sensory systems. It is important for an animal
to have some kind of adaptive mechanism to minimize this self-generated noise
that can interfere with detecting important sensory signals in the external
environment. This project uses the electrosensory system of an elasmobranch
fish, the skate, to analyze the neural circuits in the brain that provide such
mechanisms. Intracellular electrophysiological recording with dye labeling
allows identification of relevant nerve cell responses during self-generated
versus external stimuli. The mechanism for producing a differential cancellation
of common input is explored by testing the role of known inhibitory transmitters
on the cells involved. A novel approach here uses a weak external electrical
signal in the water that is directly coupled to the timing of fin movement,
which itself creates a signal detected by the electrosensory system. This
paradigm allows direct tests for whether the adaptive filter mechanism works by
an active process. Results will add an important comparative dimension to our
understanding of electrosensory systems, and will have implications for issues
of brain control of movement and sensation, which are fundamental for all
neuroscience, with added relevance to robotics and artificial neural systems.