* 9409028
* Computerization of the Mesoamerican and South American      Archaeological Collections of the Peabody Museum of Natural History
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Michael Coe, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 104,920.00

Coe With National Science Foundation support, the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural
History will computerize the catalogue records of its Mesoamerican and South
American archaeological collections. The collections have been acquired over a
period of more than 130 years and constitute a significant body of material of
great temporal depth and spatial breadth. They have been crucial in solving
important culture-history questions and continue to provide a valuable resource
for the study of pre-Conquest, complex cultures. The collections include
material acquired through systematic excavations from the Andean area in the
south to the Valley of Mexico in the north. Currently these collections are
recorded in 66,000 catalogue entries in handwritten, bound ledgers. This paper-
based format makes access to crucial descriptive data difficult and novel
searches of the data are impossible. With NSF support, this information will be
entered into Peabody Museum's computerized relational database system. This will
permit quick and efficient access and significantly enhance the research
potential of the collection. The system will also make the data available over
Internet, greatly increasing opportunities for use. Museum collections contain
valuable information which permit researchers to examine many scientific
questions. The Peabody materials can shed new light on how complex societies
develop and are maintained. They can illuminate principles of social
organization and change in technologically simple societies and increase our
understanding of human - environment interactions. This grant is important
because it will significantly increase the research potential of the
collections.