* 9409909
* Mathematical Sciences:  Stochastic Models of Dynamics       of DNA Repeats
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Marek Kimmel, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 01/31/1998
* USD 90,000.00

9409909 Kimmel The mechanisms of creation and evolution of repeats are important
for both theoretical reasons and for understanding the dynamics of recently
discovered disorders involving expansion of repeated DNA. We have been engaged
for a long time in studies of dynamics of gene amplification and cell
populations. We used and refined mathematical tools: multitype branching
processes, branching processes with continuous type space, branching random
walks and other. We propose two extensions of our modeling. One is dynamics of
expansion of arrays of tandem repeats, which can be viewed as the action of a
discrete stochastic dynamical system. The second concerns genetic aberrations
caused by dynamic expansions of chromosome regions including short multiple
tandem repeats of DNA. Both problems are the subject of active research by
molecular biologists. The goals of this work will be to test if mathematical
models based on qualitative biological models are sufficient to reproduce
experimental observations in quantitative detail, to provide a better
understanding of the molecular processes, and to suggest new experiments. Recent
experimental evidence shows that for a fraction of DNA, its amount per cell and
its structure are not constant. Much of this rapidly evolving DNA consists of
repeated sequences of various length. The mechanisms of creation and evolution
of these repeats are important for both theoretical reasons and for
understanding the recently discovered disorders involving expansion of repeated
DNA. We have been engaged for a long time in building mathematical and
statistical models in this field. Now, as more biological information is
becoming available, we propose further extensions of our modeling. We managed to
enlist collaboration of competent biological consultants. The goals of this work
will be to test if mathematical models based on qualitative biological theories
are sufficient to reproduce experimental observations in quantitative detail, to
provide a better understandin g of the molecular processes, and to suggest new
experiments.