* 9410843
* Dissertation Research: Contributions of Charophycean Algae  & Sphagnum Moss to Long-term Carbon Storage in Boreal       Peatlands.  Dissolved Organic Carbon Uptake & Carbon
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* James Graham, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Clifford N. Dahm
* 06/30/1996
* USD 27,800.00

Graham Boreal peatlands are a recognized site of carbon accumulation. Recent
data suggests the occurrence of two potential mechanisms for carbon retention
that have not previously been quantitatively assessed, namely, the uptake and
utilization of dissolved organic carbon (in the form of sugars), and production
of degradation-resistant cell wall polyphenolics by charophytes and Sphagnum
moss. The first of these processes removes liable forms of fixed carbon from the
environment, while the second generates relatively long-term storage forms of
carbon. Both processes interfere with the ability of bacteria to convert fixed
carbon back to CO2, and thus contribute to peatland carbon accumulation.
Cultured charophytes and Sphagnum will be used for cloning and sequencing of
sugar transport genes, and for gene expression studies. Field data for
charophyte diversity and biomass will be correlated with field measurements of
pH, DOC, DIC, and bacterial biovolumes, and with species-specific abilities to
load sugars and generate polyphenolic wall compounds measured with the use of
laboratory cultures. Assessments of Sphagnum production of resistant wall
materials and utilization of DOC by protonematal stages will also be made. The
goal of the project is to improve estimates for the amount of carbon sequestered
in peatlands.