* 9410326
* Collaborative:  Assessing the Genetic Potential and         Physiological Controls of N2 Fixation in 2 Temperature,     N-Limited Estuaries
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1997
* Douglas Capone, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1997
* USD 40,131.00

9410326 Capone Freshwater and marine primary production are often limited by the
availability of N, yet the characteristics of N2 fixing populations in the two
realms differ substantially. N2 fixing heterocystous cyanobacteria are prominent
planktonic features of N limited freshwater lakes and rivers. In N-limited
marine waters, if N2 fixation occurs at all, it is usually restricted to benthic
environments. The reasons for the striking differences in N2 fixer distributions
between marine and freshwater systems are not known, but could be due to
physico-chemical constraints such as salinity, turbulence, or other factors, or
they may reflect sources, diversity and expression (activity) of allochthonous
seed populations advected into the marine realm. The contrast between the
predominance of N2 fixing organisms in freshwater, and the apparent dearth of N2
fixing organisms in estuaries and oceans, provides the basis for the proposed
research. Our primary objective is to identify and characterize the sources,
diversity and distribution of N2 fixing genes in relation to environmental
control of nitrogen fixation activity along a salinity gradient in an N-limited
estuary of the Neuse River. The approach proposed here goes beyond the
conventional analysis and interpretation of the presence or absence of the
activity of N2 fixers by focusing on the fundamental relationships between the
genetic potential for this activity and the environmental factors regulating
species selection and expression of the N2 fixation apparatus. %%% A novel
aspect of this research is that this investigation will examine the importance
of ecological selection factors on microbial diversity with respect to how, why
and when natural waters can respond to N limitation with development of a
diazotrophic community and N2 fixing activity.