* 9410562
* The Architecture of Functional Categories in American Sign  Language
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Carol Neidle, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1998
* USD 355,000.00

Neidle Although some research on American Sign Language (ASL) syntax has been
done, the field still lacks consensus on even the most basic questions regarding
ASL phrase structure. Many theoretical controversies may, in fact, be a
consequence of inadequate means for written transcription and reporting of
visual-gestural data. This has precluded both the replicability of results and
accessibility of the raw data for direct inspection by the scientific community.
The representation of ASL signs using English-like glosses has obliterated-and
implicitly undervalued-extremely important manual and non-manual information
expressed through signing. Glosses are inconsistent and frequently ambiguous or
misleading. Reliance on glosses may well have given rise to incompatible and
contradictory theoretical claims found in the literature. We will develop a
prototype of a linguistically oriented computerized multimedia database of ASL
that allows simultaneous access to raw video data and to representations of that
data in linguistically useful formats. It is our hope that our prototype will
lead to subsequent funding for the development of a large-scale sign database,
accessible through a server, via the Internet, to the ASL research community. We
come to this task with a very specific research agenda: to test and refine the
hierarchical representation of functional categories in ASL that has emerged
from our recent studies focusing on Agreement; grammatical relations; and Tense
and Aspect. We have achieved sufficient understanding of the syntactic
organization of ASL to lay out the major components of its phrase structure, and
to identify what is needed to complete the picture. To answer those outstanding
questions, we will investigate several constructions in detail: the tag
construction, rhetorical questions, and relative clauses. We intend to use
standard methods of linguistic elicitation and argumentation, supported by
multimedia documentation of our da ta. While the two parts of the project are
different in nature, we believe that significant progress in the understanding
of ASL syntax can only be achieved by syntactic analyses based on the kind of
rigorous attention to data that current technologies now make possible.