* 9410612
* New Methods for the Exploratory Analysis of Geographical    Data
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Luc Anselin, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1996
* USD 82,289.00

9410612 ANSELIN The available methodology to carry out an "exploratory" analysis
of geographic data is limited, especially for the analysis of large data sets
that combine information from several points in time with large amounts of
geographic detail. In such instances, which are often characterized as data rich
but theory poor, the discovery of significant patterns of association (across
space, over time, and between multiple variables) is a crucial aspect of the
initial phase of scientific inquiry (i.e., the formulation of hypotheses). This
situation is increasingly encountered in empirical research as large
computerized data bases become available to researchers studying such topics as
global change, the spread of contagious diseases, and socio- economic dynamics.
The research proposed here will remove these impediments to the exploratory
analysis of geographical data by developing a set of new methods to assess
association in space- time, with special emphasis placed on categorical
variables. The new methods will be developed as an extension of the idea of a
general class of Local Indicators of Spatial Association (LISA) developed
earlier by the principal investigator. The proposed research consists of a
rigorous assessment of the statistical properties of the new methods by means of
a series of carefully designed simulation experiments. The new techniques will
be disseminated to the research community in the form of a software toolbox for
exploratory data analysis, based on an object oriented design. The potential of
the new methods for providing new insights in the analysis of large geographical
data bases will be illustrated in a case study of the human impacts of global
change. This project will provide much needed new statistical tools for
exploring relationships throughout space and over time and thus taking better
advantage of the large data bases that are being constructed and organized in
geographic information systems. The project will result in a set of new software
tools that will be made accessible to, and have a significant impact on, the
large research and business community who use such data bases.