* 9410227
* RIA:  Multiuser Detectors and Equalizers for Present and    Future Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1994,11/30/1997
* Alexandra Duel-Hallen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Fuja
* 11/30/1997
* USD 97,500.00

North State University Alexandra Duel-Hallen RIA: Multiuser Detectors and
Equalizers for Present and Future Wireless Networks The objective of this
research is to increase the capacity of wireless communications systems by
providing simple and reliable detection algorithms. The research is a multi-
pronged effort in the area of detection for wireless communication networks. The
first direction addresses multiuser receivers for Code-Division Multiple Access
(CDMA) systems. These low complexity adaptive multiuser detectors for CDMA
systems are expected to operate reliably in the presence of strong interferers.
Incorporation of the proposed receivers into CDMA systems should lead to
significant capacity improvements for the future generation of wireless
networks. The second direction is diversity reception for multipath fading
channels. The methods studied are expected to alleviate the shortcomings of the
existing frequency diversity receivers and improve the reliability of wireless
communications by resolving multipath present in the mobile environment. The
focus of the third component of the research is adaptive equalization for
present digital mobile radio systems. The thrust will be to find receivers that
are less complex and more reliable than those currently sued. The final
direction is the investigation of capacity improvement of packet radio or local
area networks using joint demodulation.