* 9410711
* Repeated Bargaining with Persistent Private Information:    Structural Estimation of Screening Equilibria
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1994,06/30/1999
* John Kennan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1999
* USD 192,207.00

9410711 Kennan This project aims to provide an evaluation of the empirical
relevance of strategic bargaining models. The ultimate goal is to develop
theoretically coherent empirical analyses of important policy issues in
collective bargaining. The strategic importance of private information has been
emphasized in many recent theoretical models, with applications in many fields.
It remains to be seen whether this large body of theory has much empirical
substance. The analysis of labor contracts is a good test-bed, since interesting
theories have been proposed, and good data are available. A serious limitation
of the recent literature is that each contract is treated in isolation. In
practice, labor negotiations involve contracts covering several years, and the
parties seem mindful of how the outcome of the current contract will affect
negotiations on the next contract. There is strong evidence that the likelihood
of a strike is influenced by what happened before the previous contract was
signed: a short strike last time means that the probability of a strike now is
about 40%, while if there was either a long strike or no strike last time the
current strike probability is below 20%. To analyze whether private information
might explain this pattern, a model of negotiations between a buyer and a seller
will be developed where the "pie" to be divided in each contract follows a
Markov chain, with transitions that are observed privately by the buyer. Each
negotiation consists of a sequence of offers made by the seller; the buyer can
only accept or reject each offer, and a contract is signed as soon as the buyer
accepts.