* 9410147
* Research Initiation Award:  Active Control of               Amphiphilicity:  In Situ Control of the Assembly of Redox-active Surfactants in Bulk Solution and at Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Nicholas Abbott, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9410147 Nicholas Abbott/U. Cal @ Davis Studies of water-soluble
surfactant molecules have, in the past, largely concentrated on systems in which
the amphiphilicity of each surfactant was fixed at the time of its synthesis; at
fixed temperature, pressure and composition, the properties of systems
containing these surfactants are invariant. The research proposed here moves to
active control of amphiphilicity, and aims to explore molecular-level principles
to change, in situ and reversibly, the amphiphilicity of molecules and thereby
control the surfactant-based properties of solutions and interfaces. Amphiphiles
with redox-active groups that change hydrophilicity with oxidation state will
designed and synthesized. Electrochemical and photochemical techniques will be
used to control, in situ, the oxidation states of redox-wettability,
micellization, and macroscopic phase-behavior of their solutions. The proposed
research aims to develop the capability to cycle, on time-scale of seconds,
properties of aqueous surfactant solutions and to direct changes in
amphiphilicity to specific regions of a solution or interface thereby creating
spatial gradients in their surfactant-based properties. The fundamental
relationships between the molecular structures of surfactants and their
collective properties will be investigated.