* 9410748
* Time-Resolved Photochemical Footprinting
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1995
* Michael Brenowitz, Yeshiva University
* Standard Grant
* Jack Horowitz
* 10/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9410748 Brenowitz Photochemical techniques have been researched and tested
enabling time-resolved determinations of the structures of protein-DNA complexes
that allow the reaction intermediates to be examined. This project will 1)
Determine the mechanism and specificity of cleavage of DNA by photolyzed
cobalamins; 2) Develop a rapid mixing-laser photolysis method to attain the goal
of millisecond time resolution for photochemical footprinting; and 3) Test the
new technology by examining the reaction mechanism of two sequence- specific DNA
binding proteins. This new technique will be immensely valuable in bridging the
gaps in present thermodynamic and structural analysis of protein-DNA
interactions. Since complex formation can be followed at single basepair
resolution, detailed structural information will be available at time
resolutions on the order of milliseconds to microseconds. The photochemical
footprinting protocols will be tested using the binding of the Eco RI
restriction endonuclease to its recognition sequence and the binding of the
'TATA' Binding Protein (TBP) to a promoter. Thus, it will be possible to study
for the first time the intermediate steps in the formation of the protein-
nucleic acid complex. %%% Understanding the mechanisms by which proteins
recognize and bind to specific DNA sequences is a key step towards understanding
cellular function and dysfunction. Protein-DNA interactions play important roles
in cellular processes such as gene replication, recombination and regulation.
The formation of protein DNA complexes is a complex process involving multiple
steps and many different chemical interactions. Significant insights have been
made into the mechanisms by which proteins bind to specific DNA sequences using
techniques that determine the three-dimensional structure of the complexes, and
independently by techniques that probe the chemistry of the interactions.
However, a severe limitation of such data is that they report only on the
endpoints of the binding reaction. Thus, the intermediate events in the binding
reaction, such as identification of initial recognition sites and induction of
changes in the conformation of the DNA have not been observed or studied.
Techniques are under development that utilize visible light to trigger chemical
reactions that will enable the time dependence of the reaction of proteins with
specific DNA sequences to be examined. This approach will greatly advance our
understanding of the molecular mechanism by which proteins recognize and bind to
specific sequences of DNA. ***