* 9410527
* Surface Chemistry and Spectroscopy from Model to Real       Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/1994,10/31/1999
* Paul Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 10/31/1999
* USD 604,000.00

9410527 Weiss This research program, supported in the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program, is focussed on developing an understanding of the scanning
tunneling microscope for determining molecular structure and spectra of adsorbed
species. The effects of local structure, defects and adsorbate interactions on
surface chemical and physical properties are studied in systems ranging from
isolated rare gas atoms and aromatic molecules to self asembled monolayers and
polymer films. Instrumental development and expansion of the capabilities of the
scanning probe microscope, including the development of the tunable microwave
frequency AC STM, form a large fraction of the research effort. Real systems of
fundamental and technological interest will be examined using scanning probe
microscopy in these studies. %%% Scanning tunneling microscopy has proven to be
an invaluable method for the examination of the detailed structure of surfaces
and molecules adsorbed on surfaces. The research supported in this program
addresses the detailed understanding of the imaging mechanism operative in
scanning probe microscopy. A full understanding of the mechanism of image
formation will enable the development of improved scanning probe methods,
increasing the range of interesting and technologically important surfaces and
adsorbed overlayers which can be probed with these methods. This instrumentation
development forms a large fraction of the work supported here.