* 9410608
* Theoretical and Computational Studies of Quantum Dynamical  Processes in Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1997
* Gregory Voth, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 01/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

Gregory Voth is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to perform studies of quantum dynamical processes in condensed
phase systems. He will employ the dynamical properties of the imaginary time
path centroid in the Feynman path integral formulation. The time position
correlation function in many-body systems will be computed using centroid
molecular dynamics. In this method classical-like equations of motion generate
centroid trajectories which are correlated and statistically weighted with the
phase space Feynman path integral centroid density. The resulting correlation
function can then be related by Fourier transform to the quantum position
correlation function. New algorithms will be developed to solve the centroid
molecular dynamics equations, and they will be applied to a number of condensed
phase studies including: 1) quantum tunneling and mode quantization effects in
liquid water; 2) diffusive transport of the hydrated electron in quantized
water; and 3) the quantum dynamical motion of an excess proton in water and
related systems. Gas phase chemical systems have been studied for a number of
years, and excellent theoretical and computational techniques have been
developed to model their behavior. More recently theoretical and computational
methods are being developed which make it possible to treat more complex
condensed phase systems. Most of the current theoretical models are classical in
nature, and cannot deal with the additional complications imposed by quantum
effects. Voth's research addresses this additional degree of complexity, and
proposes the development of computational approaches which will permit the
treatment of condensed phase systems which include various quantum degrees of
freedom.