* 9410923
* Adaptive Strategies During the Paleolithic-Neolithic        Transition in China
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Robert Bettinger, Intermountain Research
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1996
* USD 42,353.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Robert Elston and his
collaborators will conduct one season of archaeological survey in the Pigeon
Mountain Basin, Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, Peoples Republic of China. This
region is characterized by a dry desertic environment quite similar in apparent
ecology to areas within the United States Great Basin. The team will conduct
systematic survey of several square kilometers, record and map sites, make
extensive surface collections and conduct limited test excavations in a sample
of spring mounds as well as other likely localities. They will use these data to
begin a reconstruction of the culture history of the region and to examine the
changing pattern of human adaptation in relation to environmental features. In
particular they will focus on water utilization. Preliminary evidence indicates
that the Pigeon Mountain Basin was inhabited by hunter and gatherer groups at
the end of the last Ice Age and that at some later time a transition to
agriculture occurred. The team will examine changes in cultural adaptation over
this transition. Because one major goal of the research is to compare adaptive
patterns in desertic China and the Western U.S., a Chinese archaeologist will
also travel to the U.S. and conduct field research in the Malheur National
Wildlife Refuge in Oregon and analyze the materials collected. The goal of this
work is to understand how humans at a relatively simple level of technological
development adapt to extreme environmental conditions. A great deal of work has
been conducted in the Western U.S. and the culture history of this area is
reasonably well known. From these data archaeologists have attempted to draw
broad ranging conclusions about human adaptation, but without at least one more
case for comparison, it is impossible to know whether conclusions from one
region can be generalized. The work planned by Dr. Elston and his colleagues
will help to answer this question. The research is als o important because it
will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and because it will
strengthen scientific ties between the PRC and the U.S.