* 9410749
* Monitoring Dangers in an Uncertain World
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2000
* Michal Tamuz, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2000
* USD 131,572.00

This project is a study of how organizations collect information about and learn
from near accidents, events which under slightly different circumstances could
have resulted in an accident. Organizations monitor these potential dangers to
learn how to cope with dangers, i.e., low probability, high negative consequence
events. In this research, a comparison is made to how near accident monitoring
systems operate in the medical device, nuclear power, space shuttle, and air
transportation industries. Specifically, the research is based on an analysis of
interviews with key participants in a variety of safety information systems, and
reports generated within previous studies in the air transportation industry.
The proposed research draws on and seeks to contribute to the study of risk
management, information processing, and organizational learning. Additionally,
it has broader implications for organizational management of other areas of
risky events, such as the extreme weather events that may become more frequent
or unpredictable under global environmental change. The purpose of the projects
is to identify factors which constrain (or enhance) the organizational capacity
to collect information about and learn from near accidents (or near disasters).
The focus is on three main research questions: 1) How does the organization of
safety information systems affect the volume (e.g., reliability) and contents
(e.g., validity) of information collected and the organizational capacity to
learn from near accident information? 2) To what extent do attention-related
factors affect the volume of near accident reporting over time? and 3) How do
organizations learn from near accidents? Specific research questions are
developed for each of these main research questions. To illustrate, the first
research question includes a discussion of the definition and interpretation of
near accidents in which the dimensions of vulnerability vs. robustness, learning
vs. controlling behavior, and ambiguous vs. clearly -defined definitions are
considered. The research will help address such policy questions as: If an
organization collects information for purposes of controlling behavior, does it
lessen the amount of near accident reporting and increase the self-interested
bias that distorts accounts of potential dangers?