* 9410473
* RIA: Three-Dimensional Nonlinear Cyclic Analysis of         Concrete-Filled Tube Beam-Columns and Composite             Subassemblies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Jerome Hajjar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1998
* USD 110,000.00

9410473 Hajjar This is a Research Initiation Award to study the force
displacement response and ultimate strength behavior of composite subassemblies
of unbraced frames. Structural engineers are increasingly realizing the economic
benefits of using concrete filled steel tube (CFT) beam-columns in low and
medium-rise construction, and they expect the demand for CFTs to grow
significantly in the next decade. Detailed but efficient numerical simulation,
coupled with experimental research, is the only practical means of understanding
CFT behavior. Yet only insufficient research has been conducted on CFTs to date.
The subassemblies to be studied in this project consist of steel I girders
framing into rectangular CFT beam-columns subjected to either monotonic or
cyclic loading. The project's objectives are: 1) to develop a practical, three-
dimensional, nonlinear, fiber-based finite element formulation to represent CFT
beam columns; 2) to develop compatible nonlinear models to represent the girder-
to-column connection and panel zone region; 3) to implement these formulations
in an existing composite frame analysis system, and to calibrate the
formulations against experimental data; and 4) to conduct comprehensive
parametric studies of individual CFT beam- columns and composite subassemblies.
The parametric studies will be conducted to provide the data required to improve
the accuracy and scope of current non-seismic and seismic design specification
provisions. This fiber analysis will also facilitate investigation of new
composite CFT systems, and permit experimentalists to both predict and interpret
their test results. ***