* 9410297
* SGER:  The Effects of Chaparral Fire on Chemically Mediated Intraspecific Predation
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Lee Kats, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1995
* USD 5,170.00

9410297 Kats Cannibalism has been documented in a wide variety of kinds of
animals. However, given recent emphasis on predator-prey interactions, few
studies have examined mechanisms that mediate predation on members of the same
species. Adult California newts prey on both eggs and larvae of the same
species. Dr. Kats has demonstrated in both laboratory and field experiments that
newt larvae respond to chemical cues from adults by increasing the amount of
time they spend in refuge. On 2 November 1993, a wildfire burned Dr. Kats's
primary study site near Malibu, California. There are virtually no studies on
the effects of major fire disturbances on animal behavior. To determine the
effects of fire on chemically mediated newt cannibalism, Dr. Kats and his
students will test two hypotheses: (1) Changes in stream water caused by runoff
from recently burned hillsides will interfere with the detection of
intraspecific predator cues by California newt larvae, and (2) changes in stream
water caused by runoff from recently burned hillsides will interfere with the
egg-eating behavior of adult California newts. These hypotheses are particularly
exploratory in nature because no previous study has attempted to examine the
effects of wildfire on chemically mediated animal behavior. Results from the
experiments to be conducted by Dr. Kats and his students could make significant
contributions to understanding the effects of unpredictable environmental
disturbances and perturbations (wildfire in this case) on behavioral
interactions.