* 9410747
* Multidimensional Mechanism Design:  Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Ennio Stacchetti, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1996
* USD 55,903.00

9410747 Stacchetti Mechanism design problems arise naturally in numerous
economic situations, including the regulation of a monopolist, auctions,
government procurement, nonlinear pricing, and the provision of public goods.
There is a vast literature in each one of these major fields of application by
now, but for the most part, the analysis has been reduced to the case in which
uncertainty is modelled by a single parameter, and the number of goods is
restricted to two (one of the two goods is typically money). The technical
difficulties presented by higher dimensional cases have impeded progress, and
delayed our understanding of economic applications. The project develops new
techniques in the theory of multidimensional mechanism design, and applies these
techniques to several important economic problems. More specifically, the
techniques for multidimensional mechanism design developed by this project are
based on the work of Rochet and Armstrong. For problems with a certain linear
structure (including auctions with externalities and pricing in multiproduct
monopolies) conjugate duality leads to an envelope condition and a full
characterization of incentive compatible mechanisms. The divergence theorem
takes the place of integration by parts, which is used in the one-dimensional
case to simplify the objective function of the principal. In a symmetric auction
with externalities, these techniques allow one to identify the only buyer type
whose participation constraint binds at the optimal solution. Myerson's notion
of "regularity", which is so crucial in one-dimensional problems, has a more
complicated but useful analog in higher dimensions. The symmetric auction model
with externalities of Jehiel, Moldovanu and Stacchetti is extended by relaxing
the assumption of symmetry and considering the case where buyers experience
externalities even when the seller keeps the object. Dynamic games are
investigated where there is a strategic motive for buying t he objective,
namely, to resell it later. The generalized regularity analysis alluded to above
would extend Armstrong's results on pricing and regulation to multiproduct
monopolies to a much wider range of economic environments.