* 9410979
* The Effect of Environment on The Fatigue and Fracture       Response of Advanced Polymers and Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Lisa Pruitt, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sunil Saigal
* 02/29/1996
* USD 18,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9321887 William Marsh Rice University P. I.: Riki Kobayashi A new
five-parameter extended corresponding states model has been developed for
viscosity and proton spin-lattice relaxation rate applicable to a variety of
hydrocarbons in the dense fluid phase. Simple mixing rules allows extension of
the model to mixtures. This proposed model is shown to bring improvements over
the viscosity model of Ely and Hanley 1, 2 , for cyclic and branched alkanes,
and their mixtures with n-paraffins. The corresponding states treatment of the
proton spin-lattice relaxation rate, R1, yields a new correlation between R1 and
temperature for saturated hydrocarbons, spanning three different processes of
spin relaxation (i.e. spin-rotation, intramolecular and intermolecular dipole-
dipole mechanisms). Accurate correlations between {SYMBOL 104 \f "Symbol"} are
generated for pure and mixed fluids, with observed root-mean-square deviations
of less than 8.0%. This new approach utilizes shape factors 3 to properly
predict p-v-t surfaces; and two additional constants to account for transport.
The new parameters, {SYMBOL 103 \f "Symbol"} for viscosity, and {SYMBOL 98 \f
"Symbol"} for R1, mainly arise from hindered rotation of polyatomic molecules.
The four-parameter corresponding states treatment, utilizing only the shape
factors 3 , yields correlations of comparable accuracy, when confined to long-
chain alkanes.