* 9410022
* Research Initiation Award:  Motion of Particles in          Non-Newtonian Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Howard Hu, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 06/30/1997
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract Howard Hu CTS-9410022 This project is an experimental and numerical
investigation for motion and interactions of rigid particles in non-Newtonian
fluids. The experiments will be performed with particles of different shapes in
sedimentation and suspension systems of polymer solutions. The numerical
simulation will be based on a finite element package which handles the unsteady
and non-linear coupling of the motion between fluid and solid particles. The
effects of non-Newtonian properties of shear-rate dependent viscosity, normal
stress differences and elasticity of fluids on the motions and interactions of
particles will be examined, and the mechanisms that control the behavior of
particles in those non-Newtonian fluids will be identified. Five topics are
outlined in this study: (1) stable orientation of long particles sediments in
non-Newtonian fluids; (2) particle-wall interactions and wall effects on
particle motion; (3) equilibrium position and migration of sedimenting and
suspended particles; (4) interactions between particles and flow induced
structures; (5) flow of fiber suspensions. Results of these project will
contributed to the fundamental knowledge of dynamics of non-Newtonian fluids,
and to the modeling of flows of polymeric liquids with suspended particles. They
will find through the use of polymer solutions. ***