* 9410851
* Application of Molecular Biological Research in Agriculture,Health and Environment, U.S-Pakistan Workshop, Lahore,      Pakistan, March 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Lawrence Grossman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1996
* USD 36,000.00

9410851 Grossman Description: This project is to support participation of twelve
U.S. scientists in a regional symposium and workshop on applications of
molecular biological research in agriculture, health, and the environment, to be
held in Lahore, Pakistan, in March 1995. The symposium-workshop will be preceded
by a two week training course for sixteen young researchers in relevant
molecular biological techniques, and other methodologies and concepts. This will
help them participate in the discussions of the symposium workshop sessions. The
basic science sessions will include: recombination and restriction modification,
molecular basis of genetic transformation in bacteria, repair of UV irradiated
DNA in procaryotes, characterization of UV repair genes in M. Luteus.
Applications sessions will include: plant molecular biology (crop improvement
strategies, transformation of certain crops, control of plant insects losses)
and human genome, and challenges of therapeutics and diagnostics. Scope: This
project involves some of the most well known leaders in molecular biology in the
U.S. and Europe in an undertaking to enhance this very important field in one of
the world's most heavily populated regions. Participants will include some
hundred scientists from Pakistan, and from neighboring countries. The initial
two week training, followed by the one week symposium workshop provide for the
exchange of information, based on solid foundation of understanding of the
subject matter. Past meetings have led to research collaboration between the
U.S. and foreign participants. The topics of this meeting are quite relevant to
the needs and to the capabilities of the participating south Asian countries,
and are also important to the United States. The project fits well with the INT
objectives. ***