* 9410720
* Semiconductor Quantum Electron-Wave Optoelectronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Gregory Henderson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/1998
* USD 315,000.00

9410720 Gaylord Mid-infrared and far-infrared sources are needed for eye-safe
wireless optical networks, remote sensing, medical treatment, and numerous other
applications. This project investigates the modeling, fabrication, and testing
of a new class of semiconductor optoelectronic sources directed at this need.
These devices are based on quantum-mechanical electron-wave propagation effects.
The quantitative analogies between electromagnetic propagation in dielectrics
and ballistic electron transport in semiconductors, as developed with previous
support, are being used to design nanostructure infrared emitters, detectors,
and modulators. The optical transitions in these new devices use classically-
free quasibound energy levels. In these energy states, an electron is free
(unbound) classically. However, due to their quantum-mechanical wave nature,
optical interference effects produce spatial confinement in Fabry-Perot type
states. Using these quasibound states, the design, fabrication and testing of
the first room-temperature semiconductor mid-infrared semiconductor laser is
being attempted. Procedures are being developed that allow the energy positions
and lifetimes of the quasibound states to be specified so that the wavelength of
the laser can be chosen arbitrarily. In addition to optical methods for
evaluating these devices, a series of independent measurements of electron
transport through these nanostructures is being performed using the methods of
ballistic electron emission microscopy/spectroscopy (a type of scanning
tunneling microscopy). This allows separate independent testing of the
electronic characteristics of the designed structures.