* 9410148
* Studies of the Magnetic Properties of Thin Films,           Heterostructures and Superlattices Containing Iron
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1994,08/31/1999
* James Walker, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9410148 Walker In recent years the Principal Investigators have been making
nano- scale magnetic thin-films, superlattices, and heterostructures by
Molecular Beam Epitaxy. Not only do they produce new magnetic materials by these
techniques, but they also study fundamental aspects of magnetism. The group
detect weak interlayer magnetic coupling between thin (110) Iron layers through
intervening layers of (111) Silver and (111) Copper. These studies are important
for understanding the mechanisms of giant magnetoresistance in these multilayer
systems. This phenomenon is beginning to be exploited for magnetic read-write
heads for high density magnetic disk memories. % % % % This research involves
making new magnetic materials by careful engineering at the atomic level. Normal
magnetic materials such as iron are alternated with both non-magnetic materials
such as gold, copper, silver and with other magnetic materials to make repeated
atomic-scale multilayer system whose magnetic properties can be tailored to
particular applications by controlling the relative thickness of the various
layers. This area of research is being vigorously pursued in a number of
countries because of its potential technological importance. Already these
materials are coming into use by International Business Machines (IBM) to make
magnetic recording heads for very high density computer disks. ***