* 9410005
* Research Initiation:  Enhancing Reusability by Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Bert Bras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/1998
* USD 89,998.00

9410005 Bras A growing concern about the environment, and especially about waste
and landfill, has spurred research into the design of more environmentally
benign products. A dramatic reduction in environmental impact can be made by
product reuse in which, in contrast to material recycling, the geometrical form
of the product is retained and its associated economical and environmental value
is preserved. However, attempts to generate formal and systematic design
approaches which include environmental considerations such as reusability as
well as economical, mechanical and other design considerations break down when
confronted with the need to quantify environmental properties and requirements.
In this research the objective is to identify efficient and effective metrics
for quantifying and enhancing reusability in design. In order to achieve this
objective, reusability metrics are postulated based on life cycle factors
affecting reusability of engineering systems. A validation strategy is developed
to determine the correctness and validity of these metrics. Among others, the
postulated metrics are verified using historical design and service data from
cooperating industrial partners. Uncertainty and variability are key aspects
which are taken into account as well. Design of environmentally benign products
is an area of critical national importance. Successful research results could be
used by the industrial design community to improve the product development
activities. The project has strong industrial support.