* 9410756
* Regulation of GTP-Induced Depolarizations in Paramecium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Todd Hennessey, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/1998
* USD 313,750.00

9410756 Hennessey Paramecium is an excellent system for studying sensory
transduction mechanisms in eukaryotic cells because behavioral mutants can be
selected to genetically dissect a sensory transduction pathway. Also, swimming
behavior can be used as a convenient bioassay to estimate the effects of drugs,
antibodies, and mutations on the electrophysiological properties of the cell. In
Paramecium, attractants generally cause hyperpolarization and fast forward
swimming while repellents depolarize and can cause backward swimming. External
GTP is a repellent at concentrations as low as 0.01 micromolar. It elicits novel
repetitive somatic (body) depolarizations which cause bouts of backward
swimming. Adaptation occurs within 1 minute, causing a return to normal
swimming. This research is designed to test the hypothesis that external GTP is
recognized by a body plasma membrane purinergic receptor to activate a novel
somatic calcium conductance. This triggers repetitive somatic plateau
depolarizations. if receptor-operated channels are involved, there may be second
messenger involvement in either their activation, deactivation, or adaptation.
The objectives are to: 1) Identify and characterize the ion channels or
transporters responsible for GTP-induce somatic depolarizations and describe the
ion dependence, pharmacology, kinetics, and possible second messenger
involvements. Established intracellular current injection and voltage clamp
procedures will be used. The second messengers cAMP, cGMP and calcium will be
assayed during exposure to GTP; 2) Use behavioral bioassays to screen drugs and
mutations for effects on responses to external GTP. New behavioral mutants will
be selected by behavioral selection techniques and characterized; and 3) Use
microinjection "curing" of behavioral mutants to identify the altered gene
products of mutants. The goal is to understand the biochemical and
electrophysiological mechanisms involved in GTP-induced responses and sensory a
daptation in Paramecium. This will contribute to a better understanding of
purinergic responses and chemosensory transduction mechanisms in eukaryotic
cells. %%% Living cells can sense and respond to chemicals in their environment.
The first indication of such a cellular response is usually a change in the
electrical properties of the cell membrane. The goal of this research is to
understand how single cells sense chemicals and respond to them. The free-
swimming, single-celled organism, Paramecium provides an excellent opportunity
to study the molecular bases of these responses. Paramecium can be grown in
large numbers in solutions resembling pond water; the electrical properties of
its membrane can be studied using techniques of electrophysiology; and its
genetics are well understood and mutants can be generated that affect the
organism's swimming behavior. Swimming behavior can be used as a convenient
assay for changes in its chemical sensing machinery. One chemical that
Paramecium can sense very well at very low concentrations is an organic
molecule, GTP. External GTP is a powerful repellent for these cells. They swim
away from it at concentrations as low as 10.0 nanomolar. Many types of
behavioral mutants will be generated that do not respond to GTP, and the details
of their biochemical and physiological defects will be characterized. In this
way the important components of the cellular GTP sensation pathway will be
identified. The results of this research will provide important insights into
how cells sense chemicals in their environment and respond to them. ***