* 9410580
* The Dynamics of Rural Industrialization:  Comparative       Studies of the Re-Organization of Work
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Gillian Hart, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1996
* USD 78,867.00

9410580 HART Although emerging patterns of rural industrialization are part of
an integrated set of global processes, characterized in part by capital mobility
and the declining power of labor unions, these processes are experienced in
different ways in different settings. The purpose of this study is to
investigate the processes of agrarian reform and rural industrialization in
South Africa and Malaysia to identify the commonalities and divergent paths of
local, rural economies set within an integrating global system. This research
rests on a framework in which the particular form and trajectory of rural
transformation (in terms of sectoral and distributional change) hinge on local
power structures, institutional arrangements, and types of resource access and
use. These factors are examined within the specific context of macro-economic
and macro-political structures and processes. Ethnographic, longitudinal, and
comparative analysis methods will be used to apply this framework to the
conditions and dynamics of rural change in the two settings. Both South Africa
and Malaysia have experienced initial state development efforts and, more
recently, unplanned industrial decentralization into selected rural areas, yet
the circumstances, mechanisms, outcomes, and implications for the distribution
of power and development vary substantially between them. This study will make
two levels of contributions. At a practical level it will help to inform policy
debates in South Africa. Questions of rural industrialization in South Africa
assume particular significance in light of World Bank-led discussions of
agrarian reform and economic development in the new South African political
regime. At a more theoretical and methodological level, the proposed study will
contribute to bridging the gap between "first world" and "third world"
literature and debates on the socio-spatial reorganization of work.