* 9410880
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Between Property and       Privilege:  The State, Property Rights, and Business in     Porfirian Mexico (1876 - 1911)
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Stephen Haber, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* C. Neal Tate
* 12/31/1995
* USD 8,520.00

9410880 Haber This Dissertation Improvement research examines the economic
consequences of legal institutions within the transitional economy of Porfirian
Mexico during the period of 1876-1911. The study will analyze the institutional
framework for economic activity and the contractual relations between government
and private enterprise in a state where institutional reform was implemented to
eliminate traditional constraints to industrial innovation and economic growth.
One set of legal institutions, the federal New Industries (IN) act of 1893, will
be examine to see how the government allocated and adjudicaton property rights.
Hypotheses about how well Mexican property rights were defined and whether
Mexico business was highly politicized will be tested and an analysis completed
of the effects of property rights policies on investments levels and the
competitive structure of industry. In sum, this project will re-examine the
Mexican political economy using theoretical tools of the economic theory of
property rights. Data will be collected through examining extant legislation,
congressional debates and newspaper commentaries to ascertain the intentions of
those who established and administered public policy regarding property rights
and economic promotion. The complete administrative records of the IN program
available in the Mexican national archive and supplementary materials in the
notarial and judicial archives will also be used. In addition, data will be
collected from the financial press.