* 9410759
* Exchange of Atmospheric Methane with Soils of Forests and   Pastures in Brazil
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Eric Davidson, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/1998
* USD 276,792.00

The few data that exist on exchange of atmospheric methane with tropical soils
are equivocal. Upland temperate soils are thought to be sinks of CH4, and site
disturbance usually decreases rates of CH4 uptake by soils, but these
generalizations have not been tested widely in the tropics. Indeed, preliminary
evidence suggests that high rates of soil respiration and low gas diffusivities
in fine textured soils of the eastern Amazon can result in CH4 production in
tropical forest soils. Moreover, knowledge of the effects of changing land uses
on CH4 fluxes in the tropics is rudimentary at best. The first objective of this
research is to assess variation in CH4 fluxes caused by land uses, diurnal
cycles, seasonal cycles, within-site heterogeneity, and events in primary
forests, secondary forests, active pastures of varying age, and abandoned
pastures in eastern Amazon. The second objective is to test two mechanistic
hypotheses: that gas diffusivity in soils controls CH4 fluxes; and that enhanced
NH4+ availability can inhibit CH4 consumption. It is expected that diffusivity,
estimated from profiles of 222Rn and from CClF3 tracer experiments, will be the
dominant factor affecting production and consumption of CH4. Characterizing the
effects of land use in this area of active logging and ranching, and describing
these effects mechanistically will improve our understanding of how human
activities impact atmospheric methane.