* 9410117
* RIA:  Tractable Reasoning in Knowledge Representation       Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Mukesh Dalal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,001.00

9410117 Dalal A general-purpose knowledge representation (KR) system allows
explicit representation of and reasoning with various kinds of information. A
critical problem in present-day KR systems is caused by the tradeoff between the
expressiveness of the representation language and the computational complexity
of reasoning with it -- deductive reasoning with sufficiently expressive
languages is inherently intractable. In preliminary work in addressing this
problem, the PI has developed a technique for generating tractable approximate
reasoners, and a parameter, called intricacy, whose finite value for a
representation language indicates that reasoning with it is tractable. The
preliminary approach has some serious limitations. First, although there are
many approximate reasoners that can be obtained using the technique for any
given application, the PI has not provided any systematic way for among them.
Second, although he has shown that many known tractable cases of reasoning have
finite intricacy, he has not used this parameter for obtaining new non-trivial
tractability results. The proposed research addresses these limitations. The PI
proposes to evaluate various approximate reasoners by implementing and testing
them on KR systems used in some real-world applications; this evaluation will be
used to develop guidelines for choosing appropriate reasoner for a given
application. The PI also proposes to use intricacy for obtaining new non-trivial
tractable cases that are characterized by efficiently-identifiable syntactic
features.