* 9410086
* Collaborative Research:  Developmental Ecology of Mayapple
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1999
* Cynthia Jones, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 11/30/1999
* USD 164,000.00

9410086 Jones Whether a plant is able to persist in a particular natural
environment is determined by its reproductive success, or fitness, through
evolutionary time. Among the determinants of reproductive success are the
schedule of reproduction, i.e. the life history, and the resources available for
reproduction. Because a plant's reproductive success is directly influenced by
the number of reproductive structures (flowers), plants face a tradeoff between
producing flowers that increase reproductive output immediately, versus
producing new vegetative structures (leaves and roots) that enhance resource
uptake and may lead to higher reproductive success over the life of the plant.
This tradeoff is complicated by the interaction between (1) a plant's inherent
developmental program, which influences when and what type of new structure will
be made, and (2) the efficiency of that structure in resource accumulation,
which in turn influences the plant's subsequent developmental program. The
influence of this interaction between a plant's developmental program and
resource accumulation on the proportion of reproductive individuals in the
population, i.e. the population's demography, is poorly understood. Interactions
between developmental program, resource uptake and use, and demography in an
herbaceous perennial clonal plant, mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum) will be
examined. Mayapple is an ideal plant for such a study because each year each
rhizome faces a simple developmental decision--to produce either a single
foliage leaf, or a simple reproductive shoot bearing a single flower and two
foliage leaves. Long-term studies of naturally occurring populations will be
used to (1) construct a timetable of developmental decisions for mayapple,
emphasizing how and when the type of new aerial "shoot" is determined, (2)
examine the interaction between resources acquired in the past and those
acquired in the current year on current and future determination of shoot type
and (3) determine whether dif ferences in the timing of developmental events
among different clones affects their reproductive output over the long term. The
results of this study will reveal how variation in developmental timing and
resource uptake affect demography. Moreover, this study will reveal at what
points selection may act to alter the timing of the expressed developmental
program, thus contributing to our understanding of how different life histories
evolve, a critical issue for plants facing a rapidly changing environment. These
results will contribute to understanding how variation in developmental timing
affects vegetative and reproductive productivity in economically important
plants as well.