* 9410476
* RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD: Use of Molecular Techniques to   Evaluate Causes and Control of Foaming in Activated Sludge  Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Lutgarde Maria Raskin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 07/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

Raskin 9410476 This is an award to provide support for research on the causes
and control of foaming in aerobic and anaerobic, suspended growth bioreactors.
The investigator plans on designing oligonucleotide rRNA-targeted probes that
are specific for identifying several foam-causing microorganisms. The probes
will be used to study and characterize the conditions that lead to foaming and
the microbiological flora associated with foaming in bioreactors that are used
in waste treatment processes. Foaming is a problem commonly associated with
bioreactors used in wastewater treatment processes and in the processing of
residuals produced during the treatment process. The foaming problem is
frequently associated with conditions that result in dominance by filamentous
microorganisms in the reactors. Results of this research are expected to provide
new insights into the causes of foaming and the potential for its control. This
knowledge is expected to be applied in improving the operation of existing
bioreactors and in improving the engineering design of systems utilizing
bioreactors. The proposal leading to this award was submitted in accord with NSF
92-122, Research Initiation Awards Program. ***