* 9410872
* Dissertation Research: The Influence of Landscape           Heterogeneity on Insect Population Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Peter Kareiva, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1997
* USD 9,000.00

9410872 KAREIVA The ecological landscape in today's world is becoming
increasingly characterized by a checkerboard-like mosaic of diverse habitats
encompassing urban, agricultural, and natural environments. Ecologists have yet
to devise a general theory pinpointing the effects, and more importantly, the
mechanisms behind the effects that mixed landscapes may have upon resident
populations. The investigators have chosen to conduct a field experiment in
which non-crop vegetation (e.g. weeds) is incorporated into a crop field. The
experimental design includes varying mixtures of crop and weed at different
scales as well, so that investigators can determine the usefulness of such
mixtures in a variety of general farmland scenarios. The data from these
experimental field tests will be incorporated into different mathematical
models, in the hopes of elucidating the mechanisms operating in the field. This
mix of empiricism and theory will lead to a protocol for determining, in any
given setting, how and at what scale mixing landscape types may affect insect
populations. Incorporating data obtained in field experiments into mathematical
models will generalize to many different real-life scenarios in which organisms
move through combinations of diverse landscapes. Any such general guidelines
combining agricultural production and natural vegetation should be an important
contribution ln light of the current trend towards increasing landscape
fragmentation as well as increasing population pressure.