* 9410039
* Structural Empirical Research on Production and Value
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Robert Hall, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1997
* USD 153,369.00

9410039 Hall The research will focus on three related projects. The first
project will study the determinants of productivity across the states of the
United States. The cross-state analysis attempts to assess the role of
geographic proximity as a determinant of productivity. The model also accounts
for cross- state spillovers and spillovers from different types of goods. The
second project will study variations in productivity across countries with a
host of explanatory variables. The main emphasis is on examining the importance
of rent-seeking behavior on productivity. The third project will examine the
creation of value within manufacturing corporations in the United states and
will investigate the extent to which various aspects of corporate governance
affect the creation of value within corporations. The emphasis in this part of
the study is on examining the role of variables such as the size of the board of
directors, the role of the management of the board, and the incentive programs
for managers, among others things, in creating value. This project is important
because it promises to provide results that would greatly enhance our
understanding of differences in productivity across states in the United States
and differences in productivity across countries.