* 9410357
* RIA:  Networking Issues in Mobile Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Suresh Singh, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 06/30/1997
* USD 138,112.00

NCR 9410357 University of South Carolina Suresh Singh RIA: Networking Issues in
Mobile Computing In the near future mobile users will be able to access a wide
variety of services that have so far been available only to users connected to
fixed networks. Mobile users will be able to access data while on the move.
Numerous problems from diverse areas such distributed data management, security,
networking protocols, etc. have to be solved to enable this environment. The
focus of this work is on identifying and solving a wide range of networking
problems such as developing practical network architectures to support mobility,
protocols to manage mobile connections in ways that guarantee uninterrupted
service, defining quality of service guarantees and ensuring graceful service
degradation in situations where user demands exceed the network's capacity to
satisfy them. The problem areas targeted in this work are fundamental to
developing workable mobile computer networks. The approaches undertaken are
practical in the sense that they will hopefully lead to engineering solutions
that will be incorporated into actual designs in the future. An attempt will be
made to provide solutions which will facilitate easy integration of the mobile
networks into the high-speed networking technology in the fixed plant.