* 9410490
* Undergraduate Design Projects:  Custom-Designed Devices for the Physically Disabled
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2000
* Richard Culver, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 08/31/2000
* USD 133,642.00

9410490 Culver The proposed research is in the Undergraduate Design Projects
Program category, and requests support for undergraduate and graduate student
engineers to provide prototype "custom designed" devices and software to aid
persons with disabilities. The primary goal of this thrust is to provide
meaningful design experience for the engineering student that will directly aid
a specific disabled individual. A formal program is in place at SUNY Binghamton
which will ensure satisfactory progress is attained on these projects. A group
of students and the investigators on the grant will work with a number of
collaborating agencies and individuals on these projects. Fifty- five projects
are planned during the five ear duration of this award, and a written report on
the completed projects will be submitted for an annual publication. Once
completed, each project will be given to the person for whom it is designed. The
hope is that this "real world" experience will give engineering students a sense
of purpose and pride, help engineering schools serve the community, attract new
students into engineering, and raise student interest in graduate education.
This type of undertaking is important since it provides a meaningful experience
for engineering students as part of their undergraduate design requirements, and
will also benefit a population where customization is often needed for
rehabilitation devices. ***