* 9410933
* Collaborative Research:  Higher-Order Information Storage   through Spatially-Ordered Synaptogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Bartlett Mel, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Walter Wilczynski
* 07/31/1998
* USD 182,009.00

9410933 Mel This collaborative project between a young theorist and two
experienced experimentalist to test a new theory of what happens in the brain
during learning.. The theory says that learning in the mammalian cortex is
guided by a balance between two distinct mechanisms. One is the continual
activity-independent changes in the connections between neurons (called
synapses) that tend to randomize the place on a neuron where an incoming
afferent neuron establishes its connection. The second is an activity-dependent
process in which the connections of afferent neurons that are active at the same
time are stabilized if they happen by chance to be close together. This means
that groups of frequently co- activated inputs to the brain come together to
form neighboring synapses and, therefore, have a more powerful effect on their
target neurons. This theory will be tested experimentally by looking
anatomically at the spatial arrangement of afferent synapses on target neurons
when the afferent neurons are artificially induced to have correlated activity.
The theory will also be tested by simulating this type of biological experiment
on a computer. The outcome of these studies promises to have a significant
impact on the way we think about how the brain does the computations that allow
us to learn complicated patterns.