* 9410160
* Infant Movement Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Neil Berthier, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 06/30/1998
* USD 128,626.00

The cognitive capacities of infants are evident in the way they use reaching to
manipulate and explore their environment. Infants demonstrate considerable
capacity to adjust their reaches to different tasks, and to use particular
strategies to solve particular tasks. At present it is not clear why infants use
particular ways of reaching in different situations, or why the kinematics of
reaching changes so dramatically during development. The present proposal
suggests that infant reaching kinematics are mainly determined by the internal
constraints imposed by the infant's lower-level motor systems and by the
external constraints imposed by the task. The current proposal suggests that
infant motor planning can be modelled as the development of a plan to control a
stochastic dynamical system representing the lower-level motor systems. This
formulation of the planning problem, together with a small number of testable
assumptions, predicts motor behaviors, and spotlights the aspects of the reach
that are most important in controlling the arm, and guides experimental design.
The proposed research examines the kinematics of infant reaches in several tasks
and compares the infant's movements with movement plans predicted by a
mathematical model. The research tests whether adults will adopt infant-like
strategies when forced to execute movements with a model of the infants lower-
level motor systems.