* 9410242
* RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD:Efficient Control of ManufacturingSystems with Buffer Costs
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* James Perkins, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1998
* USD 90,000.00

9410242 Perkins The primary objective of this research is the development of an
efficient control for semiconductor manufacturing systems. To achieve this
objective, two subproblems will be solved. The overall aggregate control will
then be an intuitive blend of these results. The first subproblem is to
determine an optimal control for a re-entrant manufacturing system with buffer
costs. The method of solution is to exploit structural properties, such as
piecewise continuity and monotonicity, of an optimal control in order to reduce
the problem to one with a known solution. The second subproblem is to determine
the effect of the control on several unreliable machines. It will be show that,
for a certain class of controls, the buffer level probability densities satisfy
a set of linear, hyperbolic partial differential equations. The solution of
these equations will be explored using numerical, and simulation methods. The
aggregate control will partition the system buffers using three criteria:
machine reliability, buffer utilization, and distribution of the down and up
times of machines. The results of the subproblems will then be used to determine
the appropriate controls. In addition, regulators will be implemented to smooth
out the material flow, thus reducing second-order effects. Simulation will be
used to test the efficiency of the aggregate control. ***