* 9410377
* RIA: Fast Simulation of Computer Architectures Using        Field-Programmable Gate Arrays as Hardware Accelerators
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Thomas Conte, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Lionel Ni
* 07/31/1997
* USD 84,955.00

This research is on architectural-level simulation using field- programmable
gate arrays as hardware accelerators. The goals of this research include the
development of a paradigm for architectural specification that is both general-
purpose and can be used to produce fast and efficient simulators, development of
a graphical user interface-based entry tool, development of tools for automatic
translation of an architectural description to FPGA programming information, and
implementation of a trace-driven execution environment to run the simulations.
The key idea behind this work is to use FPGA's to simulate a system above the
gate level, at the level of events, dependencies, resources and delays. FPGA's
place a limit on the size of the hardware-implemented data structures, which
will be extended via a software monitor to allow virtual, unlimited-length
structures. The simulation will be automatically translated from a high-level
description by use of methods adapted from high-level synthesis and the
compilation of C programs. To aid in entering the architectural description, a
graphical user interface tool will be developed. The paradigm for system
description will be based on a discrete-event architectural model of system
behavior. This paradigm will be hierarchical and provide a library that takes
advantage of existing fast simulation techniques for cache and processor
simulation.