* 9410136
* Theoretical Studies of the Bonding of Endohedral and        Exohedral Complexes of Fullerenes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Debbie Tuan, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Komornicki
* 01/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

In this research project, supported by a Career Advancement Award for Women
Scientists, high-level, ab initio, molecular electronic structure calculations
will be carried out for clusters consisting of one or more metal atoms,
particularly Hafnium, inside or outside a cage of 28 carbon atoms. The
calculations will be carried out with relativistic core potentials, spin-orbit
operators, large orbital basis sets, and a configuration interaction
wavefunction. The COLUMBUS code will be used taking maximum advantage of the
high point group symmetry of the molecular system. The results will be analyzed
to predict trends in ionization potentials, electron affinity, and electronic
spectra, and to study the factors that affect chemical bonding in these
fullerene-like cluster compounds. The recent discovery of Buckminsterfullerene,
a remarkably stable molecule consisting of 60 carbon atoms forming a symmetric
cage resembling a soccer ball, has motivated experiments to find other molecules
with similar chemical bonding. One of the smallest such carbon cluster
molecules, observed in plasmas, consists of 28 carbon atoms bonded together, as
in Buckminsterfullerene, in fused rings of five and six atoms around a heavy
metal atom. A few of these 28 carbon atom complexes are selected for theoretical
study using highly accurate quantum mechanical theory to predict physical
properties which will aid the interpretation of experiments and provide a deeper
understanding of the chemical principles which govern the stabilities of such
complexes