* 9410993
* A Development Environment for Active Database Systems:      Testing and Analysis of Active Database Rules
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Suzanne Dietrich, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/1998
* USD 280,000.00

Active database systems transform passive database processing into active
environments by using rules as alerters and triggers. This research is
investigating two complementary aspects of active database development
environments: the analysis of rules for termination and confluence properties
and the run-time testing and debugging of active rules. The research is
addressed in the context of an active, deductive, and object-oriented database.
The rule analysis process is a static approach, applying termination/confluence
analysis techniques from conditional term rewriting to identify rule problems
before execution. The run-time environment is a dynamic approach allowing users
to step through the rule triggering process, observing rule behavior and testing
different rule triggering sequences. The execution model includes a propagation
algorithm for monitoring changes to derived data. The integration of rule
analysis with rule generation and transaction development to support
specification and analysis of rules prior to rule execution is also being
investigated. The significance of this work is found i n the integration of
active, deductive, and object-oriented concepts as well as the supportive
environment provided to address the correctness and predictability of active
rules in the development of complex database applications.