* 9410141
* Polarization Fluctuation Phenomena in Tungsten Bronze       Ferroelectric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Ruyan Guo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 01/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9410141 Guo The primary goal of this research planning activity is to identify
polarization fluctuation characteristics in ferroelectric materials of the
tungsten bronze (TB) structure. Dielectric properties of TB crystals under
designed poling conditions in a broad temperature and frequency range are to be
tested to reveal the dependence of the speculated polarization fluctuation on
the crystallographic parameters. Selected single crystals of lead barium niobium
oxide solid solutions, including crystals of near morphotropic phase boundary
compositions, will be used to perform preliminary tests under various poling
conditions. The outcome of the planned activities is expected to offer
guidelines (but not the answers) on (i) whether the specific dielectric
dispersive behavior underlines polarization fluctuation; (ii) is this phenomenon
characteristic to the TB family, i.e., inherent to its crystallographic
structure? (iii) is the polarization fluctuation a thermally activated process?
and (iv) what is the role of chemical composition fluctuation on the speculated
polarization fluctuation? %%% Ferroelectric materials of tungsten bronze
structure encompass a large family of solid solution systems with great
potential in optical and electrooptic applications; however, an understanding of
their characteristic polarization properties is a key still lacking for further
exploration of new materials and modification of known materials in this family.
This research, along with knowledge on ferroelectric oxygen octahedral materials
(including the perovskites and the tungsten bronzes) in general, will give the
foundation for researchto select, modify and design tungsten bronze
ferroelectric materials with desired and controllable ferroelectric properties.
***