* 9410584
* Coordination of Cognitive Activity during Group Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Garold Stasser, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/1997
* USD 124,022.00

9410584 Stasser ABSTRACT Members of decision-making groups often have access to
different information, and one aim of discussion is to pool members' unique
knowledge. Pooling information is particularly important if the combination of
members' unique information will reveal a superior decision alternative.
However, previous work shows that discussions tend to focus on commonly-held
knowledge, and groups risk overlooking an option supported by their collective
knowledge. This program of empirical work examines how perceptions of knowledge
distribution and task demands affect information processing and communication
styles. Of particular interest is the process of tacit coordination whereby
members of a group adjust their selection, rehearsal and communication of
information to obtain varying degrees of informational diversity depending on
perceived task demands. This coordination can be based on direct knowledge of
others' access to information or on acquired knowledge of what others have done
on similar tasks in the past. It is hypothesized that some types of tasks
(collective recall, idea generation, intellective problems) will encourage
diversity of informational input whereas other types (judgmental tasks) will
promote uniformity of input. It is also hypothesized that concerns about recall
accuracy may promote redundancy of informational sampling in order to provide
social validation. It has been found that, in the process of decision making,
groups tend to focus on the information that is commonly held by all members,
ignoring information that is not shared by all but that could lead to a better
decision. By advancing our understanding of the conditions under which unique
information is likely to be shared, this research will provide knowledge
relevant to improving the quality of decision making in groups. As such, it will
have implications for various initiatives in industry and government that have
emphasi zed the importance of basing decisions on the best information available
from groups or teams. At the heart of these initiatives is the goal of
empowering people who are uniquely aware of crucial information that could be
used to improve processes and procedures, getting them to speak up and make a
difference. The proposed research will help to provide a sound basis for such
attempts to enhance worker productivity.