* 9410354
* RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD: Markov Chain Control of          Randomized Switching in Power Converters
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Aleksandar Stankovic, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Vijay Vittal
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,676.00

9410354 Stankovic The use of power electronics in general, and of switching
power converters in particular, is pervasive, widespread and critical to the
success of much of modern technology. Current standard practice in power
converters operation is based on the generation of periodic switching functions.
Periodic switching policies are energy efficient, but can require extensive
filtering, and can produce excessive acoustic noise in motor applications, due
to interactions of harmonics with mechanical structures. The purpose of this
project is to mitigate these and other related effects through the development
of a unified design procedure for randomized switching waveforms in power
converters. The starting point for the proposal is a set of recently proposed
randomized switching schemes, where a stochastic signal with appropriately
chosen statistical properties is added to the reference switching function.
Randomization then alters the frequency content without affecting the proper
operation. The proposed development of design procedures for switching governed
by Markov chains will further enhance this approach by enabling time-domain
adaptation and wave-form optimization in both time and frequency domains. The
new approach is also practical and interesting for manufacturing, as it does not
require any major hardware changes in existing equipment. ***