* 9410637
* Thyroid Hormone Effects on the Peripheral Olfactory System
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1995,08/31/1996
* Terry Takahashi, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 08/31/1996
* USD 112,689.00

Roberts, William M. IBN 94-10637 The ability to recognize familiar locations by
their sights, sounds and smells is a common phenomenon. In salmon, who migrate
great distances from fresh water streams to vast salt-water oceans, and
ultimately, back to their home streams to reproduce, the ability to identify
their home streams is crucial to species survival. But how is it that these fish
recognize their home environments? One possible mechanism is the incorporation
of familiar smells into memory which occurs during the parr smolt in salmon.
During smolting, a physical transformation takes place as does a maturation of
olfactory memory. Additionally, smolting is accompanied by a marked increase in
thyroid hormone levels. Drs. Roberts and Takahashi will examine the role of
thyroid hormones in the development of olfactory memory. Olfactory receptor
cells born at the time of the parr smolt will be chemically marked and the
effect of exogenous thyroid hormone treatment to enhance their survival will be
determined. Moreover, structural changes in the olfactory bulb of the brain at
smolting and modulation of those changes by thyroid hormones will be assessed.
In addition to examination of the structural changes occurring in the brain at
the time of smolting, functional changes in the sensitivity of the olfactory
receptor cells to odorants will be examined. These studies have the potential to
provide a breakthrough in understanding the physical basis of memory. Further,
migration of salmon is of considerable commercial interest. This research has
the potential to allow man to devise methods for guiding salmon to their
birthplaces following novel pathways that may enhance the survival of the
species.