* 9410531
* RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD:Analysis and Synthesis of Robust  Control Systems Using Integral Quadratic Constraints
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Alexandre Megretski, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1997
* USD 90,000.00

9410531 Megretski The main project objective are: to develop a unified approach
to the robustness and performance analysis of control systems in the presence of
mixed (real parametric, non-linear, slowly time varying etc. structured
uncertainty and non-stochastic correlated exogenous signals; to present a less
conservative linear feedback control synthesis procedure based on the analysis;
to implement the theoretical results in a set of computer algorithms; and to
test the method by applying it in the practical problems of control of highly
uncertain dynamics, such as compressor antisurge control and greenhouse climate
control. The main method to be employed in the analysis part of the project is
based on describing (conservatively) each component of uncertainty and noise by
a set of Integral Quadratic Constraints (IQC's). Then the robust stability (or a
prescribed level of performance) is achieved if a certain system of Linear
Matrix Inequalities (LMI's), defined by the choice of IQC's has a solution. In
the synthesis, a Projective Parameterization of the set of admissible
controllers will be used to reduce the problem (possibly conservatively) to a
system of LMI. Alternatively, an analog of the heuristic D-K Iteration algorithm
will be studied. The significance of the proposed research activity is in its
potential to enhance the power and extend the field of application of many
recently known methods of robust control analysis, including u-synthesis,
quadratic stability, positivity theory and Kharitonov-type arguments. ***