* 9410965
* Carbon-Carbon Bond Formation and Related Reactions on Metal Oxides: Surface Science and Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Mark Barteau, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 06/30/1997
* USD 445,000.00

ABSTRACT Mark Barteau CTS-9410965 This is an investigation of two carbon-carbon
bond-forming reactions that occur on metal-oxide surfaces: reductive carbonyl
coupling and alkyne cyclotrimerization. It has been demonstrated that both
reactions can be run as gas-solid reactions on titania single crystals even in
ultrahigh vacuum. This research defines the mechanisms of these surface
reactions in order to test analogies with liquid-phase organometallic reactions,
and applies the understanding gained to the invention of new heterogeneous
catalysts for novel surface organic syntheses. The program includes
spectroscopic investigations of carbon-carbon bond-forming reactions on reduced
titania single crystals, steady-state and temperature-programmed flow reactor
studies on oxide powders at atmospheric pressure (to demonstrate the "scale-up"
from ultrahigh vacuum to normal industrial catalytic operations), and scanning
probe microscopy experiments to probe active sites and adsorbed intermediates at
the molecular level and to test the ability to manipulate these factors. This
effort is the centerpiece of a program to enable the transfer of traditionally
esoteric surface chemistry to industrial practice through a series of "scale-up"
stages, and thus rationalize the introduction of new catalytic chemistry into
industrial technology. ***