* 9410700
* Mathematical Sciences:  Inverse Nodal Problems and          Perturbation Theory in Higher Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1996
* Joyce McLaughlin, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 10/31/1996
* USD 27,302.00

9410700 McLaughlin This project is concerned the problem of determining which
properties of an elastic membrane can be deduced from knowledge of the natural
frequencies and the nodal lines of the membrane. The nodal lines are places on
the membrane where there is no excitation when the membrane is excited at a
natural frequency. There are two major parts to the project. The first is to
obtain perturbation results for the natural frequencies and mode shapes. Since
the frequencies are not well spaced in higher dimensional problems, small
divisor problems must be solved. The second major part of the project is related
to the fact that nodal domains (connected domains in the membrane defined by the
nodal lines) can be long, thin strips whose diameter is as large as the diameter
of the membrane. What is required then is to define approximate nodal domains
whose diameter goes to zero as the order of the eigenvalue goes to infinity. The
goal of this research is to establish methods for finding properties of
vibrating systems from indirect measurements, in particular, measurements of
natural frequencies and nodal lines. The natural frequencies can be determined
by spectral analysis of impulse response data. The nodal lines can be measured
by directing a laser at the vibrating surface when the membrane is excited at a
natural frequency. The lines where the Doppler shift in the backscatter is
minimized are the nodal lines. From this data the amplitudes of external forces
on the membrane and an expression for a (nonconstant) density of the membrane
may be determined from explicit formulas for these quantities. These formulas
are expected to be very useful for obtaining efficient numerical algorithms to
identify the quantities in question. ***