* 9410374
* Research Initiation Award:  Fundamental Investigations of   Multiphasic Atmospheric Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Julie d'Itri, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 12/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT Julie d'Itri CTS-9410374 The objective of the project is to develop new
environmental technology which will allow quantitative determination of mass
transfer rates and chemical reaction kinetics of gas-aerosol atmospheric
systems. An apparatus and methodology for measuring mass and chemical reactions
rates in dispersed media will be developed. These rate data are essential to
accurately estimating global atmospheric changes and the effect of pollutants on
the environment. The system will be designed to allow determination of gas and
aerosol compositions and precision control of the aerosol particle diameter and
composition. The developed technology will be tested initially by examining the
oxidation of sulfur dioxide to sulfate, which is the major pathway in forming
sulfuric acid rain. Mass transfer and chemical reaction rates will be measured
and by kinetic modeling, rate and constants and rate expression will be
established. The relative importance of O3-catalyzed versus non-catalyzed
heterogeneous (on aerosol surfaces) oxidation of sulfur dioxide will be
delineated. The research will lay a foundation for better understanding and
quantificatio of the atmospheric reactions of sulfur containing species. A
method to determine atmospheric reactions of whole families of chemicals,
including nitrogen oxides and organics, in dispersed media will be established.
***