* 9410693
* Whole-animal Physiological Performance: Natural Selection   and Phenotypic Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Jack Hayes, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/31/1998
* USD 221,731.00

9410693 Hayes The physiological functions of animals (e.g., their ability to
produce heat in cold environments or sprint away from predators)are widely
thought to impact their ecology and evolution. Despite this widespread belief,
differences among individual animals of the same species rarely have been shown
to affect their survival and reproduction. Data on whether individual
differences in physiology affect survival and reproduction are essential to
understanding the evolution of organismal function (i.e., physiological traits
of organisms). Hence, the effects of whole animal physiological performance on
survival and reproduction will be studied in a high altitude (3800m) population
of deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus). These mice are particularly suitable for
study because their physiology is well known and because the extreme cold and
low oxygen availability they experience at high altitude makes it likely that
natural selection on their physiological running performance occurs. Survival,
reproduction, ability to produce heat in the cold, and sprint running
performance of individual mice will be measured. Because physiological functions
may vary substantially with the environment encountered (i.e., are plastic or
flexible), it is usually unclear whether physiological differences among
individual animals are genetic or environmental in nature. Previous studies
indicate that differences in the heat producing capacity of high- and low-
altitude deer mice are genetically based. However, the effects of the
developmental environment on the ability of deer mice to respond to subsequent
environmental change are poorly understood. This information is critical to
understanding the relative importance of genetic versus environmental effects in
coping with environmental change. The effects of developmental environments will
be studied by comparing physiological performance of siblings raised at high
versus low altitude. Ultimately, the proposed research will lea d to a better
understanding of the relative importance of genetic variation versus
physiological plasticity in coping with environmental stressors, will provide
insight into developmental constraints on mammalian lung function, and will
elucidate whether the broadly held belief that individual variation in
physiological performance has ecological and evolutionary significance is valid.
***