* 9410281
* Evolution of Population Stability
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Laurence Mueller, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Therese A. Markow
* 07/31/1997
* USD 166,000.00

Mueller 9410281 This proposal describes experiments for studying the evolution
of population stability. The experimental research described will utilize
Drosophila melanogaster as a model organism. Specifically, 20 populations will
be created to study the evolution of life histories that affect the stability of
a population around its carrying capacity. Two source populations will be used:
the UU populations that have been kept at low larval and adult densities and the
CU populations that have been kept at high larval and low adult density. Each of
these populations, which is replicated fivefold, will be kept in two different
environments: the HL environment provides high levels of food for larvae but low
levels to adults, and the LH environment, which provides low levels of food to
the larvae and high levels to the adults. The LH environment has been shown
previously to produce cycles about the equilibrium point. The stability
properties of these populations will be determined in the LH environment at the
start of the experiment and after 24 generations of selection. Additionally the
populations will be sampled periodically for life history characters that are
known to respond to density-dependent natural selection that are important for
the stability of the population. These characters include, (1) larval feeding
rates, (2) larval pupation height, and (3) female fecundity in the LH
environment at high adult densities.