* 9410680
* Engineering Deployment Teaching Initiative:  Mechanical     System Design for Reliability -- Technology Deployment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Thomas Cruse, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/1996
* USD 29,996.00

9410680 Mahadevan There is a real need for design engineers to be able to link
the design decision making process with product reliability in a way that
supports quantitative evaluation, more effective use of experiments, and
engineering specifications on production processes and variables. It is also
important that design tools be easy to integrate in the design process. The
deployment strategy makes effective use of industry in the definition and
evaluation of the deployed technology. It also uses computer networks,
workshops, and conferences for rapid dissemination of the technology to
universities and industry. The educational materials to be developed include a
full description of the methodology, presentation material in the form of view
graphs, simplified working models for spreadsheet calculations, a computer
program with several options for probabilistic design analysis, and example
problems. This effort will deploy a ready technology of computationally-based
tools for reliability-based design analysis to the mechanical design communities
in industry through an educational infrastructure. The developed technology has
been found to be generic for mechanical systems reliability and has been shown
to be directly usable in the design process without extensive knowledge of
statistics and probability methods. It enables the designer to compute design
uncertainties such as the probability of failure for any sensible design limit
condition and to combine a number of such design limit conditions into a
generalized estimate of system reliability. At every step, the designer is given
direct feedback on the critical drivers of product unreliability and design
confidence levels, facilitation re-design for enhanced reliability.