* 9410199
* Research Initiation: Distributed Shop Floor Control in LargeIntegrated Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Dharmaraj Veeramani, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 08/31/1997
* USD 106,900.00

9410199 Veeramani The objective of this research is to investigate synthesis and
algorithm issues pertaining to distributed control of large manufacturing
systems comprised of many autonomous intelligent devices. Several facets of
distributed control will be investigated. One aspect of the research will focus
on the development of models and methodologies to characterize and compare
alternative distributed control architectures and theoretical prediction of
information and communication system performance and requirements. A second
aspect focuses on the development of robust, real time distributed control
algorithms that differ in terms of the definition of customers and contractor
nodes, the nature of interaction between devices and the control policies that
relate to how devices decide whether to participate in an auction. This aspect
of research will also investigate how bids are contracted and evaluated by
devices, and how the devices react to unexpected events. The algorithms will be
evaluated through discrete event simulation of manufacturing systems models and
through emulation of such a manufacturing system by a network of computer. The
research will facilitate the development of a new class of high-performance
intelligent manufacturing systems that can possibly provide more flexibility and
responsiveness to system changes. New control algorithms that enhances system
performance and flexibility may result from the research. Enhanced systems
performance can increase the competitiveness of such a system.