* 9410906
* Electron Spin Resonance Dating of Prehistoric Sites
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,03/31/1997
* Henry Schwarcz, McMaster University
* Continuing grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 03/31/1997
* USD 163,380.00

9410906 Schwarcz With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Henry Schwarcz
will continue research on electron spin resonance (ESR) dating of prehistoric
archaeological and hominid sites. ESR dating can provide dates over the range
from a few thousand to more than two million years. It is based on the principle
that some materials found at archaeological sites store a physical record of the
amount of radiation to which they have been exposed. Tooth enamel, which is
found at virtually every archaeological site, displays a characteristic ESR
signal which increases in intensity with exposure to radiation, and which has
zero intensity in modern teeth. One can experimentally determine the dose rate
at the site where the enamel was recovered, and the equivalent dose that was
absorbed by the enamel to produce the observed ESR signal. The ratio of these
quantities provides the age of the tooth, and thus the time of occupation of the
site. The precision of the dates is +- 5 to 10 %. The McMaster Laboratory is the
only one in North America carrying out ESR research and has successfully applied
the method to many sites in Europe, Asia and Africa. With NSF support research
will continue to refine the ESR technique itself. Dr. Schwarcz and his
colleagues will also analyze and provide dates for a range of significant
anthropological specimens.