* 9411844
* Dissertation Research: Microbial Responses to Variation in  Dissolved Organic Carbon (DOC) Quality and Quantity in the  Hyporheic Zone of Stream Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Robert Howarth, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9411844 Howarth The dimensions of stream ecosystem studies have been greatly
expanded within the last decade to include saturated sediments that lie beneath
and adjacent to the streambed. Recent work indicates the hyporheic zone's
importance in regulating stream metabolism, altering stream chemistry, and
supporting stream food webs. Although the hyporheic zone contains diverse
microbial and invertebrate communities, benthic bacteria are at the base of the
hyporheic food web and thought to control much of its ecosystem function. The
primary energy source for benthic bacteria is dissolved organic carbon (DOC).
This dissertation research will determine the extent to which variation in DOC
quality and quantity affects the microbial community in stream hyporheic zones.
Research will address how DOC from contrasting sources within and among streams
that are thought to vary in DOC quality and quantity affect the bacterial
community in the hyporheic zone. Changes in bacterial abundance and productivity
in response to changes in DOC, as well as subsequent changes in water chemistry
will be studied. This research will also determine if hyporheic microbes serve
as a carbon sink or an important link to higher trophic levels in stream food
webs. %%% The objectives of this research will lead to a greater understanding
of both stream ecosystem function and microbial loop dynamics. This study will
provide an excellent forum to link ecosystem-level function with previously
poorly understood microbial processes.