* 9411025
* Collaborative Research on Political Parties and Electoral   Landscapes
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* John Miller, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1997
* USD 55,275.00

9411025 Miller This research projects concerns theories of electoral competition
between political parties competing for public office in democracies. Electoral
politics are dynamic. This research examines the dynamic interactions between
election rules, public opinion, and the behavior of political parties. A
distinguishing feature of the proposed research is that it employs computer
models to discover patterns of political party behavior over a series of
elections and across electoral institutions. The models in the project are
advanced forms of computer simulations that are new to the social sciences
though they have been used extensively in the natural sciences. Among their
advantages, these models allow for flexibility and descriptive accuracy in
developing theories of political behavior. The current research will continue to
develop theories of electoral competition through the use of computers and
mathematical modeling, and then test these theories using survey data from the
United States and Europe. The research consists of three parts. The first part
is the computer modeling, which continues previous research of the collaborative
research team. This research has already generated explanations and predictions
about the effects of electoral institutions and public opinion on the behavior
of political parties, both in the way parties campaign for public office and in
the policies they enact once in office. The second part of the project involves
using mathematics to substantiate the findings from the computer model. using
both techniques, the researchers have so far confirmed the validity of earlier
computer findings and made several predictions of political party behavior. The
third part uses survey data from election studies in the United States and
Europe to test the predictions generated by the computer models. One central
theoretical finding from their previous research has generally been supported by
survey data from the American Nati onal Election Study 1972-1988. The
collaborators intend to undertake more research on real election data as a
portion of this research project. The research has two main objectives. First,
to understand more fully the way different democratic institutions create
incentives for political elites to change governmental policies to appeal to
voters. Knowledge from this research may be helpful in the design of
constitutions for emerging democracies. The second objective is to extend the
use of computer modeling in the social sciences, and to establish computational
standards for testing social science models for completeness and accuracy.