* 9411934
* Theoretical Study of Photodissociation Dynamics in the      Gaseous and Condensed Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1994,11/30/1998
* Hua Guo, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 11/30/1998
* USD 190,000.00

Hua Guo at the University of Toledo is supported by the NSF Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program for theoretical investigations of chemical
reaction dynamics. The concern of this work is the study of photodissociation;
in particular, time dependent quantum mechanics will be used to study the
photodissociation dynamics of small molecules. These processes will be studied
in the gas phase, on surfaces, and in solution. In order to treat problems in
the later two cases, a new theoretical procedure will be developed which is a
hybrid approach combining quantum and classical methods. With this hybrid
approach, the quantum features of the molecular reaction are properly addressed
but the effects of the medium, substrate or solvent, are included. For the gas
phase studies, a few modest size polyatomic molecules will be treated; these
include rare gas complexes and Ryderg excited states of methyl complexes. The
dynamics of photo-induced chemistry, in general, and of photodissociation, in
particular, depend on the details of the interaction energies among the atoms in
the system; i.e., on the details of the potential energy surfaces. However, it
is not simple to relate the features of this surface to the identity of the
reaction products and to the energy distribution over these products. The
studies of photodissociation being carried out in this project will enhance the
understanding of the relevant relationships. In particular, two aspects of the
work help to insure that it will have considerable impact on this important
scientific goal. First, the work is being carried out is close contact and,
often, in collaboration with experimentalists. Because of this, the
approximations used to obtain the underlying potential energy sufaces as well as
those used to study the time dependent quantum features of the reaction can be
validated. Second, the systems being studied are carefully chosen to yield
important and useful information. They are sufficiently small to be tractable
for high accuracy quantum mechanical treatments yet sufficiently large to
contain chemical bonds and other features relevant to more general problems in
photochemistry.