* 9411366
* Molecular Thermodynamics of Polymer/Mixed-Solvent Systems   for Process/Product Design and Environmental-Protection     Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* John Prausnitz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1998
* USD 170,194.00

John Prausnitz CTS-9411366 Thermodynamic properties of polymer/mixed-solvent
systems are necessary for a variety of applications including surface acoustic-
wave vapor sensors; recovery of organic vapors from waste-air streams using a
polymeric membrane; pervaporation, and other polymeric membrane-separation
processes; polymer devolatilization; vapor-phase photografting; and for optimum
formulation of paints and coatings. For rational process and product design, we
require new experimental data and new correlation based on molecular
thermodynamics. Vapor-liquid equilibria for several polymer/mixed-solvent
systems will be measured , both for dilute polymer solutions (using a sampled
equilibrium cell ) and concentrated solutions (using a gravimetric polymer
swelling technique). Also, the theta temperature for various polymer/mixed-
solvent systems will be measured and correlated with a procedure that involves
measuring (by scanning) the cloud-point temperatures for a range of polymer
concentrations and extrapolating to unity volume fraction polymer. The goal of
the study is to provide experimental data and correlations for thermodynamic
properties of these systems for a wide range of applications in acoustic-wave
vapor sensors, VOC membrane separation from air streams, vapor-phase photo-
grafting, and paint formulation. The successful completion of the project would
significantly enhance the knowledge and technology base in these areas, enabling
better design of existing processes and development of new processes and
products. The experimental techniques to be used are modifications to existing
techniques developed by the P.I.'s and others, to account for mixed solvents.
The correlational work will be with the P.I. 's previously developed Perturbed
Hard-Sphere-Chain equation of state. The theta temperature is the spinodal
temperature in the limit of infinite polymer chain length and infinite dilution
of the polymer in the solvent. A program for this calculation has been develop
ed by the P.I. and co-workers. For the experiments, a tentative list of systems
is given, and these are keyed to the specific technological application. A
typical error analysis for the gravimetric technique is given.