* 9411850
* Energy Filtered Detector for Micro-Diffracton in the        Scanning Electron Microscope
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* James Mancuso, Advanced Microscopy Techniques
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 130,384.00

*** 9411850 MANCUSO SBIR Phase-II funds are provided to investigators at
Advanced Microscopy Techniques to develop an energy filter for electron
backscatting patterns (EBSP) with fine pattern resolution and a large acceptance
angel. The Phase-II research objectives are: 1) to develop an energy filter and
EBSP sensor element that retains high quality micro-diffraction patterns with
improved contract due to energy filtering, and 2) maintain a large acceptance
angel for the microdiffraction patterns. If these improvements can be made, two
major advances would be possible. First, the visibility of the diffraction
pattern would improve for both direct viewing and for digital acquisition and
analysis. This would extend EBSP ( and consequently SEM) to a greater variety of
applications and materials. Second, the new device could serve a dual purpose as
both an EBXP detector and a small angle (dark field) detector. Thus, both
quantitative analysis of diffraction patterns and qualitative diffraction
imaging are available to the materials researcher. The success of this research
will lead to a Phase-III program to develop a system that can be used in basic
research, materials design and manufacturing support. The technique can be
adapted to both new electron microscopes and the large existing base of SEMs -
allowing the fullest use of SEM technology in materials characterization. ***