* 9411147
* CSU/TTU Cooperative Wind Engineering Program
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/1995,06/30/2001
* Robert Meroney, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Scalzi
* 06/30/2001
* USD 1,643,566.00

9409869 9411147 Mehta Meroney The Cooperative Wind Engineering Program (CWEP)
enters the second five-year cycle of research activities undertaken by an
interdisciplinary team of researchers from Colorado State and Texas Tech
Universities working jointly. The cooperative research program will continue
focusing on three main areas: wind load, wind engineering meteorology and wind
flow around buildings. The combination of full scale field and wind-tunnel
physical modeling will be merged in studies conducted in the three main areas
and each will be integrated into the other two. On Wind loads, studies will
continue in topics such as data acquisition and analysis, pressures on permeable
surfaces, the influence of architectural and mechanical features, the spatial
and temporal structural of wind loads, and on wind loading reliability analysis
of low-raise buildings. In the area of wind engineering meteorology,
instrumentation refinements and improved analysis of wind flow records
especially of NEXRAD data, and the simulation of wind storms in the boundary
layer wind tunnel are some of the topics to be studied. In the area of wind flow
around buildings, the identification of the separation region near the surface
of structures, the effect of the Reynolds number, the use of laser-sheet
visualization to examine the time-dependent nature of the wind flow, the effect
of building shape, roof line and other features, shelter and topographic
effects, and numerical modeling are some of the topics to be studied. The
results from the work done in these three main areas will be integrated
throughout the duration of the program. Based on the results from this program
the safety of populations at risk will improve and the private sector, such as
the construction and insurance industries, will benefit because the
vulnerability of new and retrofitted buildings and structures will decrease; the
Federal, State and local administrators will continue to benefit because o f the
development of new and improved mitigation measures; and the research community
also will gain knowledge from the data, instrumentation and methods developed
during the program. ***