* 9411536
* Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic and Molecular           Evolutionary Studies of the Tageteae (Asteraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Robert Jansen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9411536 Jansen The use of DNA data in studying the phylogenetic or genealogical
relationships among organisms has increased dramatically over the last few
years. For most plant groups, the focus, for several methodological reasons, has
been upon organellar DNA from the leaf chloroplast. Consequently, a major
question is posed concerning whether mutational differences in chloroplast DNA
are strongly correlated with mutational differences between plant species in
their nuclear DNA, which is usually more difficult to analyze. Graduate student
Dennis Loockerman, under the supervision of faculty adviser Robert Jansen at the
University of Texas, is addressing this question in his study of a large group
of sunflower relatives, the Tageteae. He will be analyzing large amounts of data
from both chloroplast and nuclear DNA sets, comparing patterns of mutational
differences among species, and reconstructing phylogenetic trees for this group
of flowering plants. Results from the molecular studies will be integrated with
traditional morphological characters, to improve classification of these plants
and designate reliable identification features. Analysis of DNA data from both
organellar and nuclear sources in a large group of sunflower relatives, the
Tageteae, and integration with morphological characters, will improve taxonomic
and phylogenetic understanding of these plants.