* 9411146
* Acquisition of an Ultrahigh Vacuum Sputter Deposition       System for the Preparation of Nanostructured Metal Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1996
* Katayun Barmak, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1996
* USD 196,450.00

Funds are provided for the acquisition of a state-of-art ultrahigh vacuum (UHV)
sputter deposition system for the preparation of nanostructured metal films. The
system is equipped with two magnetron sputtering sources, two ion beam sources
(one for deposition and one for simultaneous ion- beam modification of the
microstructure), capabilities for substrate heating and biasing, two gas
supplies (argon for sputtering, and oxygen or nitrogen), residual gas analyzer,
two crystal rate monitors for thickness measurement, and computer process
control. The combination of the UHV sputter deposition system with the world-
class analytical electron microscopy facilities at the University will provide a
unique opportunity to investigate and manipulate the composition and
microstructure of metal films on the nanometer scale. With this system, metal
films can be fabricated that have different composition and impurity content and
different microstructure. The control of microstructure, composition and
impurity content is important in on-going research addressing: 1) examination of
the role of grain structure and grain boundary diffusion in multilayer thin
films, 2) studies of the mechanism of segregation of chromium to grain
boundaries of cobalt-alloy films, the effect of impurities (such as oxygen) on
this segregation, and the role that this segregation plays in the magnetic noise
characteristics of cobalt-alloy thin film storage media (in collaboration with
IBM for magnetic storage applications), and 3) fundamental studies of
interparticulate and interphase magnetic exchange coupling in nanoheterogeneous
thin films (in collaboration with Brookhaven National Laboratory and General
Motors R&amp;D for energy applications). The sputter deposition system also will
be useful in the education of graduate and undergraduate students in thin film
materials processing.