* 9411603
* Dynamic Social Impact
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1997
* Bibb Latane, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/1997
* USD 63,983.00

9411603 Latane ABSTRACT Conceiving society as a nonlinear dynamical system of
interacting individuals, this program of research will explore how individual
influence processes lead to the temporal evolution of groups into self-organized
entities. Changes in the attributes (eg.,moods, attitudes, habits) of spatially
distributed individuals resulting from the interactive, reciprocal, and
recursive operation of social influence processes can be modeled by social
impact theory, a simple but very general theory of social influence.
Surprisingly, several macro-level phenomena can be predicted to emerge from the
operation of these micro-level processes, including dynamic equilibria with
stable diversity, an incomplete polarization of positions resulting in coherent
clusters of minority members protecting each other from exposure to majority
influence, and a tendency for people's positions on different issues to become
correlated. As in other complex systems, these tendencies toward self-
organization are accentuated by the introduction of randomness. Empirical
research will determine whether laboratory and real groups show the predicted
signs of self-organization. Field studies in a factory town in China will
produce information about the nature of social space and the spatial patterning
of work- and housing-related attitudes. Longitudinal studies of individuals
interacting via e-mail will document the existence of polarization, clustering,
and correlation and determine the effects of varying the geometry of social
space on the maintenance of diversity. This research will contribute to
understanding the complex interaction between individual psychological processes
and social outcomes in groups ranging in size from families and other small
groups to organizations, communities, and even nations. Concepts and procedures
developed in this research should be applicable to understanding the historical
development of regional differe nces in customs, values and beliefs, social
determinants of moods, norms, life styles, and behaviors, both constructive and
maladaptive, and such elusive phenomena as social movements, national mood, and
public opinion. This approach aligns social psychology with the
interdisciplinary study of complex self-organizing systems, and will contribute
to and draw on related work in physics, economics, and biology. Finally, the
empirical research will contribute to predicting the consequences of the
increasing use of electronic communication in work groups and society. ***