* 9411574
* Physical Properties of Strongly Correlated Quantum Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Xiao-Gang Wen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/1997
* USD 162,000.00

9411574 Wen This theoretical research will deal with strongly correlated
electron systems, one of the most important current problems in condensed matter
physics. Strongly correlated electron systems include high temperature
superconductors, fractional quantum Hall systems and mesoscopic devices.
Research will be conducted on a variety of topics including: (1) the noise
spectrum of tunneling and transport of correlated electron systems in mesoscopic
devices. Better understanding of noise spectrum will increase our knowledge of
the response of mesoscopic devices at high frequencies. The noise spectrum is
also a powerful probe of correlation dynamics. (2) the relation between the
fractional quantum Hall effect and the dirty boson problem will be studied. (3)
studies will be conducted on the new class of non-abelian fractional quantum
Hall states. (4) in strongly correlated metals slow spin fluctuations in high
temperature superconductors will be compared to slow density fluctuations in the
fractional quantum Hall effect. In particular, the interaction between electrons
and slow fluctuations yields Cherenkov radiation. A theory of this Cherenkov
radiation will be developed for these strongly correlated metals. %%%
Theoretical research will be conducted on a variety of topics dealing with
strongly correlated electron systems. These systems are one of the most
challenging problems in contemporary physics. Topics include the high
temperature superconductors and the fractional quantum Hall effect. ***