* 9411787
* Dissertation Support: Sociology of Alternative Knowledge of AIDS in the U.S. and England.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Michael Watts, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/1996
* USD 10,864.00

9411787 Watts Challenges to the received view that the human immuno-deficiency
virus (HIV) is the primary cause of the epidemic of AIDS have arisen from
'heretics' within the biosciences, and from academics, authors and treatment
organizations outside of institutionalized science. Some of this response can be
attributed to the failure of Western researchers to characterize the virus's
action completely and to advance effective therapies. This dissertation project
will seek to provide a more comprehensive explanation for this increase in the
production and dissemination of alternative knowledge on the AIDS epidemic. The
thesis is that understanding national structural differences in the political
organization of dissidents and their access to scientific forums and the mass
media is necessary to explain the different degrees to which dissidents in the
United States and England have succeeded in deconstructing 'expert' discourse
and orthodox knowledge on the epidemic and engaged the 'AIDS establishment' in
serious dialogue on the cause(s) and treatment of the disease and the
appropriate direction for public health policies regarding the epidemic. This
research will 1) explore the sites and content of alternative knowledge on
acquired immune-deficiency syndrome and AIDS in the United States and England,
and 2) explain the structural differences in the access that dissidents have to
forums for disseminating their views in each country. Methodologically, the
research will involve semi- structured interviews with dissidents, participant
observation of dissidents during the 2nd Alternative AIDS Conference and
dissident meetings, and archival research on dissident publications and media.
It will involve analysis of dissident claims as presented by individuals, in
archives, audio and video-tapes, and science journals. Representatives of media
who have aired dissident views as well as science reporters working for several
English and U.S. newspapers who have restricted dissident debates will be
interviewed, as will persons who have sought to limit dissident access to
international scientific and medical forums on AIDS. ***