* 9411504
* Optically Probing the Chemistry of Thin Film Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Irving Herman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1998
* USD 320,000.00

9411504 Herman This research is concemed with the development of optical
diagnostic techniques for obtaining a detailed view of the chemistry that occurs
on and near the surface during thin film processing. These in situ techniques
are used to identify the chemical steps in representative materials processes,
specifically plasma-assisted chemical etching. The proposed work consist of two
related phases. The first is the development and use of laser-induced thermal
desorption (LITD) to study the steady-state surface layer that is formed during
etching in a high charge density plasma, specifically an ECR (electron cyclotron
resonance) plasma. The chemistry of the formation and desorption of this layer,
which is often only a monolayer thick, is key to understanding the etching
process. Plasma-induced optical emission and laser induced fluorescence (LIF)
will be used to examine the desorbed products. Laser-induced thermal desorption
and other optical probes will be used to investigate the ECR etching of
important prototype alloy materials in real time. The second phase of the
proposed investigation is the development of high-spatial resolution optical
probes of pattemed thin film processing, such as the etching of films with a
pattemed mask on the surface. Understanding the details of the chemistry that
occurs on and immediately above the surface of the exposed film and mask, and
near the sidewalls of the mask, is complex. The proposed approach is to probe
the gas near the surface with LIF and the surface itself wih Raman microprobe
spectroscopy, at times simultaneously, both with 1 micron lateral resolution.
This will be done in situ and usually in real-time. %%% The processing of
materials often depends critically on the chemistry that occurs on and near the
surface. This is true for applications in microelectronics and optoelectronics,
which includes patterned etching and the atomic layer-controlled growth of
heterostructures, monolayers and films, in nanoma nufacturing, and in the
manufacture of optical films and protective coatings. However, a fundamental
understanding of the chemical steps that occur is often lacking in such
materials processing. This occurs, in part, because of the complex nature of the
processes which may include the interplay between events on the surface and in
the overlying gas phase, and, in part, because of a lack of diagnostics to
identify species and to measure their concentrations with sufficient spatial
resolution. The linked goals of this proposal are to develop in situ, real time
optical diagnostics that are necessary to obtain a detailed view of these
chemical processes, and to use them to identify the chemical steps involved in
the processes of several key, yet representative, materials processes.