* 9411983
* Special Project:  Travel Support for Three Workshops on     Academic Careers for Women in Computer Science
* CSE,EIA
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Frederick Weingarten, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/1997
* USD 71,600.00

9411983 Cuny This award provides travel support for three career management
workshops targeted at women who are new to academic careers in computer science.
The workshops will present practical information, advice, and basic information
needed to succeed in academic careers. The attendees will be provided with
opportunities to interact with more senior women in academia, to develop
mentoring relationships, and to start a professional network with their fellow
attendees. The workshops will be held in conjunction with the Grace Hopper
Celebration for Women in Computing to be held in Virginia in June 1994, with
Supercomputing '94 to be held in Washington DC in November 1994, and with the
Federated Computing Research Conference (FCRC) to be held most probably in
Philadelphia in 1996. A successful pilot workshop has already been held in
conjunction with the first FCRC held in San Diego in May of 1993. The workshop
drew a 150 participants although funding was provided for only 32 people. The
CRA is an association of U.S. and Canadian academic departments of Computer
Science and Computer Engineering, and Industrial Laboratories engaging in basic
computing research. The mission of CRA is to represent and inform the computing
research community and to support and promote its interests. Dr. Weingarten is
the Executive Director of CRA. Dr. CUNY, the academic leader of this project, is
a Professor of Computer Science and The University of Oregon.