* 9411713
* REG:  High-Resolution Spectral-and Near-Field-Measurement   System
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Dan Botez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 07/31/1995
* USD 53,942.00

9411713 Botez The Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of
Wisconsin, Madison, will purchase high resolution spectral- and laser near-field
measurement equipment, which will be dedicated to research. The equipment will
be used for several research projects including in particular the development of
high-power, single- frequency phase-locked diode-laser arrays. Phase-locked
diode-laser arrays have demonstrated high diffraction- limited powers: 1-1.5W.
However, the devices do not have a single-frequency output, which prevents their
use in many applications. Furthermore, at the present time, their number of
elements is limited to 20, which in turn limits the amount of coherent power.
The proposed research consists of developing phase-locked antiguided arrays with
distributed feedback as well as implementing novel concepts for creating
40-80-element single-spatial-mode arrays. The goals are: single-frequency,
diffraction-limited-beam operation to 1W with linewidths 50kHz, and spatially
coherent powers of 3W. The requested funds are for purchasing a high-resolution
grating spectrometer with a CCD camera as well as a vibrating mirror for
spectral near-field imaging of array modes. This will enable the study of the
modal structure of novel devices as well as optimization for high-power single-
mode operation. ***