* 9411973
* LTER: The Luquillo Experimental Forest II
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1996
* Robert Waide, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1996
* USD 1,267,137.00

9411973 Waide The Luquillo Experimental Forest (LEF) Long-Term Ecology Research
Program began in 1988 with the goal of integrating studies of disturbance regime
and forest structure and dynamics with a landscape perspective. Two central
research questions addressed 1) the relative importance of different disturbance
types within the four tropical rain forest life zones of the LEF and 2) the
importance of the biota in restoring ecosystem productivity after disturbance.
The long-term monitoring program initiated as part of the Luquillo LTER was
critical to the evaluation of immediate and subsequent effects of Hurricane
Hugo, which struck Puerto Rico in 1989. The occurrence of a hurricane soon after
the initiation of the LTER program provides an opportunity to study the long-
term dynamics of a tropical forest as it recovers from a major disturbance.
Integration of the spatial and temporal patterns of the different disturbances
affecting the LEF (tree falls, landslides, hurricanes, and human land use)
indicated that even the effects of large disturbances are not homogeneous over
the forest landscape. A strong gradient in damage from Hurricane Hugo occurs
from northeast to southwest in the LEF, corresponding to the direction of the
strongest winds. However, even in severely disturbed areas, many forest
attributes were approaching their pre-hurricane values within four years of the
storm. Forest response depended both on the successional status of the site at
the time of disturbance and the intensity of disturbance. In many areas, the
legacy of past human activities was apparent in forest composition and structure
even after Hurricane Hugo. The long-term experiments and measurements initiated
in 1988 will remain the central focus of the Luquillo LTER as it moves into its
second phase. Analysis of the dynamics of recovery after the hurricane and its
associated landslides and synthesis of the interaction of multiple disturbances
continue to be the primary goals of collaborating investi gators. New
initiatives will concentrate on defining the distinctive characteristics of
anthropogenic disturbance and on evaluating the importance of pivotal species in
shaping the path of succession. As before, a major emphasis of the Luquillo LTER
will be to provide information and ideas for cross-site and network-wide
syntheses.