* 9411016
* Late Prehistoric Prey Selection and Procurement Strategies  in the Wyoming Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,04/30/1996
* James Stoltman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/1996
* USD 5,300.00

9411016 Stoltman Under the direction of Dr. James Stoltman, Mr. Patrick Lubinski
will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. The work consists of two
phases. In December 1991 a herd of 150 Wyoming proghorn antelope fell over a
cliff on a foggy day and were killed. The skeletal remains have been collected
and through analysis of dental remains it is possible to reconstruct the age
profile of the group and to improve criteria for aging skeletal remains of this
species. In the first part of his research, Mr. Lubinski will study these
materials. On this basis he will then examine a series of proghorn skeletal
remains collected from many sites and time periods in the Great Basin region.
Prehistoric peoples hunted this species widely and Mr. Lubinski's goal is to
reconstruct changing utilization patterns over time. This work is important for
several reasons. Archaeological evidence suggests that over time intensified
resource use occurred in the Great Basin and that human groups tended to
specialize and focus on limited types of food. While this process is well
documented in other parts of the world and led to the domestication of plants
and animals, it would be surprising and unusual if such a process took place in
a desertic Great Basin environment. Mr. Lubinski will examine this phenomenon.
Secondly, the research will contribute basic biological data which will be
useful to archaeologists who study and attempt to interpret faunal remains.
Finally, this project will contribute to the training of a promising young
scientist. ***