* 9411739
* Service Sector Conflict:  Application of a Computerized     Semantic Grammer Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Roberto Franzosi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/1996
* USD 120,000.00

This is a study of conflict in the service sector of the economy, employing a
new computer system for analyzing written text. It will systematically examine
some of the hypothesized ways that prior case studies suggest labor strikes in
the service sector may differ from strikes in the industrial sector: 1) threats
of strikes and actions short of strikes but greater willingness to resolve
disputes without resorting to open conflict; 2) positional power of some
workers; 3) third-party involvement in labor relations, particularly the state
and the public; 4) political vulnerability of state officials as employers. Data
on 3,767 individual labor disputes, in both service and industrial sectors, have
been coded from 14,016 newspaper articles. The present project will carry out
data analysis after some further data checking and validation. %%% The research
employs a linguistic, computer-based methodology for collecting and analyzing
text, based on semantic grammars. The investigator has developed a prototype
software system, "Program for Computer-Assisted Coding of Events," that follows
closely the linguistic underpinning of the grammar and that structures narrative
text in relational form. Once the data are in this form, a set of procedures
using Structured Query Language extracts the desired information. The present
research project is a demanding test of this computer-based approach to the
analysis of textual materials. Success would permit scaling the system up to
larger computers and potentially to the National Information Infrastructure, and
results of this work will inform the development of alternative linguistic tools
for the NII. %%% Given the shift of emphasis in modern societies from industry
to service, this research will increase scientific understanding of the labor
conflict dynamics of a major sector of the economy. Thus it will contribute to
industrial sociology, economic sociology, and economics. In addition the
methodological innovations in the computer-assisted analysis of text has the
potential to contribute to a wide range of social sciences.