* 9411036
* Undergraduate Senior Design Program in Assistive Technology to Aid the Disabled
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2000
* Frank Redd, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 08/31/2000
* USD 39,380.00

9411036 Redd The proposed research is in the Undergraduate Design Projects
Program category, and requests support for undergraduate and graduate student
engineers to provide prototype "custom designed" devices and software to aid
persons with disabilities. The primary goal of this thrust is to provide
meaningful design experience for the engineering student that will directly aid
a specific disabled individual. A formal program is in place at Utah State
University which will ensure satisfactory progress is attained on these
projects. A group of students and the investigators on the grant will work with
a number of collaborating agencies and individuals on these projects. Forty
projects are planned during the five year duration of this award, and a written
report on the completed projects will be submitted for an annual publication.
Once completed, each project will be given to the person for whom it is
designed. The hope is that this "real world" experience will give engineering
students a sense of purpose and pride, help engineering schools serve the
community, attract new students into engineering, and raise student interest in
graduate education. This type of undertaking is important since it provides a
meaningful experience for engineering students as part of their undergraduate
design requirements, and will also benefit a population where customization is
often needed for rehabilitation devices. ***