* 9411962
* Dissertation Research:  Origins of Public Health Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Shirley Roe, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 01/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

Ms. Michelle Anne Laughran, working under the direction of Professor Shirley
Roe, is examining the rise of efforts on the part of cities and other
governments to regulate human behavior in order to protect human health. The
degree to which a government might optimally intervene is of constant concern.
The United States, for example, had a dismal failure in its attempt to
criminalize alcohol. Use of alcohol in the United States was not stopped while
criminal behavior rose dramatically in order to meet the demands of citizens
wanting to drink. The net effect was a broad scale disrespect of the law. Given
this experience, Congress and the Administration is currently debating how far
it should go to regulate smoking. One approach, short of prohibition, would be
taxation; but even here, too high a tax will lead to smuggling and other methods
of subverting the law. Regulation of public health arose in the modern world
with the efforts of cities in Northern Italy to prevent the plague. Ms. Laughran
is examining the developments in Venice where a civil magistrate for public
health quickly expanded his powers to include supervision of begging,
prostitution, hostelries and the city's poor population. By tracing how this
magistrate for health expanded his power over such a broad spectrum of human
behavior and the effects this expansion had both on public health and the
operation of government, Ms. Laughran promises to illuminate both the beneficial
and the detrimental aspects of public health policy.