* 9411716
* Engineering Research Equipment:  Time-Resolved              Fluorescence Spectrometer
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Joan Brennecke, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/1996
* USD 41,474.00

Abstract - Brennecke - 9411716 This is an equipment grant to enable the Chemical
Engineering Department at the University of Notre Dame to purchase a Time
Resolved Fluorescence Spectrometer which will be dedicated to support research
in engineering. Initially, the equipment will be used to study solvation and
reactivity in supercritical fluids (SCFs), specifically: (1) use of SCFs to
study reversible diffusion-influenced reactions; (2) study of the transition of
diffusion-controlled reactions from Stokes-Einstein diffusion in liquids in
kinetic theory and (3) use of fluorescence probes to study preferential
solvation in SCF mixtures. SCFs have found a variety of applications in
extractions and separations because of their unique physical properties that can
be varied between those of normal gases and liquids. They also show potential
for use as solvents for reactions; for example, the use of supercritical water
to oxidize hazardous organic wastes. The above projects are important in
advancing those technologies because they involve the application of
sophisticated spectroscopic techniques to study fundamental quantities, such as
the solvation of species and the solvent effect on reaction rates. The
understanding gained from these experiments will aid in predicting what reaction
could benefit from operation at supercritical conditions.