* 9411582
* The Origins of Logical Empiricism:  Philosophy of Science   in the Context of General Relativity
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1995,09/30/1996
* Thomas Ryckman, Northwestern University
* Fixed Amount Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 09/30/1996
* USD 63,686.00

Contemporary American scientists and philosophers of science have built their
views of the nature of science on a foundation of what became known as logical
empiricism. While contemporary philosophy of science in the US has largely
rejected much of this philosophy developed between the two world wars, logical
empiricism still shapes how science is understood. Dr. Ryckman, under this
grant, argues that an examination of the response of some of the founders of
logical empiricism to a revolutionary scientific theory--Einstein's theory of
general relativity--may encourage a clearer understanding of practices and
methods of approach in contemporary philosophy of science and will also
illuminate the problems surrounding the construction of philosophical
interpretations of science. Dr. Ryckman is investigating the formation and
subsequent influence of philosophical interpretations of the general theory of
relativity that were fashioned in the period immediately following the theory's
inception. In view of logical empiricism's preeminent role as a precursor of
much of contemporary philosophy of science, the focus is on those
interpretations of the theory's philosophical significance offered by
philosophers who were to become its leading figures. This project requires both
careful attention to scientific, historical and philosophical context and
detailed knowledge of published and archival material. Under this grant, Dr.
Ryckman is examining Han's Reichenbach's solution to the problem of the metric
of space-time. This task involves an examination of correspondence and perhaps
other unpublished materials in the Hermann Weyl papers. Second, he is studying
the philosophical influence of Sir Arthur Eddington's work on general relativity
and his attempted "generalization" which sought to bring the gravitational and
the electromagnetic field into a common framework.