* 9411248
* Dynamics and Mechanism in Organic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1996
* William Doering, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1996
* USD 139,900.00

9411248 Doering The thermochemistry of extended conjugation of carbon-carbon
double bonds to a radical center will be determined. The stabilization energy
for each incremental double bond will be determined and, where possible,
compared to theoretical predictions. By the use of specially chosen rigid
conjugated polyenes, the effects of alkyl substituents and configuration can be
sorted out to give a unique value for the stabilization energy increment for
each added double bond. The interaction of phenyl groups with the conjugated
p-system will also be pursued. These results will be extended to a study of
cycloaddition and cycloreversion reactions that are interpreted in terms of a
biradical process. In addition to the simple dimerization of two ethylenes, the
cycloaddition reactions will include the Diels-Alder reaction and the Cope
rearrangement. This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the
continuing work of Professor William von Eggers Doering at Harvard University. A
carbon-carbon double bond unit connected to a carbon with one odd electron (a
tricoordinated carbon atom or radical center) will stabilize the radical center.
The magnitude of this stabilization energy and the amount of stabilization of
each successively added carbon-carbon double bond unit will be determined by the
use of specially designed molecules. In conjunction with the determination of
these stabilization energies, the thermochemistry of carbon-carbon double bonds
to form cyclic molecules through the intermediacy of a species with two radical
centers ( a biradical) will be determined.