* 9411604
* ENGINEERING RESEARCH EQUIPMENT: Differential Scanning       Calorimeter for Liquid Crystal Research
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Shaw Chen, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1996
* USD 22,645.00

CTS-9411604 Chen Equipment funds are requested for the procurement of a Perkin
Elmer DSC-7 differential scanning calorimeter to help initiate a project on low
molar mass glass-forming liquid crystals. It should be noted that both single
crystals and liquid crystals have found numerous potential applications in
optical and laser systems. Whereas single crystals are difficult to process,
liquid crystal devices lack environmental durability. To overcome these
problems, liquid crystalline polymers capable of vitrificaton have been explored
in recent years. However, the highly viscous nature of polymeric materials has
presented a processing problem where device uniformity is critical. Hence, ideal
materials should possess low melt viscosity besides requisite optical
characteristics. Few low molar mass liquid crystals capable of vitrification
with glass transition temperature above the ambient have been reported to date.
Furthermore, there is little understanding of glass-forming liquid crystals from
the perspective of chemical structure. It is proposed that two seemingly
opposing structural features, a mesogenic core and a volume-excluding moiety, be
chemically bonded to each other via a flexible spacer. To strike a subtle
balance between the types of mesogenic core and volume-excluding moiety, the
number of mesogenic cores per volume excluding moiety, and the flexible spacer
length is the key to accomplishing liquid crystal mesomorphism and glass
formation in a single molecular entity. Representative structures have been
proposed for synthesis and characterization, and molecular simulation will
subsequently be performed to furnish new insights into glass formation and
liquid crystal mesomorphism by organic molecules. Other on-going projects on
high birefringence nematic polymers, hydrogels, and cycloaliphatic polymers for
eye wear and optical systems applications will also benefit from the DSC system
to be acquired. ***