* 9411142
* U.S.-Western Europe Workshop on the Comparative Study of    State Feminism; Summer 1995; Leiden, The Netherlands
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1994,11/30/1996
* Dorothy McBride, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 11/30/1996
* USD 16,014.00

9411142 Stetson This award supports the participation of eight U.S. social and
political scientists (including two graduate students) in an international
research planning workshop to be held in Western Europe in March, 1995. This
activity was jointly organized by Professors Dorothy McBride Stetson of Florida
Atlantic University, Amy Mazur of Washington State University, and Joyce
Outshoorn of the University of Leiden, The Netherlands. The workshop will bring
together U.S. and European scholars in political science and sociology for the
purpose of establishing priorities for comparative research on institutionalized
feminism and preparing research designs to conduct cross-national investigations
of research questions and hypotheses. Invited participants in the workshop have
expertise in comparative politics and social theory, and research experience on
the phenomenon of women s policy institutions in one or more countries. The U.S.
participants will benefit from the opportunity of working with counterparts from
European countries where there is a long tradition of inquiry into state
theories. Some of the most far-reaching changes in Western societies in the last
100 years have been related to the changes in gender roles, specifically those
associated with the massive movement of women into the paid labor force and the
parallel shifts in family relations, child rearing and political participation.
The term state feminism refers to the creation of government agencies assigned
to improve the status of women. These include a variety of forms from
specialized bureaus or ministerial level offices to equal opportunity councils.
The workshop and ensuing collaborative research promises to make important
contributions to the development of empirically grounded theory of state
capacities and state-society relations. ***