* 9411208
* Workshop on the Interaction of Morphosyntax and Lexicon in  the Acquisition of Narrative Discourse; Albuquerque, New    Mexico; Summer 1995
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Dan Slobin, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1996
* USD 37,279.00

9411208 A research Workshop on The Interaction of Morphosyntax and Lexicon in
the Acquisition of Narrative Discourse will be held at the 1995 LSA Linguistic
Institute at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque. The objectives of the
workshop are: (I) to bring together experienced researchers who have done cross-
linguistic work on the development of the functions of morphosyntax in narrative
in order to compare findings across languages and methodology across studies;
(2) to enable less-experienced researchers and students to work with these
experts, to become familiar with the current issues, learn the state-of-the-art
analysis techniques, and carry out summer-long collaborative projects; (3) to
facilitate the formation of new interdisciplinary research collaborations which
will extend beyond the summer. In summary, the workshop will provide a seminar
setting for leaders, less-experienced researchers, and students to compare their
analyses across languages, with the goal of testing and improving current
theories of the acquisition of lexical and grammatical devices used in narrative
discourse. The workshop will be led by Ruth Berman and Dan Slobin, and will
focus on children's gradual mastery of the uses of the morphosyntax of their
languages to convey complex narrative information, primarily utilizing the 'frog
story' elicitation paradigm. The workshop will be open to all institute faculty,
affiliates and students; those interested in the cross-language comparison of
morphosyntax in aphasia and in developmental language disorders will especially
be encouraged to participate.