* 9411988
* Communication and Engineering Support Services for the      United States Antarctic Program
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Michael Lewis, JACKSON AND TULL CHARTERED ENGINEERS
* Contract
* Patrick Smith
* 06/30/1998
* USD 1,070,920.00

9411988 Lewis The NSF/OPP is developing a design concept to replaces facilities
at the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, Antarctica. The development of
concepts began approximately three years ago. The plans are to complete the
concept development by July 1994, so that initial funding for replacement of
facilities can be submitted in the FY-96 budget request. This contract with
Jackson and Tull Chartered Engineers will provide technical and management
support for reviewing and documenting design requirements for the replacement
facilities. Jackson and Tull's responsibility will be to develop a review
procedure and manage the review process to meet the FY-96 budget submission
schedule. In general, the review process will consist of peer reviews for each
management, functional, and operational area of responsibility. A non-advocate
review will be conducted to examine the review process and validate the basis of
design for final engineering and congressional funding. Jackson and Tull are to
provide a Project Manager, Subsystems Engineer, Configuration Manager and
administrative support. The review process will begin on February 1, 1994 and be
completed by July 1994. To meet this schedule a pre-contract award to Jackson
and Tull is recommended. This pre-contract award is recommended for $200,000.
$450,000 has been obligated for the completed task. ***