* 9411181
* Quantum Chemistry by Random Walk
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* James Anderson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 07/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

This project, supported by the NSF Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
Program, further develops the direct simulation Monte Carlo method for the
solution of the electronic Schroedinger equation. The goal is to compute
definitive theoretical energy surfaces for various molecular systems with two to
six electrons including small Helium clusters, Lithium hydride, and the proton
transfer reaction between the Helium atom and the Hydrogen molecule ion.
Approximate Monte Carlo methods for larger systems will be developed based on
cancellation of Monte Carlo walkers with opposite signs. The goal is to achieve
significant improvement in accuracy over that of fixed-node Monte Carlo methods.
These methods will be applied to the water molecule and to some small
hydrocarbons. Direct simulation Monte Carlo methods employ a rigorous
mathematical relationship between the solutions of certain differential
equations and the statistical average of a large sample of weighted random walks
in many-dimensional space. The accuracy of the method applied to the approximate
solution of the electronic Schroedinger equation is limited only by the size of
the statistical sample. Monte Carlo calculations have yielded the most accurate
quantum mechanical potential energy surfaces for the hydrogen atom hydrogen
molecule exchange reaction, and for various other small molecular systems, and
so provide reliable standards against which to test all other computational
methods in molecular electronic structure theory. The present research project
is of fundamental importance because it will provide additional benchmarks
needed to better establish the foundations of theoretical methods to be applied
to a wide range of chemical problems. A second goal of this research is the
development of less precise but more efficient Monte Carlo methods applicable to
somewhat larger molecular systems.