* 9411587
* System-level Integration of Optics into Multiprocessor      Interconnect Architecture
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Timothy Pinkston, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 08/31/1998
* USD 270,000.00

9411587 Pinkston Communication complexity and latency is a critical problem in
multiprocessor systems. A major portion of communication latency is associated
with the interconnect network. Optics has many advantages for achieving low
latency, scalable interprocessor communication. Recently, many optical
interconnects have been designed; however, little regard for system-level
influences on the interconnect architecture were taken into account in these
designs. The proposed research is to investigate an integrated design solution
for low latency multiprocessor communication. Program behavior, architecture,
and optical technology considerations are factored into the overall interconnect
design. This will lead to a design capable of increased network throughput and
optimal processor-memory connectivity. Engineering design principles will be
developed for applying high bandwidth, reconfigurable optical interconnects to
electronic digital multiprocessor systems. An optical interconnect strategy that
incorporates latency reduction and hiding techniques will be developed. An
interconnect simulator will be written to assist in the design and performance
evaluation efforts. A small scale optical interconnect demonstrator unit will be
built to show feasibility. Hence, an outgrowth of this research is an optical
design framework (design methodology, simulation tools and prototype) that will
build infrastructure and allow for empirical evaluation of a large design space.
***