* 9411681
* Dissertation Research: Developing a Theory of Landscape     Allometry: Coupling Detrital Dynamics to Slough Size
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Robert Wissmar, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 26,980.00

Wissmar Streams, lakes, and wetlands are strongly influenced by the landscapes
they drain. They receive surface and subsurface waters, allochthonous carbon,
sediments, nutrients, and pollutants. The intensity of this landscape influence
differs for large and small streams, lakes, or wetlands due to differences in
perimeter to area ratios. We will develop a model of landscape interactions
called landscape allometry, and test this concept by examining the relationship
between slough size and the amount of allochthonous insect and plant flotsam
exported from the sloughs. We will also dissect sloughs of various sizes to
quantify detrital insect and plant fluxes from slough sections spanning a range
of sizes; integrate the results over the entire slough; and compare integrated
results with whole slough measurements. We anticipate that landscape allometry
will have broad application to other ecosystems, that it will contribute to the
application of fractal geometry theory to ecology, and that it could influence
management of habitats of smaller size by placing their landscape functions and
greater vulnerability to disturbance into clearer perspective. Our choice of
study system also contributes to the understanding of the ecology of estuarine
habitats, which are used by juvenile salmon as feeding sites during their
outmigration to the ocean.