* 9411767
* Deposition, Transport and Fallout of Debris Lofted by       Tornadoes
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* John Snow, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 10/31/1997
* USD 392,195.00

9411767 Snow Due to their severity, tornadoes have been the subject of much
study. One data source, however, that is still relatively unexplored is that of
the location of debris lofted by the tornado and parent storm. The phenomena of
lofting, deposition, transport and fallout of debris are not well understood
with most data being anecdotal in nature. The Principal Investigator will carry
out his research under the umbrella of the Verification of Origins of Rotation
in Tornadoes Experiment (VORTEX) that will be conducted in 1994 by a consortium
of university and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration researchers.
The Principal Investigator will conduct field surveys, and telephone and mail
campaigns of regions where deposition and fallout are deemed likely. He will use
these data in combination with supporting meteorological data collected in
VORTEX to fine tune a debris trajectory model and to develop data sets for later
use in evaluating the ability of cloud/mesoscale models to replicate the
observed patterns of fallout. He will use the observed deposition and fallout
patterns together with observations of the tornadoes to infer the likely
mechanism that control lofting. Results of this research will extend
understanding of tornadoes and their damage producing mechanisms, elucidate
connections between tornadoes and their parent thunderstorms and further reveal
the interaction between a thunderstorm and the environmental winds. Because of
the potential hazard posed by lofting and subsequent deposition and fallout of
contaminated or toxic materials, the results will be of interest to emergency
management personnel as well as to the meteorological community. ***