* 9411785
* Dissertation Research: The Understory as Ecological Filter: Its Influence on the Abundance, Composition, and Size       Structure of Seedling Bank in New England Deciduous Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Fakhri Bazzaz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1996
* USD 5,000.00

9411785 Bazzaz This dissertation research will evaluate the role of understory
plants in shaping characteristics of the seedling bank in central New England
forests. The understory has the potential to influence development and
composition by acting as a filter through which all tree seeds and seedlings
must pass. This project will explore whether the understory acts as a general
filter that influences seedling abundance of all species similarly or whether
selectivity of an understory filter predictably influences species composition
and relative size structure of the seedling bank. Spatial correlations of tree
seedlings and understory plants will be described in stands where overstory
trees have been mapped so that seedlings-understory relationships can be
established independently of seed rain patterns. Growth and survival of
naturally recruiting tree seedlings will be monitored under different understory
types for two years. Field experiments involving understory manipulation will
test the effects of the presence and identity of two dominant ferns on
dispersal, germination, growth, and survival of rd oak, red maple, and yellow
birch seeds and seedlings. %%% Studies of forest regeneration have focused on
the growth of tree seedlings with respect to the location and condition of
canopy trees, yet little is known about how the understory herb and shrub strata
influence stand succession. Results of this study will add to an understanding
of forest regeneration following disturbance by focusing attention on processes
which shape the starting array of advanced regenerants released by overstory
removal.