* 9411972
* LTER: Succession, Biodiversity and Ecosystem Functioning at the Prairie-Forest Border
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1994,10/31/2001
* Peter Reich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/2001
* USD 3,915,998.00

9411972 Tilman The Cedar Creek Natural History Area is important because of its
location on the climatically and edaphically controlled boundary between prairie
and forest. This "tension zone" between forest and prairies is highly sensitive
to climatic variation and strongly impacted by edaphic factors, especially soil
nitrogen availability fire frequency and by herbivores and predators. The
dominant vegetation of the region, oak savanna, itself has unusually high
species richness because its flora and fauna include both prairies and forest
species. It is the diversity and dynamics of these ecosystems that form the
focus of their research. Three major questions guide their research: (1) What
factors, interactions and positive and negative feedback effects control the
species composition and species dynamics of our successional grasslands and
native savanna ecosystems? (2) What forces determine how many species can
persist on various trophic levels within our ecosystems, i.e., what controls
biodiversity? (3) What are the impacts of species composition and biodiversity
on the functioning of these ecosystems? Succession and biodiversity are tightly
linked. They are interested in succession because it is the process of ecosystem
assembly. Disturbances often cause the local loss of species. The factors that
drive the successional processes, are thus the processes that control and
maintain diversity. They have performed numerous long-term experiments that have
provided insights into the impacts of biodiversity on the stability and
functioning of these ecosystems. They will continue to seek the underlying
mechanisms that cause broad scale patterns in ecosystem composition, diversity,
and productivity in their successional grasslands and prairie openings, and will
expand their efforts in oak savannas. Their ongoing studies will further
quantify the effects of biodiversity on ecosystem resistance to and resilience
from climatic variability. Their new biodiversity e xperiment should provide
some of the first direct field evidence of the effects of species and functional
diversity on numerous aspects of population and ecosystem stability and
functioning.