* 9411901
* REG:  X-Ray Powder Diffractometer for Characterization of   Ultrafine Materials and Novel Structures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Hans-Conrad zur Loye, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 07/31/1995
* USD 55,000.00

ABSTRACT Jackie Y. Ying CTS-9411901 A X-ray powder diffractometer will be
purchased and dedicated to support several research projects in the Departments
of Chemical Engineering and Chemistry at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
The projects include structural tailoring of ultrafine materials generated
through nanocrystalline synthesis, sol-gel processing, and pillaring of layered
structures. The common theme of these programs lies in the design of nanoscale
structure, which consists of nanometer-sized crystallites or two-dimensional
layered structures, high volume fraction of surfaces and interfaces, and
microporous network. X-ray diffractometry will be used in the identification of
crystalline phases, and in the characterization of crystallite size, lattice
strain, film thickness, interlayer spacing, and thermal stability. Novel
nanostructures are targeted towards the following applications: (1) high
activity catalysts for SO2 removal, (2) microporous molecularly mixed
multicomponent catalysts for partial oxidation and hydrodesulfirization, (3)
low-temperature sinterable, high strength Si3N4-based structural composites, ad
(4) high permselectivity dense metallic membranes for hydrogen purification and
membrane reaction. The first three projects are currently funded by NSF. The
proposed diffractometer will be also used in the phase identification and
structural determination of new nitrides and oxygen ion conductors. Ternary
nitrides which have interesting metallic and magnetic properties will be
synthesized via ammonolysis of solid state oxide precursors. Accurate structural
characterization of these polycrystalline powders will be performed with X-ray
Rietveld refinement. Similar structural determination is also proposed for novel
layered bismuth oxides with intrinsic oxygen vacancies. They have great
potential as low-temperature superionic oxygen ion conductors, which will be
very useful in fuel cell and air separation technologies. Research is funded
through gran ts from Division and American Chemical Society Petroleum Research
Fund. ***