* 9411666
* US-Polish Cooperative Research: Texture Analysis with       Discrete Methods
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1995
* Hans-Rudolf Wenk, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 05/31/1995
* USD 4,360.00

9411666 Wenk This US-Poland Research project between Dr. Hans-Rudolf Wenk of the
University of California-Berkeley, and Dr. Jan Pospiech of the Krupowski
Institute for Metals Research of the Polish Academy of Sciences, is a "Texture
Analysis with Discrete Methods." Interdisciplinary research between PAN Krakow
and UC Berkeley coordinated efforts to obtain quantitative information of
orientation characteristics of polycrystalline materials, particularly those
with low crystal and sample symmetry which are not only typical in geology but
in ceramics and polymer science as well. They showed that discrete methods have
distinct advantages to obtain the orientation distribution (OD) from a minimum
amount of experimental pole figure data. Discrete methods are also useful to
obtain misorientation functions (MOD) and other orientation characteristics
describing correlations between orientations. This has been illustrated for
copper, quartz and calcite. The researchers now propose to conclude this project
by generalizing computer programs for analysis of individual orientation
measurements and adding elements of the component method for compact
representation of texture data, all using a discrete approach rather than the
harmonic method which easily introduces artifacts. Programs will be made
available to the texture communities for testing and application to benefit a
larger constituency than the laboratories of the principal investigators. This
project in geological sciences fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in Poland and the United States
to combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. ***