* 9411762
* 1994 BOC Priestly Conference; Lewisburg, Pennsylvania;      June 24-27, 1994
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1994
* Charles Root, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 10/31/1994
* USD 10,816.00

9411762 Root The 1994 BOC Priestley Conference will be held at Bucknell
University in Lewisburg, Pennsylvania, from June 24 through June 27, 1994. This
conference is a joint celebration between the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC)
and the American Chemical Society (ACS). In 1974 the 200th anniversary of Joseph
Priestley's discovery of oxygen was observed. Since that time conferences have
been held every three years; The first in 1977 in Leed, UK (Heterogeneous
Oxidation): the second in 1980 in Birmingham, UK (Oxygen and Life); the third in
1983 in London (Oxygen and the Conversion of Future Feedstocks); the fourth in
1986 in Leeds (Membranes in Gas Separation and Enrichment); the fifth in 1989 in
Birmingham (Separation of Gases); and the sixth in 1992 in Paris, France (Role
of Oxygen in Improving Chemical Processes). The basic theme of the 1994
conference will be "Oxidants and Oxidation in the Earth's Atmosphere" with a
keynote lecture on the history of ozone. Topics crucial to the atmospheric
chemistry of global change and local and regional air pollution will be
addressed. Recent progress in these areas has been rapid. As detailed in Section
2, the Organizing Committee has assembled a distinguished group of U.S. and
international atmospheric chemists who will address the issues domination
current research and policy agendas. The ACS and RSC feel it is important to
communicate this progress and to identify remaining scientific and societal
questions in a forum accessible to academic, industrial, and government
scientists, engineers, and policy-makers. This grant will support the
participation of graduate and post-doctoral students in the conference.