* 9411650
* Dissertational Improvement: Ecological Pressures Selecting  for Dietary Plasticity During Migration in Two Neotropical  Migratory Passerine Genera
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Douglass Morse, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 06/30/1996
* USD 11,060.00

9411650 Morse The decline of many populations of Neotropical migratory songbirds
has triggered much research over the last decade into the biology of these
species on their temperate breeding grounds and their tropical wintering areas.
The interim migration period has received much less attention, despite the
extreme energetic demands and the very divergent behavior of migrants during
this transient period. During migration, many songbirds diversify their
breeding-season behaviors to select different habitats, use more foraging
behaviors, and feed on more varied diet types than at other times of the year.
The ecological factors behind the evolution of such behavioral plasticity and
the ecological and conservation implications these divergent behaviors remain
speculative. The proposed research will investigate these questions in one
aspect of behavioral diversification in autumn migrating songbirds - the shift
in diet from eating insects to one of eating fruit. Preliminary research on
Block Island, Rhode Island suggests that unpredictability in resource abundance
at migratory stopover sites and increased energy intake on expanded diets during
the demanding migration period have led to behavioral plasticity in songbirds.
This research will be furthered with continued monitoring of insect and fruit
abundance at stopover sites to monitor different degrees of predictability of
the two resources during Autumn, 1994 and 1995. Furthermore, migrants will be
fed experimental diets with varying degrees of fruit to determine the extent
they can fatten on expanded diets, thus testing the hypothesis that
diversification of ingested food types has resulted from selection to maximize
energy intake during migration. Finally, experiments will allow evaluation
(through doubly-labeled water techniques) of the amount of energy saved by
migrant birds in feeding on diverse diets. These techniques allow estimation of
the energy expenditure of birds which can be follow ed under situations where
birds have monotypic and diverse diets available to them. These studies will
provide insight into the evolutionary pressures for behavioral plasticity as
well as important information about the biology of migrating songbirds. This in
turn will allow better conservation decisions to be made regarding these
declining populations. ***