* 9411610
* Auger-Photoelectron Coincidence Studies of Solids and Their Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Robert Bartynski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9411610 Bartynski A technique of Auger-photoelectron coincidence spectroscopy
(APECS) with synchrotron radiation will be employed to study the core level line
shapes and Auger electron spectra in selected metals, semiconductors and oxides.
The enhanced sensitivity of APECS will be used to study the core level shifts,
charge transfer, and electronic structure at the clean and adsorbate covered
surfaces. With the ability of APECS to eliminate lifetime broadening, we will
probe the line shapes of 3p (4p) core levels in several 3d (4d) transition
metals for surface shifts and hidden splittings. Site- specific electronic
properties and correlation effects in inhomogeneous solids will also be studied
by measuring core-valence (CVV) Auger transitions coincidence with shifted core
levels. Finally, we will use the unique capabilities of APECS to explore the
photoexcitation/decay process itself. The majority of the research will be
performed at the National Synchrotron Light Source of Brookhaven National
Laboratory. Our group has developed Auger-photoelectron coincidence spectroscopy
using synchrotron radiation as a new experimental probe of solids. This is a
qualitative improvement over conventional Auger electron or photoelectron
spectroscopy. It is more surface sensitive, it eliminates background signal, it
sharpens spectral lines, and it provides a new and unique way to study the local
electronic properties of complicated systems. The technique will be utilized to
obtain new information about the electronic structure and bonding at clean and
adsorbate covered semiconductor and metal surfaces. The site-specific nature of
the technique will be used to probe the electronic properties of different atoms
in solid compounds. The sharper spectral lines will allow new ways to
investigate magnetic effects and electronic interactions in solids. Finally the
unique capabilities of this technique will provide clues to the
photoexcitation/decay process itself. The ma jority of the research will be
performed at the National Synchrotron Light Source of Brookhaven National
Laboratory. ***