* 9411766
* Cusp Turbulence and Transport and their Impact on           Ionospheric Coupling
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* James Drake, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 06/30/1998
* USD 212,310.00

The shocked solar wind plasma, or magnetosheath, provides the basic input and
outer boundary condition for the Earth's magnetosphere. The most direct access
of this magnetosheath plasma into the magnetosphere and ionosphere occurs in the
region of the outer polar cusp. Thus, an enhanced understanding of plasma
processes at the magnetosheath/cusp interface is essential to the advancing
magnetopause and boundary layer physics. Because of tailward bending of the
magnetic field near the outer magnetospheric boundary, the entire magnetospheric
boundary layer is mapped through this cusp region into the frontside, high-
latitude ionosphere near local noon. Although the interaction of plasmas and
fields in the outer cusp play a key role in linking the magnetosheath and
boundary layer to the ionosphere, very few satellite measurements are available
in this region. This project's objective is to advance the knowledge of plasma,
field and plasma wave interactions in the outer and mid- altitude polar cusp
with a focus on plasma and momentum transport, field fluctuations, and the
resulting cusp current system. The investigators will identify and test those
plasma and field interactions most relevant to enhancing unique observations
available from satellite and used as a baseline sample of particle and field
characteristics in the outer cusp and mid-altitude cusp regions. Although very
limited, available observations in the outer cusp provide enough information on
overall geometry and plasma conditions to apply state-of-the-art 2-D MHD and
hybrid simulations of the magnetosheath-cusp interaction region including
coupling to the ionosphere. Such simulations will provide information on the
local time-dependent flows and magnetic fields in the outer cusp as well as the
more nonlocal cusp/ionosphere current system. Understanding anomalous cross-
field momentum transport is crucial for developing quantitative models of the
cusp and dayside current systems. The PIs will therefore focus on shear-flow
driven instabilities and associated turbulence and transport. Realistic 2-D and
3-D hybrid simulations of shear-flow across the magnetosheath/outer cusp and
mid-altitude cusp wall boundaries will be completed. Theoretical predictions of
electric and magnetic fluctuation spectra will be compared, especially with
observed ULF-ELF wave spectra. In turn, cross-field transport will be calculated
based on the observed fluctuation spectra to assess the importance of anomalous
diffusion processes in the cusp region.