* 9411390
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Reliability of             Microelectronic Packaging and Interconnects
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Sheng Liu, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 06/30/1995
* USD 2,300.00

9411390 Liu This award supports a research planning visit by Dr. S. Liu, Florida
Institute of Technology, and Dr. W. Yang, Tsinghua University, China to develop
collaborative research on the reliability of microelectronic packaging and
interconnects. VLSI semiconductor devices continue to utilize larger chips
(dies) in progressively smaller packages than previously produced. From the
material and structural point of view, a microelectronic package is a highly
complicated composite microlaminate, consisting of silicon chips (dies) and die
coatings, various passivation layers, encapsulant such as mold compound, die
attach, leadframe, and various material interfaces. Various failure modes can
occur during fabrication, testing, storage, and operation. For instance, typical
failure modes in plastic packaging include metal line smearing, metal and
passivation cracking, die cracking, and various material interfacial
delaminations, which are mainly due to elevated temperatures and high moisture
concentrations. The reliability of a semiconductor device is closely related to
the mechanical properties of its constituent materials and its associated
interfaces. Therefore, the first part of the proposed research is to conduct
experimental and analytical studies on the measurement of the material response
and the interfacial strength for various bi- material combinations. The second
part of the present investigation involves damage tolerance analysis of
packaging devices based on analytical/numerical modeling. The predicted results
will be compared with data obtained form experimental test chips.