* 9411168
* Peasants, Poverty, and Land Encroachment in Agrarian Nepal: A Political Ecology Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1997
* Nanda Shrestha, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 01/31/1997
* USD 117,827.00

9411168 SHRESTHA This study will analyze land encroachment as an ecopolitical
struggle over land access and control in agrarian Nepal using a political
ecology framework. Nepal, like many developing countries, has arrived at a
juncture where mounting peasant impoverishment has come face to face with
growing ecological degradation. This interface reveals that poverty is not just
a socioeconomic issue; it is also an ecological issue with wide- ranging
ramifications. As in many other agrarian societies, there is a struggle between
peasants' day-to-day survival, which includes land access, on one side and the
state's dominant interests and environmental sustainability, which leads to
land/resource control, on the other. Two basic questions emerge from this
growing ecopolitical struggle: why does the struggle occur and how does it
affect the sustainability of what can be termed "peasant ecology" in which
peasants are engaged in direct production relationships with nature. Their
socioeconomic viability therefore is intrinsically intertwined with the
ecological sustainability of their environment. Land encroachment is thus seen
as a form of peasant (social) movement and/or a form of everyday resistance
against the state and its land control policy. Guided by this general
conceptualization, this study will investigate three interrelated issues: (1)
the evolution of human-environment relations in agrarian Nepal, focusing on the
social and political configuration of peasant ecology, (2) the political ecology
of land encroachment, i.e. the social and ecopolitical conflicts over land in te
Tarai, and (3) the implications of these conflicts for peasants' socioeconomic
viability and environmental sustainability. The study will involve extensive
research in Nepal relying on both the collection of formal materials relating to
land use policy and actual land use and on interviews with peasants and
officials in the region. This research will contribute to adva ncing a coherent
theoretical political ecology framework, one that can be used to investigate
similar struggles unfolding in various local and regional contexts throughout
the third world. As such it will also add new insights relevant to the formation
of policies for dealing with the growing tension between the protection of
critical environments and the social and economic survival of local populations
who are dependent on those environments.