* 9411497
* Dynamics and Sea-Air Exchange of Dimethysulfide and Carbon  Dioxide in Coastal Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* John W Dacey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 08/31/1997
* USD 357,443.00

9411497 Dacey Research will be undertaken in response to a one-time Program
Announcement (NSF 93-101) for the Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) Coastal Air-Sea
Chemical Fluxes pilot study. The NSF/CoOP Study will augment and collaborate
with the Office of Naval Research (ONR) -sponsored Marine Boundary Layer (MBL)
Advanced Research Initiative (ARI) project scheduled for 1995 off the coast of
Monterey, California. The overall scientific project is interdisciplinary, with
the NSF/CoOP efforts addressing chemical and biological parameters, while the
ONR study focuses on physical oceanographic and meteorological parameters. The
investigators will focus on the air-sea flux of dimethylsulfide (DMS) and CO2 in
coastal ocean. CO2 and DMS represent two of the most important biogasses in the
upper ocean and because of their spectral properties or greenhouse potential,
they are important factors to be considered in climate models. There is a lack
of knowledge concerning CO2 and DMS air-sea transfer rates, due primarily to the
inability to measure these tracers at high enough frequency. A new automated
sampling - analysis scheme will allow for a continuous record of DMS and pCO2
concentrations in both surface waters and the overlying atmosphere, as well as
in surface water profiles. This sampling scheme relies heavily on the
development of automated instrumentation packages that will continuously operate
for the full month-long duration of the field program. Data collected will be
used in conjunction with data from physical, biological, and chemical projects
from other investigators participating in both in CoOP and ONR MBL programs.
Ultimately, fundamental questions of biogeochemical ocean processes, air-sea
exchange, and atmospheric processes may be answered to better enable validation
and calibration of existing climate models and develop new models for predicting
local and global dynamics for these important greenhouse gasses.