* 9411483
* US-Bulgaria Cooperative Research on Associative Star        Polymerd of Poly(ethlene oxide)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,09/30/1998
* Johannes Smid, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 09/30/1998
* USD 35,453.00

9411483 Smid This U.S.-Bulgaria Joint Cooperative Research project on
"Associative Star Polymers of Poly(ethylene oxide)" is a renewal of a grant
between the research group of Dr. Johannes Smid of the SUNY College of
Environmental Science &amp; Forestry and that of Dr. Christo Tsventanov of the
Institute of Polymers of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences. The project deals
with the synthesis, properties and utilization of materials related to
poly(ethylene oxide), a polymer manufactured in both Bulgaria and the United
States. Specifically, the work to be performed at the SUNY- Syracuse campus
would involve associative star polymers with poly(ethylene oxide) arms end-
capped with a hydrophobic moiety. Such star polymers, presently being
investigated in our laboratory, cause phase separation when added to water, with
formation of a polymer rich gel phase. This phase has a high capacity and
affinity for hydrophobic organic solutes. The project aims to synthesize and
characterize new associative amphophilic star polymers with PEO arms, to find
the factors that govern the phase separation in water and that control the
transfer of organic solutes to the gel phase, and to explore methods to recover
the star polymers after extracting the organic solutes from water. This proposed
research in theoretical physics fulfills the program objectives of advancing
science by enabling leading experts in the U.S. and Bulgaria to combine
complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. ***