* 9411207
* Ethnogenesis of the Island Carib:  An Archaeological        Investigation of Politics and Identity in the Early         Colonial Lesser Antilles
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,11/30/1996
* Jeffrey Parsons, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1996
* USD 2,950.00

Parsons Under the direction of Dr. Jeffrey Parsons, Ms. Starr Farr will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological excavation
at Bloody Point, an indigenous Native American village site on the island of St.
Kitts. The site appears to have both prehistoric and early historic period
components. She will analyze the ceramics and other materials collected from
both trash midden and household contexts and attempt to reconstruct both ethnic
affiliation and social organization based on these remains. In recent years
there has been great interest in the collision of European and indigenous
American peoples and cultures. Recent scholarship on the Island Carib of the
Lesser Antilles has questioned traditional models of native society and the ways
in which they adapted to change in the face of contact. Ms. Farr believes that
in response to changed conditions, indigenous political and social realignments
occurred and that new ethnic identities were rapidly forged. The research is
important because it will increase our understanding of how human societies
adapt to intense, rapid and unexpected change. It will also assist in the
training of a promising young scientist.