* 9411862
* From Experimental Evolution to Genetics in the Work of W.E. Castele and E. M. East
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1994,10/31/1996
* Marga Vicedo, Arizona State University
* Fixed Amount Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 10/31/1996
* USD 65,000.00

The goals of the Progressive Era and the reforms in educational institutions
during those years had a great influence on the development of genetics in this
country. In response to the emphasis on useful knowledge, may biologists
developed research programs in "experimental evolution." Best conceived as an
approach to inquiry, experimental evolution aimed to solve the riddles of
evolution and to predict its workings. The ultimate goal, however, was to
manipulate and control evolutionary forces. This pragmatic goal led American
studies in heredity and evolution to assume very distinctive characteristics,
especially a pronounced theoretical and methodological eclecticism. Researchers
did not profess allegiance to any particular school of thought because they were
not interested in building theoretical systems, but rather in finding practical
applications. Dr. Vicedo is exploring how the interests and goals behind
experimental evolution changed over two decades in such a way that the field of
genetics was identified with studies about the structure of the genome, the type
of research program so successfully developed by Morgan's group at Columbia
University. She is analyzing how this change took place through an analysis of
the work of W.E. Castle and E.M. East at Harvard along with other work done by a
number of other biologists. This study promises to enhance our understanding of
the history of genetics and lead to a reassessment of current interpretations of
the development of Darwinian and Mendelian ideas. It will also help us to
understand the roots of Morgan's work and the interests and problems that led
towards the Modern Synthesis in evolutionary biology. The role of national
context in shaping styles of scientific thought will also be examined. This
study promises to enrich our understanding of how social, institutions,
pragmatic, and intellectual factors interact in the development of a scientific
discipline.