* 9411400
* Dissertation Research:  Examination of Prehistoric          Jordanian Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Clifford Lamberg-Karlovsky, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 07/31/1995
* USD 12,000.00

Lamberg-Karlovsky Under the direction of Dr. Lamberg-Karlovsky, Ms. Meridith
Chesson will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Building on pilot work
in 1993, Ms. Chesson and her collaborators will conduct archaeological
excavation at the site of Tell el-Handaquq South which dates to the Early Bronze
Age and which is located in the Jordan Valley. Research indicates the presence
of substantial fortification walls which encompass the entire 10 hectare site.
At lease seven towers complement the fortification system. Over the entire site,
room blocks are visible on the surface, some with walls extending for more than
30 meters. Test excavations in one set of room blocks revealed domestic
architecture with associated ceramic, lithic, faunal and groundstone remains.
The site therefore has the potential to shed significant new light into
household organization during the period when fortified highly organized
villages first emerged in the Near East. Ms. Chesson will uncover a large
domestic area and analyze the range of cultural materials thus recovered. She
will attempt both to reconstruct the range of social and economic activities
which occurred within household compounds and to determine the nature, function
and importance of the household unit in Early Bronze Age times. Archaeologists
are interested in the processes which lead to the rise of cities and complex
civilizations. While traditionally, much attention has been focussed on temples
and major public buildings, both archaeological and ethnographic research
indicate that the household constitutes the basic level at which change and
adaptation occurs. Given clearcut evidence for the presence of household
compounds at Tel el-Handaquq and the ease with which they can be excavated, the
site provides an excellent opportunity for examination of this issue. The
project is also important because it will both produce data of interest to many
archaeologists and assist in the training of a promising young sci entist.