* 9411644
* Dissertation Research: Systematic and Evolutionary Studies of Asarum and Aristolochiaceae
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Melissa Luckow, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* John R. Gold
* 07/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9411644 LUCKOW This award will pay for travel to conduct field work in China and
laboratory supplies for molecular (chloroplast and nuclear DNA sequencing)
studies to enhance the dissertation work of a PhD graduate student, Lawrence M.
Kelly. The research project of this student involves utilizing morphological and
molecular data in a phylogenetic analysis or study of relationships among
species groups in the genus Asarum and among Asarum and the five other genera
that constitute the plant family Aristolochiaceae. This family is understood to
be the plant group most closely related to the monocots, the grasses, bamboos,
lilies, etc.. This study will clarify relationships among major lineages, begin
work on a full species-level treatment or monograph of the genus Asarum which
includes approximately 80 species. The phylogeny or pattern of relationships
derived from these studies will be used to test hypotheses concerning the
associations of swallowtail butterflies with these plants relative to their
production of certain plant acids and modifications adapting these plants to
pollination by fungus gnats. %%% This study will clarify relationships among
members of a very interesting group of plants and test predictions about certain
members and their biological associations with swallowtail butterflies. Support
for the training of graduate students in modern systematic methodologies is
important for maintaining the workforce of scientists capable of addressing the
questions and issues of biodiversity which are of increasing global concern. ***