* 9411975
* LTER: Harvard Forest Long-Term Ecological Research Program  Forest Ecosystem Dynamics in Central New England
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1995,03/31/2002
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 03/31/2002
* USD 3,905,024.00

9411975 Foster Forest ecosystems worldwide are changing in response to direct
and indirect human activities. These present a significant challenge requiring
interpretation of the driving variables across wide temporal and spatial scales.
These dynamics also present an opportunity to evaluate the mechanisms regulating
ecosystem responses. Harvard Forest LTER I assessed temperate forest response to
human (atmospheric deposition and climate change) and natural (wind damage)
disturbances. The research was structured around five primary areas: (1)
retrospective studies of long-term changes in forest composition, disturbance,
and environment; (2) studies of current forest conditions, (3) experimental
manipulations to evaluate forest response to disturbance, (4) modeling studies
of responses to disturbance over a range of temporal and spatial scales; and (5)
cross-site studies. Results from LTER I have transformed understanding of forest
response to disturbance and have emphasized the importance of integrated studies
across time, space and discipline. In particular, results document that
temperate forests must be interpreted in the context of past disturbance,
particularly land-use. LTER II research is focused on the study of legacies of
human land-use on modern regional scale forest processes. Studies will continue
to emphasize keystone long-term experiments and measurements with a focus on the
five LTER core areas. New studies will (1) strengthen the temporal and spatial
resolution; (2) evaluate population responses to disturbance and patterns of
species distribution; (3) assess human-induced alteration of ecosystem function,
especially C and N dynamics; (4) evaluate controls on C exchange at leaf to
stand levels; and (5) synthesize our work across scales through continued
modeling, inter-site, and comparative studies.