* 9411391
* Picosecond Diagnostics in Reaching Flows Using a Mode-Locked Ti:Sapphire Laser
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Mark Linne, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 07/31/1997
* USD 103,640.00

The PI has proposed a rather innovative approach to non-intrusive laser
diagnostics of reacting flows based on the use of picosecond, mode-locked
TI:Sapphire laser technology. The PI enumerates many advantages of using a mode-
locked laser as compared to a pulsed laser. For example, since a mode-locked
laser is essentially cw in nature, consisting of trains of very short picosecond
pulses at MHz repetition rates and wide band-widths, improved signal to noise
can be obtained by using phase-sensitive detection and can result in the
recovery of pertinent frequency spectrum information such as power spectral
densities and probability density functions. The very short pulse lengths make
the measurements (absorption, fluorescence) less sensitive to collisional
effects and is especially useful in pump/probe measurements. Mode-locked lasers
also tend to be more stable, resulting in better spatial resolution. The peak
power attainable, although much less than typical pulsed lasers, nevertheless,
is sufficient to perform nonlinear optical techniques in particular degenerate
four wave mixing (DFWM). The PI has outlined an ambitious program which hinges
on the development of a reliable high power, Fourier-transform limited laser
source with pulse length in the range of 30-50 psec. The PI plans to upgrade an
existing TI:Sapphire laser for this purpose. An acoustically forced turbulent
flame and a high pressure laminar flame will serve as test beds for the
pump/probe and DFWM diagnostics.