* 9411807
* Privatizing Property Rights and Reshaping State-Peasant     Relations:  A Preliminary Study of the Implementation of    Ejido Reform in Michoacan, Mexico
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1995
* Luin Goldring, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/1995
* USD 18,000.00

This is a study of the impact of the ejido reform in rural Mexico. That reform,
initiated in 1991-92, is designed to make possible the eventual privatization of
lands that were formerly held communally by Mexican cultivators. The project
will be conducted through pilot research in the Zamora Valley, Michoac n,
Mexico. This project is funded through NSF's program of Research Planning Grants
for Women Scientists and Engineers. Communally held land has been a basic
feature of agrarian Mexico since the time of the Mexican revolution. Critics of
the ejido system claim that it hinders economic development; defenders of the
system argue that its erosion will lead to increased inequality and
landlessness. A study of the reform from its early stages will throw light on
the merits of such opposing arguments. It will also illuminate the impact of
this important reform on the social and economic lives of Mexican farmers and on
Mexico's political stability and links to the world economy. Land privatization
reforms have been proposed or tried in many other parts of the world, and the
Mexican experience will contribute to growing scientific understanding of the
consequences of such reforms. In addition to its scientific and practical
importance, this grant will enable a talented young researcher to conduct pilot
research to prepare a request for funding for a larger project.