* 9411140
* Genetic Diversity and Behavioral Ontogeny
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Gary McCracken, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 280,000.00

How do animals adapt to changes in their environments? Are all healthy, normal
appearing individuals or their offspring equally able to survive? Since finding
and utilizing food resources are important aspects of survival and the
occupation of new or altered habitats, this proposal aims at the study of
foraging and food use in a species with a generalized diet that is known to
exploit novel prey. This species is the common garter snake, Thamnophis
sirtalis, which can feed on a variety of small animals. This investigator will
follow babies from birth through the first months of life in a study that will
look at the effects of genetic background, diet, and ontogeny on food choice,
foraging ability, and growth. The initial responses to prey involve chemical
cues in newborn common garter snakes. There is great variability among
individuals, even from the same litter. Experience with different prey types can
alter prey recognition, prey preference, and prey capturing ability. This
project will investigate this individuality and plasticity with snakes from
different litters born to mothers from the same natural area. Since one
advantage of snakes is the large number of animals born to each mother, snakes
from each litter will be put in various groups raised on controlled or free-
choice diets. Another advantage of this species is that different babies born to
a given female may have different fathers. Thus identifying which snakes in a
litter have the same or different fathers can help separate genetic factors from
prenatal environmental ones. Newly developed microsatellite DNA techniques will
be applied in identifying animals with the same or different fathers. It is
hoped that the results of this work will help in predicting which aspects of
foraging are most important to survival when animals confront different or
changed environments, and how environments and genetic differences interact.