* 9411625
* RUI:  Transnationalism in Local Context:  Songhay Migrant   Experiences in New York City's Informal Economy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Rosemary Coombe, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/1997
* USD 69,999.00

9411625 STOLLER This project is an exploration of the migratory experiences of
Songhay-speaking peoples from the Republic of Niger and their on- going
participation in the informal economy of New York City. The study will be the
first full-length anthropological study of a West African community of migrants
in the area. The research will focus particularly on the legal dimensions of the
economic practices of migrants in the informal economy of a major U.S. city,
generating empirical data on how migrants become conscious of and learn to
interpret local laws. The study will make a major contribution to the scientific
knowledge base about migrant behavior and will be useful for policy makers
concerned with issues posed by the recent growth of immigration to U.S. cities
and the migrant impact on informal urban economies. The principal investigators,
who speak the Songhay language, will conduct interviews with street-vending
migrants, with migrants in other informal occupations, with local business
people in Harlem and other areas affected by the informal economic activities of
West African migrants, and with city, regional and federal officials familiar
with problems associated with immigration and the informal economy of New York
City. The principal investigators will also conduct ethnographic fieldwork,
engaging in extensive observation of West African migrant activities in New York
City's informal sector. ***