* 9411742
* Wartime Catalyst and Postwar Reaction: The Making of the    U.S. Synthetic Organic Chemicals Industry
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Kathryn Steen, Individual Award
* Fixed Amount Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 06/30/1996
* USD 17,240.00

Prior to World War 1, the United States possessed virtually no synthetic organic
chemicals industry. Instead, it relied almost exclusively on imports of such
chemicals from Germany, the world leader in this area. During and following
World War I, American industrialists and government officials, with support from
universities, promoted the organic chemistry industry through policies that
included tariffs and embargoes, military procurement contracts, and confiscation
of German chemical property. By the end of the 1920's, the American chemical
industry was firmly established as a world competitor capable of producing such
notable products as aspirin, plastics, and dyestuffs. Under a previous grant to
support her doctoral dissertation research, Dr. Steen examined the development
of the American synthetic organic chemical industry from 1910 to 1933. Under
this grant, she is extending her American study to gain a greater understanding
of the complex relationship between the German chemical companies and their
American importing agents during years of wartime stress and rampant xenophobia.
She is also extending her previous study to include the area of pharmaceuticals.
In order to carry out this extended study, Dr. Steen is examining German
archives of the Bayer Company, and the B.A.S.F. company , the archives at the
Deutches Museum in Munich, and the Charles H. Herty papers at Emory University.