* 9411226
* Regulation of Basic Fibroblast Growth Factor Gene Expressionin Reactive and Neoplastic Astrocytes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Michal Stachowiak, Barrow Neurological Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel K. Hartline
* 08/31/1997
* USD 277,963.00

The two major cell types that form the nervous system are neurons and glial
cells. Genesis of glial and neuronal cells, their differentiation and maturation
in developing nervous system are thought to be controlled by proteins (growth
factors) expressed at individual developmental stages. Controlled expression of
growth factors may also underlie the plasticity that occurs in the adult nervous
system during learning or regeneration of nervous tissue (stimulation of cells).
Aberrant expression of growth factors has been implicated in the transformation
of normal glial cells to tumorigenic glioma cells. Hence, to understand
development, adult plasticity of the nervous tissue, and tumorigenic
transformation it is essential to elucidate mechanisms that control expression
of genes encoding growth factor proteins. One such protein is basic fibroblast
growth factor (bFGF). Elucidation of the mechanisms controlling expression of
the gene that encodes the bFGF protein is of the highest priority. Very little
is known about regulation of this protein which is critical for neural and glial
development and plasticity. The PI's have revealed that expression of the BFGF
gene is transiently increased during reversible transition of quiescent
(nondividing) glial cells to reactive (actively dividing) glia. Such reversible
activation of glia is thought to play a role in neural development and in the
support of adult neural plasticity. The PI has also shown that expression of the
bFGF gene is permanently increased in irreversibly transformed tumorigenic
glioma cells. In both cases increased expression of bFGF gene was responsible
for the changes in the biology of glia (transient and permanent induction of
cell proliferation). The overall aim of this project is to determine the
molecular mechanisms underlying the above-mentioned changes in bFGF gene
expression. The analysis of the bFGF gene has indicated that there are
fundamental differences in the mechanisms by which t his gene is regulated as
compared to other genes, and that novel mechanisms are involved in the
regulation of bFGF gene. Identification of those mechanisms will lead to a
better understanding of the molecular events controlling the biology of glial
cells in the developing and adult nervous system.