* 9411976
* LTER: Biome-level Constraints on Population, Community, and Ecosystem Responses to Climate Fluctuation, Sevilleta LTER  II
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1995,01/31/2002
* Donald Duszynski, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2002
* USD 4,300,023.00

DEB9411976 MILNE The Sevilleta Long-Term Ecological Research Program (LTER) is
designed to address a suite of ecological hypotheses concerning climate dynamics
and the responses of organisms in a biome transition zone in central New Mexico.
The Sevilleta straddles several major biomes of the Southwest, including the
Great Basin, Great Plains, and Chihuahuan Desert, and is at the epicenter of the
mid-elevation Mogollon Conifer Woodland Flora. Additional ecosystems in the
study region include Rio Grande riparian cottonwood forests, mid-elevation
ponderosa pine forests, mid-elevation ponderosa pine forests, and higher-
elevation mixed-conifer / aspen forests. The region is strongly influences by
the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO), with major fluctuations in
precipitation on semi-decadal times scales. The major theme of the Sevilleta
LTER relates to the synthetic understanding of ecological responses at various
levels of organization (e.g., organismal, population, community, ecosystem, and
landscape) and at multiple spatial and temporal scales. The research is
organized to address (1) the role of water in the region in driving major
ecosystem processes, (2) the fate of carbon as it is controlled by processes of
assimilation, decomposition, and redistribution, (3) land use practices which
regulate the extent and distribution of carbon processing, (4) the assembly,
distribution and maintenance of biodiversity, and (5) the direct and indirect
consequences of changing climatic conditions. Mathematical water balance models
will provide a unifying synthesis of the LTER core topics and the various levels
of organization studied by the participating investigators. The water balance
approach will take advantage of continued studies from the first six years and
will provide a conceptual and quantitative context for a modest number of new
studies that provide a richer and more complete characterization of the
Sevilleta. In addition, LTER scientists will implement a systems model of the
CENTURY class in a geographical context, in which the water balance will be
driven by the nonequilibrium water model. Thus, the models will provide a
synthesis of existing and future data concerning the core areas of organic
matter processing, primary production, and inorganic inputs. The synthesis will
be of immediate use in relation to the disturbance and population core topics,
including vegetation-environment relations, nutrient dynamics, species
distributions and abundances, animal population studies, and population
genetics. These field and laboratory studies will provide the necessary
biological components that represent the contingencies and feedbacks that are
both the responses to, and the constraints on, the dynamics of water.