* 9411394
* Scientific Applications in a Distributed Computing          Environment
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Mark Jones, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Charles H. Koelbel
* 06/30/1999
* USD 318,807.00

9411394 Berry This research proposal focuses on the development of a reasonably
large suite of real scientific application programs for execution on networks of
high-performance workstations or within a limited distributed computing
environment with a relatively fast network (e.g., 32-processor Thinking Machines
CM-5). This suite of Scientific Applications for Distributed Instrumentation and
Execution of SADIE can be used a testbed of real scientific applications by
computational scientists to evaluate and benchmark software tools or
environments for various distributed computing environments. SADIE will
facilitate the development of performance prediction models which can assess the
suitability of a given environment for a particular application or subset of
applications. Realistic memory, CPU speeds, and network latencies needed to
execute scientific applications will be quantified using several distributed
computing software systems, Candidate support software systems for SADIE include
PVM, P4, CONDOR, and Linda. By constructing a testbed of applications, the
effectiveness of popular (underlying) algorithms which previously performs well
on massively-parallel platforms can be assessed. Alternative
strategies/algorithms for distributed environments can be compared so that a
classification in which algorithms are ranked (in suitability) according to
certain network conditions is produced. SADIE comprises a diverse set of
scientific applications: modeling high-temperature supercomputers, modeling
piezoelectric crystals, first principles simulation of material properties,
large-scale information retrieval, computational ecology, and finite element
computations on unstructured meshes. The corresponding set of dominant
algorithms used within SADIE includes: the solution of linear systems, SVD and
generalized symmetric eigenproblems, adaptive mesh refinement, matrix assembly
from finite element meshes, and cluster/patch identification geometry.