* 9411643
* Challenges to Democratization in Post-Soviet Societies:     Comparing Elite and Citizen Perspectives
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1998
* Vicki Hesli, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 05/31/1998
* USD 307,962.00

9411643 Miller This project continues and extends the investigator's earlier
survey of research in three former republics of the Soviet Union. The stated
goal of many post-Soviet leaders is the democratization of their countries.
Thus, the process of democratization as well as the development of effective
state structures is the theoretical focus of this investigation. In addressing
this task, the investigators look first to structural and then to instrumental
theories of democratization in an effort to understand the likelihood that post-
Communist systems will be successful in dealing with the myriad challenges to
democratization they currently face. The structural theorists, with their
concentration on such prerequisites for democracy as socio-economic development
and supportive mass values are helpful in pointing up the importance of societal
factors in contributing to or constraining the development of democracy, but
these theories tend to be lacking in the provision of an adequate evidentiary
base. The instrumentalist studies, while highlighting the importance of
struggles between competing elites in determining the ultimate structure of
politics, are for the most part based upon case studies and therefore lacking
generalizable outcomes. The current project integrates the structural and
instrumentalist approaches by offering a new theoretical and analytical focus
and by providing new empirical evidence drawn from their earlier cross-national
and longitudinal studies of societies currently in the process of transition.
The investigators will augment the two approaches by incorporating an analysis
of factors necessary for the establishment of strong governmental institutions -
- recognizing that a successful transition to democracy requires the concurrent
establishment of democratic procedures together with effective government. Two
factors in particular have limited effective state development - - the salience
of competing national identities within these societies and the relative lack of
legitimacy enjoyed by the institutions of authority. Tapping into citizen
orientations becomes especially critical when citizens come to base their
political participation in their ethnic identity, and when ethnic groups are
separated by feelings of distrust, suspicion, and resentment. The researchers
will study whether the devolution of political power to ethno-regional
territories and the promotion of preferential treatment programs serves to
decrease ethnic-based conflict and enhance the possibilities for stable
democracy. In addition, the researchers argue that the degree of citizen support
for political leaders, institutions, and both political and economic reform is
critical during times of transition. By interviewing citizens the study will
provide an assessment from the perspective of the citizen as to how effectively
the government is meeting the needs of the people. The study will allow for a
direct linkage between the orientations of the decision-makers and the
constituencies they are meant to serve.