* 9411869
* Dissertation Research: Self-incompatibility and Pollination in Two Species of Linanthus
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Douglas Schemske, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1997
* USD 6,414.00

9411869 Schemske The great diversity of reproductive systems is a distinctive
feature of higher plants. Self-incompatibility, a genetic system that prevents
fertilization by self-pollen in hermaphroditic plants, is one of a number of
mechanisms that promote outcrossing in higher plants. It is estimated to be
present in over half of all angiosperm species. This phenomenon has important
implications for plant breeding, and as a result its physiological and molecular
bases have been the focus of extensive research. Self- incompatibility also
plays an important role in the evolution of higher plants. The loss of self-
incompatibility and evolution of selfing is thought to be a common evolutionary
pattern in a number of angiosperm families. Yet despite an extensive literature
on the major ecological and genetic factors favoring self-vs. cross
fertilization, little is know about the specific factors involved in the origin
or loss of self-incompatibility. The co-occurrence of two closely related
annuals in the genus Linanthus presents an opportunity to investigate the
relationship between self-incompatibility and mating system evolution. The two
species are ecologically and morphologically similar, yet they are distinguished
by their breeding systems: Linanthus parviflorus is self-incompatible, while an
undescribed sympatric species is self- fertilizing. In comparing a number of
ecological and genetic aspects of the two species, the proposed research will
address the functional significance of self-incompatibility, focussing on unique
features of the phenomenon. For instance, while a number of mechanisms of higher
plants prevents self-fertilization, self- incompatibility is unique in that it
also may prevent mating between close relatives. The evolutionary significance
of this will be investigated. Another focus of the research will be the
relationship between self-incompatibility and morphological floral characters
that influence the deposition of se lf-pollen on the stigma. Information gained
from this study will contribute to our understanding of the factors that
influence the loss of self- incompatibility, a critical turning point in the
course of mating system evolution in higher plants.