* 9411573
* Dissertation Research: Dynamics and History of Treeline in  the Southern Sierra Nevada
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Lisa Graumlich, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1996
* USD 7,000.00

9411573 Graumlich Concern of the possible ecological consequences of trace-gas
induced climatic change has led to examinations of how past variation in climate
has influenced community structure and composition. Of particular interest is
the paleoecological history of ecotonal boundaries, where species are expected
to respond sensitively and predictably to climate change. The elevational
position of alpine treeline in the southern Sierra Nevada has shifted over the
past several millennia; dead and sub-fossil wood, up to several thousand years
old, remains preserved at elevations of up to 80 m higher than present treeline.
Previous research has demonstrated that the wood is dateable using
dendrochronological methods, providing a temporarily precise record of ecotonal
shifts over the last three millennia. This research will use this wealth of
paleoecological information to analyze the role of climate in driving past
movements of alpine treeline in the southern Sierra Nevada. Long-term records
(&gt;1000 yr) of seasonal climate fluctuations will be compared with records of
treeline movement. Using the technique of stand reconstructions, this study will
also investigate how climate variation over the last millennium has affected
rates of recruitment and mortality in subalpine forests. %%% Results from this
dissertation research will allow quantification of the time-varying relationship
between climate and treeline, and exploration of how this relationship is
mediated through climatic effects on rates of population processes in subalpine
forests.