* 9411210
* Quantum Chemistry Without the Hartree-Fock and Born-        Oppenheimer Approximations
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1997
* David Goodson, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 10/31/1997
* USD 240,165.00

David Z. Goodson is supported by the NSF Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
Program to perform theoretical studies which will lead to the calculation of
accurate energies eigenvalues for atoms and molecules. The supported research
involves the extension and improvement of a newly developed theoretical approach
based on dimensional perturbation theory, DPT, as well as the application and
validation of the theory. The applications to be performed concern the total
ground state energies for several small diatomic and one triatomic system. The
research will also determine the molecular vibrations of selected systems. For
the analysis of the vibrations, the usual Born-Oppenhiemer, BO, approximation
which involves the separation of electronic and nuclear motions will not be
used. Instead, the DPT will be used to simultaneously treat the motion of both
electrons and nuclei. While the BO approximation is normally adequate, there are
cases where the coupling of different BO energy levels is very strong and the
approximation breaks down. The supported research on DPT may lead to a practical
method for treating such cases. The theoretical determination of energy levels
and, hence, of potential energy surfaces is a very important problem in
theoretical chemistry and has occupied the efforts of a large number of
researchers over a long period of time. It is a central problem because the
energies of a system must be known in order to interpret the significance of
various experimental spectroscopic measurements and to interpret and predict
chemical reactivity. While there have been dramatic advances in the ability to
determine these energies using traditional ab initio and density functional
methods, it still remains a formidable computational task at the forefront of
theoretical research. This is especially true for large systems and for systems
which contain heavy atoms. It is not certain that the DPT methods which are the
subject of the supported research will replace the traditional methods; however,
this research is expected to give an understanding of their potential.