* 9412596
* An Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Turbulent    Variable Fluid Property Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow in     Enhanced Tubes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1999
* Michael Jensen, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Stefan T. Thynell
* 09/30/1999
* USD 255,971.00

The proposed research will investigate both experimentally and numerically
turbulent heat transfer and pressure drop in internally-finned tubes when there
are large variable fluid property effects. The internally-finned tube geometry
is ideal to test modeling capabilities because they are industrially relevant,
have much surface area, have complex hydrodynamics due to the geometry, are
amenable to numerical modeling, and are experimentally testable in a lab over a
wide range of geometric and operating conditions. Ten internally-finned tubes
are available for testing the experimental investigation; these tubes cover a
wide range of geometric parameters. The tube will be tested in both heating and
cooling over a range of wall-to-bulk temperature differences. The working fluids
will be water, ethylene glycol, and mineral oil. In the numerical modeling,
primary emphasis will be placed on development of appropriate near-wall modeling
and accommodation of variable fluid properties. A newly developed anisotropic
turbulence model, called the vorticity flux model, will be extended for use in
this project and applied to both axially and spirally finned tubes where
anisotropic turbulence is important. The numerical model will be validated by
comparison against detailed local and overall data from the literature, and new
overall data from this investigation. The validated model will fully describe
the governing mechanisms for heat transfer and pressure drop in this geometry
(particularly the effects of fin geometry and helix angle). It also will provide
guidance on the incorporation of variable fluid properties in numerical models
and with enhanced heat transfer techniques and suggest appropriate methods for
the development of physically-based correlations for Nusselt numbers and
friction factors.