* 9412531
* Constructing a Supranational Constitution: The Reception and Enforcement of European Community Law by National Courts
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Alec Stone, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1997
* USD 140,000.00

9412531 STONE This project seeks to describe and explain the dynamics and
mechanics of European legal integration, the process by which the European
Community (EC) is constructing a legitimized and effective supranational
constitution. This kind of legal integration provides a model for the
development of democratic constitutionalism in regimes such as post-colonial
states and newly unified territories. A hallmark of such regimes is legal
pluralism, which poses serious problems related to the integration of laws
across legal cultures, the enforcement of cross-cultural legal codes, and the
legitimation of new legal institutions. This research will provide the empirical
basis for understanding these processes in the European Community and for
formulating explanatory theoretical models. The project focuses on litigation
because it is through private claims that the critical doctrines will evolve and
be enforced. There is already evidence that the doctrines of supremacy and
direct effect, enunciated by the European Court of Justice, are being applied by
the national courts in litigation. It is this process, often dominated by
private actors such as interest groups rather than by public authorities, that
will bring about legal integration across the members of the European Union.
Enforcement of rulings, in the event of non-compliance, does rely on public
authorities. Therefore, the key actors include private litigants, national
judges, and governmental officials. Data will be collected first from the
national court decisions on EC law in which the doctrines of constitutionalism
and direct effect are at issue, and from scholarly commentaries pertaining to
them. The PI will then interview judges and other legal actors involved in
important litigation at each of the national courts. Finally, the PI will gather
data on the policy impact of legal integration and constitutionalism in three
crucial areas: environmental policy, free movement of goods, and gend er
equality. The data collection will include tracing litigation involving claims
against public authorities for violating EC norms in these three policy areas,
and interviewing the participating governmental officials, judges and interest
group litigants. ***