* 9412906
* Seismic Behavior and Design of Double-Tee Panel Precast     Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Michael Oliva, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1998
* USD 185,000.00

9412906 Pincheira Precast construction using double-Tee members is common in
parking garages, commercial and industrial buildings across the United States
and has had wide success because of its proven efficiency an economy. the
double-Tee's are used as walls and diaphragms. Unfortunately the systems were
developed primarily for vertical load resistance. New areas of the country have
recently been designated as seismically active and building codes have tightened
their seismic design requirements. These changes have cast doubt on the use and
capacity of precast structural systems, and lack of thorough evidence to the
contrary will likely result in more conservative design required by future
codes. The goal of this project to establish a proven physical basis for
connection capacities between thin concrete flange sections such as joint
between double-Tee's used as wall or diaphragm panels to improve design methods
for seismic resistance. To achieve the objective extensive cyclic connection
testing will be carried out. The connection test results will be used to develop
nonlinear analysis methods and to suggest code changes such as: rational methods
of selecting flange or diaphragm thickness and topping thickness if needed,
means of estimating appropriate load reduction factors for precast double-Tee
shear walls, steps in designing ductile flange connections between members, and
examples showing non linear design procedures for jointed precast prestressed
diaphragms and walls. This is a PRESSS project. ***