* 9412762
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Human Ecology, Growth      Coalitions, and Local State Autonomy--The Case of Enterprise Zones
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Barrett Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/1995
* USD 2,172.00

This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral Dissertation Research
Program. It is a study of enterprise zones with an emphasis on human ecology,
growth coalitions and local state autonomy. Enterprise zones are economically
and socially depressed areas that have been designated by a government agency
for revitalization. Special incentives, such as tax cuts, are offered to
businesses that wish to invest in the zones. In this research, multiple
comparisons using census and telephone survey data will measure zone
effectiveness net of various ecological factors. Examination of the zone
designation and promotion process in five study sites will provide information
on the agents involved in the zone, who lobbied for establishment of the zone,
and who is responsible for its success or failure. Because there is a noted
difference between rural and urban places in how they develop, comparisons
between zones found in these two contexts will be made. %%% This research will
contribute to the subdisciplines of economic sociology, political sociology, and
community sociology, and it will provide information to help guide policy makers
considering the enterprise zone mechanism as a means for promoting economic
growth in depressed areas. In addition to the scientific gains to be achieved by
the research, this award will materially assist a highly promising student in
completing research for the Ph.D. dissertation. Thus it contributes to the
future scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough training of the next
generation of social scientists.