* 9412739
* Collaborative Research: Controls on the Photosynthetic      Isotope Effect in the Ocean: The Roles of CO2, Productivity and Species
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Katherine Freeman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 10/31/1996
* USD 161,726.00

WAKEHAM/FREEMAN 9401765/9412739 The relationship between CO2(aq) and the
fractionation of carbon isotopes during carbon fixation in the ocean plays a
major role in preserving climatically-drive isotopic signatures in sediments. It
is known that the fractionation of carbon isotopes during photosynthesis is
dependent on a number of factors, including CO2(aq) , nutrient concentrations,
temperature, rate of primary production, and species composition. Sedimentation
of partculate matter in the ocean then transfers part of this isotopic signal to
the sediments, where the isotopic signal may be used as a proxy for inferring
past environmental conditions. Factors which determine the photosynthetic
isotope fractionation (ep) will be examined in the context of the hypothesis
that there is no generally applicable relationship between CO2(aq) and ep.
Rather, regional environmental conditions are critical control and different
molecular biomarkers may record a variety of ep - CO2(aq) relationships. Three
markedly different environments will be used in the study 1) the North Atlantic
between the Gulf of Maine and the Sargasso Sea; 2) the equatorial Pacific
between 12 degree N and 12 degress S at 140 degree W; and 3) the Peru upwelling
area. Isotopic compositions of selected biomarkers will be interpreted using
synoptic measurements of temperature, CO2(aq) , segma13C DIC, nutrients and
photoplankton species composition. The information will make it possible to
reconstruct the paleoenvironmental record in marine sediments and will provide a
basis for future assessments of ocean-climate relationships using combined
biomarker and isotope techniques.