* 9412800
* INDO-U.S. Geomagetism Symposium, Bombay, India,             August 22-26, 1994, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1995
* Steven Cande, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 05/31/1995
* USD 13,500.00

9412800 Cande Description: This proposal will support the first joint U.S.- Indo
symposium in geomagnetism which will be hosted by the Indian Institute of
Geomagnetism (IIG), Bombay, August 22-26, 1994. Its purpose is to explore
promising new areas of research with Indian scientists such as the effect of the
equatorial electrojet on magnetic field satellites, marine magnetic data from
the Indian Ocean, rock magnetism, and biomagnetism. The symposium is an activity
resulting from a workshop initiated by the U.S. Geodynamics Committee and
supported by NSF, "The Global Magnetic Environment: Challenges and
Opportunities, Washington, D.C., March 1992." Workshop topics included: 1) the
scope of geomagnetic research as applied to the deep Earth, the Earth's crust,
the oceans, the ionosphere and near Earth Environment, 2) new areas of research,
3) identification of more optimum locations for observatories/shared facilities,
and 4) the global aspects of emerging programs. Scope: Considering the strong
interest expressed by American geomagnetists in learning about the work of their
Indian colleagues, as well as India's long standing desire to collaborate with
US scientists, the proposed symposium is a highly effective vehicle for
beginning communication between Indian and U.S. geomagnetists. NSF will provide
travel support for five US participants at this workshop. India's location at
the geomagnetic equator provides unique opportunities for collaboration in this
field for the U.S. ***