* 9412306
* Reactions to Stigma: The Mediating role of deserving
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Jennifer Crocker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Leslie Zebrowitz
* 06/30/1996
* USD 216,422.00

9412306 Crocker ABSTRACT A variety of conditions, including those based on race
or ethnicity, physical conditions, and some behaviors, may be considered
stigmatizing in that people with those conditions are the targets of negative
stereotypes, are generally devalued in the larger society, and receive
disproportionately negative interpersonal and economic outcomes. Although
previous research indicates that the stigmatized do not generally experience low
self-esteem and psychological distress, there is considerable variability in
these reactions across stigmatizing conditions, across individuals within
stigmatized groups, and within individuals across situations. This program of
research refines the PIs' previous attributional analysis of this variability,
using principles of distributive justice to clarify reactions of the stigmatized
to social outcomes that they attribute to their stigma. Specifically it tests
the hypothesis that a critical determinant of the effects of outcomes that are
attributed to stigma is whether those outcomes are judged to be deserved. It
also tests the hypothesis that individuals will judge such outcomes as deserved
when they view their stigma as a relevant input in the particular domain and
that stigmatizing conditions perceived as controllable are more likely to be
judged as relevant inputs in many domains than those perceived as
uncontrollable. Other determinants of the belief that stigma- associated
outcomes are deserved include situational information suggesting that the
procedures for determining outcomes are fair, a general belief that the system
for allocating outcomes is a meritocracy, or a belief that the world is just.
These hypotheses will be tested in experiments involving members of pre-existing
groups formed on the basis of race and ethnicity, gender, and weight, as well as
members of groups created in the laboratory. Previous research has shown that
individuals with stigmatizing conditions, who are the targets of negative
stereotypes or prejudice, sometimes suffer from low self-esteem and sometimes do
not. This program of research will determine when negative stereotypes and
prejudice lead to lower self-esteem among stigmatized individuals and groups. It
is proposed that when an individual is rejected or experiences a failure, he or
she will consider whether this outcome is due to the stigmatizing condition and
whether the outcome is fair, or deserved. Stigmatized individuals are expected
to experience low self- esteem when they believe that negative outcomes due to
their stigma are fair, but not when they believe those outcomes are unfair.
Several factors will influence this judgment, including beliefs about whether
they are responsible for their stigmatizing condition, whether the condition
decreases their qualifications, whether they believe that the procedures
followed are fair, and whether they generally believe that the world is a just
place where people usually get what they deserve. By increasing understanding of
maladaptive reactions to the disadvantages associated with stigmatizing
conditions, this research will place us in a better position to ameliorate these
reactions.