* 9412666
* Nondestructive Characterization of Liquefaction Features    Using Ground Penetrating Radar
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1995
* J. David Frost, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 05/31/1995
* USD 9,676.00

9412666 Rix The January 17, 1994 Northridge Earthquake (M=6.6) caused
liquefaction-induced ground failures in the San Fernando valley, Simi valley,
and Redondo Beach areas. Of particular interest were the liquefaction features
(sand boils and ground fissures) observed in the abandoned reservoir ("debris
basin") upstream of the Lower San Fernando Dam. Free-field accelerations as
large as 0.90 g (horizontal) and 0.60 g (vertical) were observed at California
Strong Motion Instrumentation Program (CSMIP) stations in the vicinity of the
dam. Although sand boils and fissures offer valuable surface evidence of
liquefaction, they reveal little about the subsurface nature of the
liquefaction. This project uses ground penetrating radar (GPR) tests to image
the observed liquefaction features nondestructively. GPR uses electromagnetic
waves to image the subsurface, resulting in a representation of the site
stratigraphy that is similar to a seismic reflection cross section. The
objective is to perform GPR tests along several lines to image the surface along
which lateral spreads developed, and along several closely spaced lines to
generate a three-dimensional image of a sand boil. It is anticipated that
detailed subsurface images of these liquefaction features will be useful in
planning subsequent site investigations. The project uses a global positioning
system (GPS) receiver to measure the topography of the area of the ground
penetrating radar measurements. These GPS measurements allow the radar data to
be corrected for topographic effects. ***