* 9412964
* Studies on the Photophysics and Photochemistry of Aromatic  Sulfoxides
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* William Jenks, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/1997
* USD 248,400.00

9412964 Jenks Iowa State University The photochemistry and photophysics of
aromatic sulfoxides will be studied. Three specific objectives will be pursued:
(1) Elucidation of the photophysics of aromatic sulfoxides, including the nature
of the excited states and mechanisms of intermolecular quenching, (2) A detailed
study of the following photochemical reactions and primary mechanistic steps:
stereochemical inversion at sulfur, a-cleavage, hydrogen atom abstraction,
deoxygenation, and addition to olefins, (3) The design of classes of useful
transformations based on mechanistic understanding of the reaction. The
experimental studies will be coupled with molecular orbital calculations. This
grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of Professor William
S. Jenks at Iowa State University. Photochemistry and Photophysics of a class of
organic compounds will be studied. These compounds are characterized by having
sulfur bonded to one oxygen atom and to a benzene-type group. The latter group
is sometimes referred to as aromatic, and consists of six-carbon atoms bonded in
a ring. The individual steps by which these compounds undergo reaction upon
radiation with ultraviolet light will be investigated in detail. These studies
will form the basis for the design of useful synthetic routes to complex organic
molecules.