* 9412940
* Research in High-Frequency Analog Electronic Circuits for   Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Paul Gray, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 10/31/1998
* USD 409,209.00

The field of electronic telecommunications has experienced explosive growth in
the past ten years, both in terms of its commercial importance and in terms of
the research effort devoted to it in academic and industrial laboratories. It
appears likely that radio-based digital communications will play a much larger
role than might have been anticipated, complementing data communications on wire
pairs with fiber media coming into increased use for data communications
backbones. As in the past, the utilization of VLSI technology to reduce the cost
of electronics associated with such systems will be critical. This research is
directed at exploring new ways to use silicon integrated circuit technology to
improve the performance, reduce the power dissipation, and reduce the cost of
components for communication systems of various kinds, with primary emphasis on
data communications and Personal Communications Systems (PCS) using radio and
free-space optical media. Particular emphasis is placed on circuit techniques
applicable to implementation of RF, IF and baseband mixed signal communications
circuits with low power and low operating voltage. The primary goal of this
research is to discover, optimize, and demonstrate new circuit approaches which
allow the implementation of such systems with levels of power dissipation and
performance which more closely approach the fundamental limits imposed by the
basic technology being used than current approaches. The general area of
interest if RF transceivers for RF LANs ald personal communications devices, and
transceivers for fiber-optic systems and wire-based systems. Specific topics for
investigation are limits-to-phase noise performance in power-optimized
monolithic voltage-controlled oscillators, investigation of new parallel-
architecture sampling demodulators, limits-to-distortion performance in MOS
sampling demodulators, the use of passive- sampling FIR switched capacitor
filters for low-power, high- frequency filte ring and CDMA despreading,
optimization of the sensitivity in fiber optic communication receivers, the
application of BiCMOS technology for the particular needs of high-speed
communications, and modeling of active and passive IC components for RF design.