* 9412822
* 1994 International Conference on Indium Phosphide and       Related Materials, Santa Barbara, CA
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1995
* John Bowers, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/1995
* USD 6,000.00

9412822 Hu An International Conference on InP and related materials is being
held to address current topics in materials growth and characterization
including several contemporary topics on epitaxy of increasing importance,
namely: Epitaxy, Chemical Processes; Selective Epitaxy and Regrowth; Epitaxial
Processes for Patterned Growth, Epitaxial Structures and Epitaxy for Device
Applications. There are also a number of sessions dealing with devices,
OEICs(optoelectronic integrated circuits) and device physics of advanced
electronic and photonic devices based on InP with a strong emphasis on
fundamental processes. Additionally there will be an opportunity to assess the
field, and to establish ties between universities, research institutions, and
industry. It is expected that top scientists in the field will attend, and that
the Conference will provide an effective forum to discuss and delineate the
critical scientific issues in this research area, and to consider and define the
approaches and techniques needed to address them. %%% An evaluation of the
progress and status of InP and related materials, and especially the critical
materials research issues in epitaxy, processing, and the relationship of
materials research to device and circuit fabrication along with current
assessments of the most important contemporary research issues in this field
will be of great value to the understanding and enhanced utilization of advanced
materials in the field of electronics and photonics. ***