* 9412248
* Intraband Processes and New Device Concepts in SemiconductorHomo and Hetero Junctions
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Unil A. Perera, Georgia State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/1998
* USD 362,876.00

9412248 Perera Research on novel semiconductor device concepts and intraband
processes leading to potential applications primarily in high-performance
infrared imaging and emitter systems will be performed in which the unique
dimensional and compositional control capability offered by recently emerging
MBE growth technology will be revised to evolve special types of novel junction
and multi-quantum well (MQW) formats. In one such format, developed under a
previous NSF program, the interfacial work function in p-i-n homojunctions is
controlled at low values (corresponding to optical energies in the VLWIR to FIR
range) by heavy doping of the implanted or MBE-grown photo-emitter region.
Analytical and experimental approaches aimed at understanding the influence of
critical doping and dimensional parameters, and of bias conditions, on detector
and array performance be employed to suggest MBE-grown multi-junction structures
with the potential for higher performance at more elevated cryogenic
temperatures. The main significance of this work is in establishing a technology
base for the evolution of large area, uniform detector arrays with a multi-
special capability for greatly improved NE T responsivity. Recent successes with
VLWIR MQW (A1, Ga, As) detectors will be exploited by extending the cutoff for
both photoconductive and photovoltaic (miniband) structures to wavelengths
beyond 16 um, and examining transient operation modes as a means of improving
response and detectivity. Working in conjunction with MBE experts at Cornell,
NRC, UCLA and JPL the feasibility of improved quality of (A1,Ga)As barrier
growth, as a means of lowering dark current at longer wavelengths will also be
studied. As is the case for Si homojunctions, the inherent uniformity, and their
low power requirements, should enable them to out perform HgCdTe detector arrays
at longer wavelengths. Encouraging results for MQW IR emitter structures will
provide an excellent basis for further modeling efforts and experimental d
evices incorporating three-level and triple-barrier features as a means to
improve efficiency of population inversion. Other material systems (e.g.
InGaAs/InA1As) will also be examined for the potential of high IR emission in
the MWIR range. The MQW emitter technology should lead to stable, integratable,
large area IR sources at wavelengths extending from MWIR to FIR, for
applications currently being addressed by small-area chemically unstable HgCdTe
and PbSnTe laser diodes. ***