* 9412880
* Capacity Building in Atmospheric Chemistry for Developing   Countries
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Eugene Bierly, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

Atmospheric chemistry is a rather young discipline, but technically very
demanding. The international programs that rely on well-trained cadre of
atmospheric chemists for executing complex and ambitious research, monitoring
and assessment tasks include the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry
Program (IGAC--a core project of the IGBP), the Global Climate Observing System)
and the System for Analysis, Research and Training (START--a core project of the
IGBP). To promote education and training in this field, scientists in IGAC, GAW
and START have joined forces to design and execute an integrated approach to
"academic capacity building" in developing countries. The American Geophysical
Union (AGU) and its affiliates will establish an international pool of voluntary
lecturers recruited from their memberships and to coordinate the initial efforts
of the program. These include: Establishment of an international voluntary
teaching faculty. Establishment of a steering committee in charge of curriculum
design for an atmospheric chemistry program which can be implemented at
participating universities in developing countries. Execution of a series of
mini-sessions and workshops involving members of the voluntary teaching faculty
for finalizing the implementation plan. Preparation of a proposal which can be
submitted to international funding agencies for implementing the academic
capacity building program.