* 9412851
* Dissertation Research:  Archaeological Investigation of     Exchange in the Caroline Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* William Ayres, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 11,730.00

9412851 Ayres Under the direction of Dr. William Ayres, Mr Christopohe Descantes
will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct ethnographic,
ethnohistorical and archaeological research in the village of Gachpar, located
on the Pacific island of Yap, and at Ulithi, a coral atoll located off Yap's
coast. Ethnographic data indicates that in the Yap region, as in many parts of
the Pacific, extensive exchange networks existed to distribute goods among
resource poor islands and this exchange network played a central role in the
political organization of island polities. In Yap the situation appears quite
complex since specific areas of the island maintained exclusive links with
individual outlying atolls. At an even finer level, these linkages appeared
specified by individual family and lineage. Mr. Descantes will carry out
ethnographic and archaeological fieldwork on both Yap and Ulithi. He will
conduct interview and excavation in the Yap village which, by tradition is
linked through trade to Ulithi. He will do similar work at Ulithi as well. On
this basis, he will determine what trading ties exist at the present time and
trace them backwards first through the historical record and then, by means of
excavated archaeological material into the prehistoric past. Archaeological data
indicates that small and geographically isolated Pacific islands were inhabited
thousands of years ago. While the original feats of navigation involved in this
expansion have long been recognized, less attention has been focussed on the
social, economic and political systems which permitted sustained occupation of
islands which were often lacking in workable stone, clay and other essential
goods. This research is focussed on this topic. It is important because its deep
chronological perspective will permit one to examine how the system developed
and was maintained over millennia. The data which M. Deschantes collects will be
of interest to many anthropologists. The proj ect will also assist in the
training of a promising young scientist.