* 9412310
* Collaborative Research on Processes and Timing of Geomorphic and Hydraulic Adjustments During Stream Channel Recovery
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1994,02/28/1997
* Patricia McDowell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 02/28/1997
* USD 77,058.00

9412310 McDOWELL Many studies in geography and related disciplines have examined
the ways that human activities impact on natural systems. One of the locales
where such studies have been undertaken are streambeds, where direct human
alteration of channel characteristics and indirect impacts resulting from
changing patterns of land use on nearby lands have had profound impacts on
processes of erosion and deposition. Relatively little attention has been
focused, however, on the processes that occur when the impact of human
activities are removed. This collaborative research project will examine stream
channel recovery from chronic human disturbance through what is effectively a
controlled experiment. The project will document the rate, magnitude, and
processes of stream channel recovery following the elimination of cattle grazing
from pasture lands along a number of streams in central and eastern Oregon.
During the first year of work, data on channel morphology, streambed sediment
characteristics, fish habitat characteristics, and indicators of fluvial
processes will be gathered from six stream segments. Historical data on the
nature and timing of land uses from written sources and remote sensors also will
be gathered, with special attention given to the establishment of enclosures
that prevented cattle grazing on nearby lands. These data will be analyzed and
used to develop models of channel recovery. During the second year, field work
will be expanded to examine sites for which nearby enclosures were established
more recently and for which sediment, geologic, and ecological conditions of
streams are more varied. This project will provide valuable new insights into
streambed recovery processes. It will document differences in morphologic and
hydraulic characteristics between restored and unrestored reaches of streams. It
will test hypotheses about the ways that different factors respond during
different phases of the recovery process, and it wi ll determine the amount of
time necessary to achieve restoration. This information will not only have
significant value to researchers, but it will have considerable immediate
utility to land managers in both the public and private sectors. Because part of
the funding for this project is being made through the Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Program, the project will provide an excellent opportunity for
promising students to directly participate in a high-quality research project.