* 9412174
* Dissertation Research: Evolution of Floral Morphology and   Systematics of Cobaea Cav. (Polemoniaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Billie Turner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9412174 Turner Graduate student Alan Prather, under the direction of faculty
adviser Billie Turner at the University of Texas, is conducting a combined field
and laboratory study of the tropical plant genus Cobaea of the phlox family,
Polemoniaceae. The group is estimated to include ca. 20 species distributed in
the American tropics, with most species occurring only in small, isolated
populations primarily on mountain slopes. The floral morphology of these species
is diverse and often spectacular, the plants usually producing large blossoms
that are hypothesized to be bat pollinated. In addition to morphological study
of floral, fruit, and vegetative features, the student is analyzing pollen by
scanning electron microscopy, to acquire new characters for taxonomic
discrimination. Also, methods of DNA sequencing of the nuclear ribosomal regions
called ITS (internal transcribed spacers) are being employed to collect
comparative nucleotide data across all species, for estimation of mutation
differences and reconstruction of phylogenetic relationships. The combination of
molecular and morphological approaches to the study of all extant species of a
neotropical genus promises an improved classification for these plants, insight
to their genealogical affinities, and understanding of the pathways by which
floral features have diversified in relation to pollinating agents.