* 9412645
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Whites' Racial Attitudes in the Detroit Metropolitan Area:  Does It Matter How We Ask?
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1996
* Howard Schuman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/1996
* USD 3,117.00

This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral Dissertation Research
Program. It is a study of whites' racial attitudes and the appropriate
scientific methodologies for measuring them, focusing on the fact that whites
are more supportive of abstract principles of racial equality than they are of
policies directed at achieving these goals. This study investigates two
explanations for this "policy/principle gap:" 1) survey research is not
capturing true racial attitudes due to social desirability pressures to respond
according to what are perceived to be the prevailing social norms; 2) models
predicting a perfect relationship between principles and policies are
inadequate, and additional attitudes, beliefs and values must be considered.
This study attaches fresh data collection and analysis to the on-going Detroit
Area Study in order to address these questions. %%% The research engages
important issues in both research methodology and sociological theory, and the
results will contribute to the knowledge base concerning American racial
tensions. In addition to the scientific gains to be achieved by the research,
this award will materially assist a highly promising student in completing
research for the Ph.D. dissertation. Thus it contributes to the future
scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough training of the next
generation of social scientists.