* 9412115
* Strategies for Analyzing the Processing of                  Proopiomelanocortin
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Robert Dores, University of Denver
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 07/31/1997
* USD 166,280.00

IBN-9412115 Robert Dores The pituitary gland is the site for synthesis of
several polypeptide hormones which are used as chemical messenger to influence a
variety of functions such as growth, reproduction, and chronic stress
regulation. One characteristic of polypeptide hormones is that the molecule that
is first synthesized inside the cell (called a prohormone) is biologically
inactive and must undergo a variety of processing steps by enzymes to convert
the non-functional prohormone into a biologically active hormone. One of these
important prohormones is proopiomelanocortin (POMC) found in the intermediate
pituitary. POMC is the common prohormone for adrenocorticotropin, melanocyte-
stimulating hormone, and the endogenous opioid, beta-endorphin. After POMC is
synthesized, it undergoes a number of processing steps to make these active
hormones. The sites inside the cell where the enzymatic reactions take place and
the regulation and nature of the enzymes involved are poorly understood. This is
a proposal to study in melanotropic cells of the anuran amphibian, Bufo marinus,
the subcellular coordination of two important enzymes (prohormone convertase 1
and 2) that are involved in the processing and the location inside the cell
where this processing occurs. Since the proper synthesis of pituitary hormones
is essential to the survival of all vertebrates, these studies are critical for
providing new insights into the cell biology of pituitary cells.