* 9412113
* LMER: Trophic Transfers in Larger Estuarine Ecosystems:     Pulsed Inputs, Physical Features and Biological Patchiness
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1994,09/30/2001
* William Boicourt, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/2001
* USD 2,999,965.00

9412113 Boynton This is a project to investigate mechanisms by which production
at higher trophic levels in influenced by inputs from adjacent watershed, ocean
and atmosphere, using Chesapeake Bay as a study site. The proposed research
builds on previous LMER studies (PROTEUS), which focused on how inputs from
adjacent systems affect primary projection and recycling processes, to examine
the consequences of those processes for fish and other secondary producers in
this estuary. The investigators hypothesize that the relatively high rates of
secondary production characterizing estuarine ecosystems are attributable, in
part, to the pulsing nature of materials and energy inputs and the resulting
physical structures and biological patchiness, which act as sites of greatly
enhanced activity. The researchers will conduct an ambitious field program which
has been designed to examine: 1) how fine-scale distributions (as well as
regionally integrated values) of physical and biological properties and
processes respond to interannual variations in inputs from terrestrial and
oceanic margins; and 2) how physical structures and biological patches influence
production and trophic structure of the estuarine ecosystem. A suite of
numerical models and comparative analyses will be executed to; (1) integrate
field observations; (2) contrast differences between processes measured at
coarse and fine scales; and (3) investigate factors regulating trophic structure
and secondary production at specific sites. To accomplish these goals the
investigators will utilize several new technologies (e.g. rapidly towed CTD,
fluorescence, acoustic and optic sensors, aerial remote sensing, real-time in-
situ moorings) which have emerged that enable reliable estimates of secondary
production and insights into the details of interactions between planktonic
assemblages and physical structures. Over the past decade, research attention
has focused on the question of how changes in the inputs of nutrients to
estuaries creat e regional and interannual variations in primary production,
algal biomass, and nutrient recycling. The understanding of these connections in
Chesapeake Bay is at a state where researchers can now focus on the next obvious
puzzle in estuarine ecology: what makes estuaries so efficient in the transfer
form primary to secondary production and how is secondary production related to
energy and material inputs from the land, air and ocean.