* 9412482
* Partial Support of Summer Young Investigator Programs in    Health and Environment in Central Europe and Eurasia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* E. William Colglazier, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 08/31/1995
* USD 30,622.00

9412482 Colglazier This grant to the National Academy of Sciences NAS , through
the Office for Central Europe and Eurasia of the National Research Council NRC ,
provides support from 1 May 1994 through 31 October 1994 for the Young
Investigator Programs YIPs on: Health Impacts of Environmental Degradation with
the Czech and Slovak Republics; Nuclear Accidents and Radioactive Contamination
with Ukraine and Belarus; and Ecological Concerns in the Development of the
Arctic and the Far Northern Regions with Russia. These YIPs are part of a larger
series of programs designed to initiate multi-disciplinary, collaborative
research among the new generation of scientists in the United States, Central
Europe, and the former Soviet Union, in fields of national and global
significance. Each VIP consists of a two- year summer program for ten American
and ten foreign specialists. Each program phase is three weeks in length, with
one summer session in the foreign country and the other in the United States.
The NRC selects an interdisciplinary team of American specialists through a
national competition. To be eligible, American applicants must have received
their Ph.D. since 1986. The foreign specialists are chosen by carefully
identified foreign counterpart organizations. These three YIPs began in summer
1993 and will conclude with a three-week program in the United States in summer
1994. The U.S. Department of State has provided support to cover the costs
associated with the American participants in the second phase. ***