* 9412772
* Nanostructures in Multiple Quantum Well Optical Waveguides  and Microcavities
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Andrew Steckl, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 12/31/1998
* USD 444,650.00

9412772 Boyd The principle aspects of the proposed research are the fabrication
of quantum wires, optical channel waveguides, and microcavity structures and
optical characterization of their properties. FIB- induced compositional mixing
of MQW regions will be a primary fabrication technique, while time-resolved and
spatially-resolved photoluminescence is the main technique to be performed for
evaluating the quality of these structures. Since these nanostructures are
directed at enhancing nonlinear optical interactions and improving semiconductor
laser performance, we expect to characterize nonlinear optical effects resulting
from quantum wires and microcavities and to determine the impact of FIB-
fabricated microcavity structures on semiconductor lasers. Microcavity
structures are finding advantageous use in vertical cavity surface emitting
lasers (VCSELs) and have considerable potential for the formation of Fabry-Perot
bistable switches. As a part of the proposed research, we will be applying FIB
processing capability to the fabrication of these structures. The direct write
capability of FIB processing (mixing and milling) is expected to provide
significant improvement in device isolation and pn junction formation. The high
resolution properties (~50 nm) of the FIB system and its capability to direct
write patterns onto samples will allow us to fabricate several waveguide
structures which will elucidate nonlinear optical effects, including nonlinear
distributed feedback gratings, directional couplers, and Mach-Zehnder
interferometers. We expect to demonstrate all-optical switching with these
structures which will be characterized by low switching powers. ***