* 9412720
* Structural Origins of Electron Transfer Rates Across        Self-Assembled Monolayers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/1994,04/30/1999
* Christopher Chidsey, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 04/30/1999
* USD 587,000.00

9412720 Chidsey This research project addresses the structural origins of the
rates of long distance electron transfer across interfaces. It is supported by
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program, with a goal of understanding the
role of intervening and surrounding material in the transfer of electrons
between a metal electrode and a precisely positioned electroactive species. The
continuum dielectric model will be examined as a basis for understanding and
predicting the activation barrier to electron transfer, the role of
electroactive species located between the metal and the polar electrolyte will
be examined, and the effect of electronic states of the spacer material on
electron transfer will be probed in these studies. Thiol monolayers on gold
electrodes form the basis for these electron transfer studies. These
measurements will have impact on the development of new sensor and display
technologies, and will help to develop an understanding of interfacial charge
transfer in applications ranging from biology to microelectronics. %%% In order
to understand the rates and mechanisms of charge transfer between electrodes and
electroactive species, a number of model approaches have been developed. One
very promising approach uses self assembled monolayer technology to position the
electroactive species and to control the structure and electronic properties of
the medium through which electron transfer occurs. The work supported here uses
this approach to examine the structural origins of the rates of charge transfer
across interfaces. Knowledge in this area is crucial to understanding the
mechanisms of biological membrane charge transfer, and in the development of new
sensing and display technologies. The work supported here will contribute to the
development of this understanding.