* 9412445
* Heterogeneous Chemical Reactions in the Upper Troposphere   and Lower Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Harold Johnston, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/1998
* USD 299,995.00

Through laboratory studies these researchers will conduct a systematic search
for new important heterogeneous reactions in the upper troposphere and lower
stratosphere; that is, heterogeneous reactions other than those recognized to
occur in the Antarctic spring. They will measure the surface coverages and
compositions of selected trace species on the surfaces of water ice (ICE),
nitric acid trihydrate (NAT), and supercooled sulfuric acid/water (SA/W)
solutions. These surfaces will be exposed to trace atmospheric species one at a
time, two at a time and in some cases three at a time in order to investigate
reaction-enhanced surface adsorption as well as single-species surface
coverages. The plan is to study these surface compositions under experimental
conditions similar to those present in the upper troposphere and lower
stratosphere. These experiments will employ the surface science techniques of
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) for the determination of the elemental
composition of the surface and the oxidation states, (and therefore the bonding)
of the surface chemical species, Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) for the
determination of the elemental composition of the surface, and quadrapole mass
spectroscopy (QMS) for identification and monitoring of the gas phase chemical
species. In conjunction with these experiments, through use of chemical
thermodynamics combined with the composition and temperature data provided by
the Livermore two-dimensional atmospheric model, these researchers will
determine the locations and times that various chemical reactions are the
thermodynamically capable of undergoing heterogeneous catalysis at noon and
midnight, during June and September, at altitudes of 5 to 35 km, and from pole
to pole. By combining these two novel lines of study they seek to identify
candidates for new heterogeneous atmospheric reactions and suitable catalysts
for such reactions. Reactants of interest include atmospheric trace species such
as sulfur dioxide (S02), hydrogen peroxide (H202), Chlorine (Cly) molecules, and
NOy molecules. One specific research task will emphasize the +3 oxidation state
of nitrogen N(III), which is significant in urban smog, but is apparently not
important in stratospheric models and measurements. N(III) species may be a
significant reservoir for active NOx, a sink for stratospheric NOy, a catalyst
for activating HC1, and a source of atmospheric OH radical. Through such
laboratory studies, they hope to locate where in the atmosphere N(III) chemistry
is important and investigate previously unidentified heterogeneous reactions
that occur under the conditions present in the upper troposphere and lower
stratosphere.