* 9412338
* The Molecularization of Genetics
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1996
* C. Kenneth Waters, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Fixed Amount Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 12/31/1996
* USD 65,611.00

Developments in genetics since World War II are leading us to revise our
understanding of the processes of scientific change. These developments include
the "molecularization" of genetics; i.e., the apparent reformulation of
classical genetics in terms of DNA and the subsequent advances in our
explanatory and investigative practices. Dr. Waters is examining the new kind of
changes taking place in genetics, its underlying strategy, and how this new
strategy works to bring about progressive developments in explanatory and
investigative practices in science. The relationship between classical Mendelian
genetics and molecular biology is viewed by philosophers of science as a
paradigm of non- reduction, i.e. , as an example of scientific progress where
the molecular-level account answers new questions, but does not reformulate the
classical theory or provide better answers to the previously answered questions.
The genetics example plays a prominent role in debates about the prospects of
reduction in other sciences, the nature of explanation, and the metaphysical
organization of the world. The appearance of the Mendelian example alongside the
usual ones in physics marks a turning point. Philosophers now look to biology
for insights into the nature of scientific knowledge. Dr. Waters, however,
believes these current views are mistaken and have prevented a proper
understanding of the changes that have taken place in genetics. In this study,
Dr. Waters is examining in parallel the central concepts, explanatory models and
investigative practices of both classical genetics and molecular biology. He
hopes to show how molecular biology has deepened the understanding of heredity
first provided by classical genetics and then how theoretical connections
between classical genetics and molecular biology have led to a fruitful
interplay between investigative practices of genetics, molecular biology, and
biochemistry. From this, he draws a new model of antireductionism fo r all of
the Science and Technology Studies disciplines.