* 9412466
* Physical Electronics of Nonvolatile Multi-dielectric        Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Marvin White, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/1998
* USD 334,019.00

9412466 White This research is concerned with the basic physical, electronic and
material properties of multi-dielectric nanostructures which use quantum
mechanical tunneling of carriers into deep-level storage traps. In some
instances these traps are beneficial, such as in nonvolatile semiconductor
memory devices; however, in other instances the traps are detrimental to solid-
state device behavior and result in instabilities, such as in the shift of
threshold voltages in MOS Transistors. In this research we examine the
beneficial use of these traps in a new 'scaled' multi-dielectric, buried-
channel, nanostructure which consists of polySilicon gate-blocking Oxide-silicon
Nitride-tunnel Oxide-Silicon (SONOS). The traps are located in the silicon
nitride and this research explores the physical mechanisms by which charge
injection, transport and storage is accomplished in 'scaled' SONOS
nanostructures. The origin and control of these traps is an important objective
in this program as well as the understanding of electron and hole transport
across interfacial boundaries. We will explore the spatial and energetic
distribution of such traps with a new method (developed in our laboratory) based
on low-frequency charge pumping. In addition, we will use recent advancements in
atomic force microscopy (AFM) to provide visual images of the nanotopography of
the multidielectric films used in the 'scaled' SONOS nanostructure. The SONOS
nanostructure shows considerable promise for low voltage, low-power, high-
density, non-volatile semiconductor memory applications, such as in portable
semiconductor disks, application specific integrated circuits, wafer scale
integration and electronic neural networks. ***