* 9412028
* LMER: Research in the Columbia River Estuary: The Role of   Estuarine Turbidity Maxima (ETM) Processes Coupling         Watershed, Estuary and Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1994,02/28/2002
* David Jay, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2002
* USD 3,010,000.00

9412028 Simenstad This project will continue and expand upon a previous four
year NSF Land-Margin Ecosystem Research (LMER) study (1990- 1994) of the
importance of estruarine turbidity maxima (ETM) to river estuaries and coastal
ecosystems, as exemplified by the Columbia River estuary. In these continuing
investigations , the project will build on past results and will concentrate the
research on five areas: * particle aggregation/disaggregation as a key linkage
between ETM physics, geochemistry and ecology; * biogeochemical and ecological
processes affected by ETM dynamics; * modeling of these proecesses to quantify
mass, constituent and energy fluxes, and chemical transformations, with respect
to selected scenarios of watershed and global climate change; * interactions of
ETM with surrounding estuarine habitats, watershed and the coastal ocean; *
selected comparisons with other estuaries, particularly LMER sites. The Columbia
River estuary is characteristic of a major class of land-margin ecosystmes
(river estuaries) and differs in many respects from other LMER sites. Because of
its distinctiveness and scale, and the importance of large river estuaries to
coastal oceans, comparisons of critical processes and properties in the Columbia
River estuary with those of LMER sites and selected oterh estuaries will
contribut significantly to understanding global variability in land-margin
systems and their responses to anthropogenic inputs and changes. Comparative
efforts will focus on analysis of particle dynamics, microbial-loop processes,
and trophic transfers across LMER systems. Results of these comparisons will be
embedded in an estuarine classificiation system that ecnompasses physical,
sedimentological and geochemical aspects of temperate estuaries. ***