* 9412067
* Video Interviews as Technical Manpower Recruiting Tools for Small Technology Firms
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1995
* Michael Morris, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Fred M. Hawkridge
* 05/31/1995
* USD 12,160.00

This project, jointly supported by the Chemistry Division and the Small Business
Program of NSF, pioneers the development of an experimental approach to bringing
the talents and capabilities of PhD chemistry graduates of the University of
Michigan to the attention of small chemically related businesses. In an
exploratory venture termed the Michigan Demonstration Project, Professor Michael
Morris of the Department of Chemistry will coordinate the professional
videotaping of interviews with some twenty to twenty-five newly minted chemistry
PhDs for subsequent distribution, upon request, to small businesses who seek new
employees with expertise in those areas of chemistry represented by the
graduates. The intent of this exercise is to facilitate awareness on the part of
small businesses, which do not have extensive recruiting infrastructure, of the
capabilities for technological innovation offered by these new chemistry PhDs.
During the past eighteen months to two years, the majority of new jobs for PhD
chemists have been in small businesses rather than in large chemical
corporations. Recognizing this trend and the difficulties attendant to small
businesses recruiting the nation's most outstanding talent among the ranks of
new PhDs, the University of Michigan chemistry department has developed a plan
to use videotaped interviews of their new PhD graduates as a means of displaying
the talents of these young scientists to potential small business employers. The
success of this project could impact markedly on how prospective employers seek
out and identify promising young scientists for recruiting.