* 9412026
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Problem of Radiation   Reaction in Gravitation Physics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Diana Kormos-Buchwald, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 08/31/1995
* USD 8,345.00

Mr. Daniel Kennefick, under the direction of Dr. Diana Barkan, is examining the
history of theories of gravitational waves. The existence of gravitational waves
was first proposed at the beginning of this century. Since there was no
experimental or observational effect which called for explanation to justify
their invention, the motivation seems to have been purely that of establishing a
symmetry between gravitational theory and the unified electric and magnetic
fields. Work was to continue throughout the century on developing the concept,
despite the continuing absence of any experimental data until the 1970's.
Undaunted, the theorists engaged in intense debate on the question of whether
the radiation actually existed. Although some criticism was leveled at the
discipline for being so divorced from experimental "reality," ironically the
usual outside criticism was that the existence of gravitational radiation was
being doubted without sufficient cause. It is this debate about the existence of
gravity waves that has led to the biggest "big science" project at the National
Science Foundation in a number of years: the gravity wave detector known as
"LIGO." The purpose of this research is to examine the history of this
controversy from the late 1930's to the early 1980's, especially in the light of
current issues in the history and sociology of science. It offers a unique
opportunity to witness the construction, deconstruction and reconstruction of a
"physical" phenomenon entirely within a relatively small and purely theoretical
community.