* 9412853
* The Ninth Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers  International Symposium on the Application of Ferroelectrics; University Park, Pennsylvania, August 7-10, 1994
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Leslie Cross, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1995
* USD 15,000.00

9412853 Cross A major International Conference on the Application of
Ferroelectric Materials will be held August 7-10, 1994 at Pennsylvania State
University; University Park, PA. The Con ference focuses on current topics in
the synthesis, processing and utilization of fer roelectrics in a variety of
applications. Piezoelectrics, Dielectrics, Electrostrictives, Pyroelectrics, and
Photorefractives are all covered from these perspectives in Plenary and Regular
Sessions, as well as in extensive Poster Sessions. Arrangements have been made
to allow for in-depth discus sions on critical subject areas. It is expected
that top scientists in the field will attend, and that the Conference sessions
will provide an effective forum to discuss and delineate critical scientific
issues, and to consider and define the approaches and techniques needed to ad
dress them. %%% An evaluation of the status of the general chemistry and physics
of ferroelectrics from their basic synthesis and processing to their utilization
in applications, and recommendations by the session participants for the
emphasis of future work, and their assessment of the most important contem
porary research issues will be of great value to the understanding and
development of ferroelec tric and related materials, and for their subsequent
utilization in fields such as microelectronics, and for their general
applications as sensors and actuators. ***