* 9412187
* Structures and Dynamics of Solids Under High Pressures and  Other Extreme Conditions
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Malcolm Nicol, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1998
* USD 315,000.00

9412187 Nicol The objective of this proposed work is to measure properties of
materials at moderately high pressures to tens of gigapascals (GPa) with
sufficient precision to test the accuracy of theoretical models and translate
the understanding into new materials. Specific areas of research outlined in the
proposal include: (1) characterizing the photochemistry, chemistry and phase
diagram of sulfur to approximately 20 GPa; (2) developing x-ray diffraction
techniques at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (SSRL) for high
temperature-high pressure techniques; (3) determining crystal structures and
sound speeds to 20 GPa and 1000 degrees kelvin for the same oriented oxide
crystal and structures for oxygen, sulfur, and nitroanilines; (4) defining
intra-and inter-molecular perturbations on the structures and stabilities of
nitroanilines and nitroaromatics related to energetic materials and (5)
determining the conditions, mechanisms and products of reactions which limit the
stabilities of unsaturated carbon compounds in the 5-15 GPa range. %%% The goal
of this proposed study is to explore the high-pressure synthesis of novel
materials. These fundamental chemistry and physics studies under high pressure,
to include vibrational dynamics, energetics and structures of condensed-phase
systems, will lead to materials developments in areas of technological interest
such as energetic materials, polymers, and molecular materials such as diamond
and fullerenes.