* 9412150
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Community Structure in     Acacia Woodlands in Northern Botswana
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Richard Rust, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 01/31/1998
* USD 19,000.00

9412150 Rust This dissertation enhancement grant provides partial support for a
U.S. graduate student, Myra E. Barnes, working under the guidance of Dr. Richard
W. Rust, of the Department of Biology at the University of Nevada, Reno, to
study two species of Acacia trees in northern Botswana. A low rate of seedling
establishment has curtailed replacement of trees destroyed as a result of
elephant foraging. Observational and experimental methods will be used to
determine which biotic and abiotic factors influence the rate of seed
production, germination, seedling establishment, and survival of trees to
reproductive maturity. The goal of the research is to determine whether
pollinators, insect, avian, or mammal seed predators, browsers, soil water
potential, fire, or a combination of these or other factors, limit seedling
establishment and survival. The research will be conducted at seven existing
study sites in four wildlife areas in northern Botswana and two or more
additional sites which will be added later in 1994. Staff members from
Botswana's Department of Wildlife and National Parks will collaborate with Ms.
Barnes on this project. This study will make an important contribution to the
understanding of elephant-habitat interactions as they relate to biological
diversity in northern Botswana. The grant will also provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career. ***