* 9412837
* Organotransition Heterobimetallic-u-Carbon Dioxide Complexes and Homogeneous Carbon Dioxide Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Alan Cutler, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 01/31/1998
* USD 209,000.00

9412837 Cutler Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Dr. Alan R. Cutler, Chemistry
Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, is supported by the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division for
research into the activation of carbon dioxide by metal complexes. Complexes
which contain a carbon dioxide attached to both an early and a late transition
metal will be studied in order to evaluate how synergism between the two metals
may stabilize the interactions between carbon dioxide and the metals. As a
portion of this phase of the study, the insertion of carbon dioxide into metal-
metal bonds will be evaluated as a new route to the complexes. Utilizing
complexes in which carbon dioxide is bonded to iron and to a catalytically
active metal center, catalytic hydrosilation of the coordinated carbon dioxide
will be developed. Carbon dioxide is a plentiful, sometimes environmentally
undesirable material which potentially could be utilized as a feedstock by the
chemical industry. This project will examine ways in which the normally
unreactive carbon dioxide can be activated by interactions with metals. As part
of the study as method of converting carbon dioxide to a compound which can be
utilized in further chemical reactions will be devised.