* 9412731
* FASEB Conference on Calcium and Cell Function; July 2-7,    1994; Saxtons River, Vermont
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1994,09/30/1994
* Howard Schulman, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1994
* USD 12,000.00

The overall goal of the conference is to bring together a diverse group of
scientists working on all phases of calcium and its role in cell function. In
addition to its role as an essential mineral for bone growth, regulation of
calcium levels inside cells and the action of calcium on intracellular targets
impinges on virtually every primary biological activity in cells from both
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The action of calcium in cells is critical for
regulation of cardiac and skeletal muscle function, neuronal communication in
the brain, the response of immune cells to infection and in most other critical
cellular functions. The field provides the intersection of well established
physiology and pathophysiology with new findings at the molecular level that
provide insights into calcium and cell function. In addition to the formal
sessions, informal workshops will be arranged during the meeting to discuss
current questions in calcium research. Poster sessions will be held to allow all
attendees to exchange new information and participate in the conference.
Speakers will be from various fields including physiology, cell biology,
biochemistry, pharmacology, molecular biology and genetics. This meeting is an
important mechanism by which scientists funded by government grants exchange
information that reduces redundancy in research and increases the speed by which
new discoveries are incorporated by other scientists across the calcium field.
The topics to be covered are: Structure and function of calcium-binding proteins
--these are the calcium sensors that indicate to cells when they have been
stimulated; Molecular properties of calcium channels--these proteins regulate
entry of calcium into cells that trigger cell excitation; Calcium signaling in
the cell and the nucleus--how changes in calcium levels in cells is used to
provide information within the cell and how this information is transmitted
throughout the cell to regulate cell division and the produc tion of protein
products from specific genes; Calcium in human diseases--findings from the
studies on cell biology above have enabled muscular dystrophy, stroke,
Alzheimer's and other diseases to be better understood at a molecular and
cellular level and allows for design of new therapeutics which will be
discussed.