* 9412915
* Frustrated Translational and Rotational Modes of            Molecularly Chemisorbed Species
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Barbara Hinch, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 05/31/1998
* USD 290,000.00

A detailed understanding of the bond between an adsorbed molecule and a solid
substrate can be obtained by spectroscopic characterization of the adsorbed
molecule. Very little has been learned about the low energy modes of this
adsorbate-substrate complex, due to the lack of spectroscopic probes relevant to
this energy regime. This research project, supported by the Analytical and
Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Solid State
Chemistry and Polymers Program in the Division of Materials Research, is
directed toward obtaining this low energy information. Helium atom scattering
has been developed as a method which can address this question, and Professor
B.J. Hinch and her students at Rutgers University will take advantage of this
method to probe the low energy frustrated rotations and translations of model
molecules adsorbed on well characterized surfaces. This information will provide
a stringent test of our present understanding of chemisorption and the surface
chemical bond. This information is crucial to a number of technologies, ranging
from catalysis to electronic device fabrication. Spectroscopic characterization
of the low energy vibrations of adsorbed molecules is the focus of this research
project. Scattering of helium atoms from adsorbed molecular species will be used
to obtain this spectroscopic information. This heretofore unavailable data will
be compared with current theories of adsorption, with the goal of increasing our
understanding of this technologically important phenomenon.