* 9412565
* Atmospheric Pressure, Plasma Chemistry, Plasma Dynamics,    Particle Effects and Gas Dynamics in Plasma Remediation     of Toxic Gases
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1998
* Mark Kushner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 10/31/1998
* USD 227,597.00

Increasing environmental awareness and regulation have motivated research into
new methods to remediate toxins from atmospheric pressure gas streams. At the
First International EPRI/NSF Symposium on Advanced Oxidation Techniques, plasma
remediation was identified as a promising technology treating contaminated gas
streams and air. Plasma remediation of toxic gas streams from mobile emitting
sources (for example, Nox emission from diesel truck engines), remote or
sporadically emitting sources (for example, diesel emergency generators) or
small installations (for example, volatile organic solvents, VOCs, released from
dry cleaners) require inexpensive, low-voltage, compact, and reliable systems
which efficiently and selectively convert the toxic gas to benign or more
treatable products. Dielectric barrier discharges are candidates for these
systems. In this project, multidimensional computer modeling of the plasma
remediation of contaminated atmospheric pressure gas streams will be performed.
The goals of this work are: a) Investigate the hydrodynamics and plasma
chemistry of plasma remediation systems using dielectric barrier discharges; b)
develop computer models of plasma remediation of toxic gases capable of being
used to design practical manufacturable systems; and c) collaborate with
experiments being performed at Los Alamos National Laboratory and the University
of Southern California to validate the models and implement recommendations. The
test system will be Nox remediation from diesel exhaust. Remediation of VOCs
will be investigated later.