* 9412656
* Modes of Dynamic Attending
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Mari Jones, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1997
* USD 155,812.00

This proposal examines a new approach to the fundamental construct of attending
which rests on the assumption that attending is an inherently temporal activity:
people respond to dynamic changes in their environment by relying on internal
attending rhythms that are capable of entrainments. Two modes of dynamic
attending are proposed: Analytic attending, which takes place over relatively
small time spans of events, and Future-Oriented attending, which takes place
over longer event time periods. The theoretical framework advanced presumes that
the structure of environmental events offers a basis of attentional control (viz
entrainment) for each attending mode. Of special interest is a specific
oscillator model underlying Future-Oriented attending. A number of explicit
hypotheses that test predictions of the oscillator model are presented. These
pertain to the role of rhythmic factors that are predicted to facilitate or
retard attentional entrainments. This research is important because no current
psychological model of attention explains how people attend to dynamic aspects
of the environment, that is, to events such as speech, visual action patterns,
music etc.. Instead, most current theories address attending to static visual
objects (e.g., two-dimensional pictures or letter sequences). But much of our
everyday world consists of changing, dynamic, events. Because our environment is
primarily dynamic and because many attentional dysfunctions (e.g. aphasia) are
evident largely when people interact with dynamic events, it is important to
develop and test models that recognize these facts.