* 9412969
* Conference on Plant Cell Biology: Mechanisms, Molecular     Machinery, Signals and Pathways to be held at Taos, New     Mexico, January 7-13, 1995
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Christopher Lamb, Keystone Center
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 09/30/1995
* USD 15,000.00

9412869 Raikhel This proposal requests support for a new Keystone Symposia on
Plant Cell Biology: Mechanism, Molecular Machinery, Signals and Pathways to be
held at Taos, New Mexico, January 7-13, 1995. The Organizers of the Symposia are
Natasha Raikhel, Michigan State University, East Lansing, and Chris Lamb, Salk
Institute, La Jolla. The contributed talks and discussion sessions will
highlight recent progress in plant cell biology and will bring together
scientists studying plant cells from a different perspective. This is a rapidly
developing area of plant science and there is a lot of room for young people to
learn and contribute. The specific section that the Symposia addresses are: cell
surface and the extracellular matrix,; cell adhesion , cytoskeleton and the
recognition process; plasmodesmata and nuclear pores; cell division; membrane
signaling; tonoplast and plasma membrane; endoplasmic reticulum; plastids;
cytoplasmic regulatory mechanisms; signaling to the nucleus; transport vesicles;
heath shock proteins and molecular chaperones. To maximize the personal
interactions an attendance limit of 300 has been set. %%% The Keystone Symposia
format will provide a unique forum for sustained, focused, in depth discussion
of emerging topics that are critical to the understanding of the unique
properties of plant cells. The symposium will bring together in addition of
established scientists, as many young, talented scientists as possible. The
conference will be distinctly different from other s in the field because it
focuses on functional plant cell biology. The funds requested are mainly to
bring graduate students to the Symposium. ***