* 9412044
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Criminal Justice and       Private Settlement:  Appeal, Presentment and Trespass in    Thirteenth Century England
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* R Helmholz, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1995
* USD 5,079.00

9412044 HELMHOLZ This project uses quantitative methods and economic theory to
understand how, when, and why key aspects of modern Anglo- American criminal law
emerged. Modern Anglo-American criminal law is characterized by two features
that differ from the origins of public legal authority: (1) public agents,
rather than the victim, exercise the power to prosecute; and (2) criminal
sanctions are punitive rather than compensatory. The proposed research explores
the origins and consequences of the shift to public prosecution and punitive
sanctions in medieval England. Through analysis of manuscript sources in Great
Britain's Public Records Office, the project will seek to confirm preliminary
research that suggests that this key shift occurred in the early thirteenth
century, nearly a century later than usually believed. It will also seek
evidence to document the hypothesis that the shift to public prosecution and
punitive sanctions was the unintended consequence of a procedural change to
judicial prosecution of discontinued private accusations, which was probably
introduced for other reasons such as increasing royal revenue. The consequences
of this shift away from a system based on private incentive were primarily
negative, however, including a doubling in the rate of flight from justice and a
decline in the rate of prosecution of most crime. The proposed research will
develop important historical data and contribute to our theoretical
understanding of the development of criminal law. It also has implications for
criminal justice policy-making. ***