* 9412316
* A Measurement Study of Control Theory Explanations of       Deviant and Delinquent Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Travis Hirschi, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 07/31/1997
* USD 149,945.00

9412316 HIRSCHI This project uses a survey of adolescents to develop better
measures of self-control and to test control theories of delinquency and crime.
These theories, which suggest that young people commit delinquent acts because
they do not consider the long term or broader consequences of their acts, have
received significant scientific support. They argue that child rearing practices
in the home and the school produce people with varying degrees of concern for
family, school, and peers, which translates into a differential likelihood of
committing delinquent or criminal acts. Major scientific issues remain, however,
which center on the generalizability of such patterns, on the circularity or
tautological nature of individual-level control theories, on the relation
between social and individual sources of control, and on the relation between
control theory and other forms of deterrence (such as activities of the criminal
justice system). The research will (1) test the generalizability of earlier work
to samples differing in ethnicity, gender, urban location, and historical
period; (2) develop and validate measures of self- control; (3) analyze the
relationship between social-control and self-control; and (4) explore the
relationship between these forms of control and other types of deterrence. The
study will produce an empirically validated instrument for measuring self-
control and a large data set of high quality that will be of interest to many
researchers. ***