* 9412485
* 1995 Gordon Research Conference on the Impact of New        Technologies on Science Education; IRSEE, Germany;          September 25-30, 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1995
* John Fackler, Jr., Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1995
* USD 40,000.00

9412485 Fackler This award supports the participation of twenty U.S. scientists
and science educators in the first Gordon Conference on Science Education to be
held in Europe. The subject is the impact of new technologies on science
education, with particular reference to the visualization of concepts and
molecular structures. The meeting is co-organized by Professors John Fackler of
Texas A &amp; M University and W. Gerhard Pohl of Linz, Austria. It will take
place in late September, 1994, at the Swabian Conference Center in Irsee,
Germany, with European participants significantly outnumbering American
participants. The conference program was organized along the very successful
Gordon Research Conference procedures. This includes bringing together research
scientists and educators for critical examination of various initiatives in
science education, in an atmosphere that is conducive to generating joint
ventures between research scientists and educators. Sharing of ideas world wide
is as important in science education as it is in scientific research. The U.S.
has no monopoly on effective methodologies. The European site of the meeting was
chosen with the specific objective of introducing U.S. participants to the
variety of novel approaches being taken by European science educators. The U.S.
participants are expected to gain many new contacts and ideas for strengthening
programs in science education in the U.S. ***