* 9412804
* Raman Spectra of Mass-Selected Metal Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Derek Lindsay, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 01/31/1998
* USD 265,285.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division,
Lindsay and Lombardi are conducting resonance Raman studies on mass-selected
metal clusters in rare gas matrices. Sputter-produced metal cluster cations are
mass selected and co-deposited with excess rare gas on a window in the presence
of low energy electrons. Neutralized cluster samples of mixed metal species and
a variety of transition metal elements are interrogated by several different
spectroscopic techniques. Vibrational constants will be obtained under
conditions where there is little or no ambiguity as to the spectral carrier.
Force constants, bond energies, and geometries of the clusters will be obtained
from the data. %%% Atoms and macroscopic bulk material are two extremes of
matter which are fairly well understood. Small atomic or molecular clusters
represent the transition between these two states of matter. Scientists are
interested in knowing more about clusters in order to learn more about quantum
effects and bulk properties in matter. The results of these studies will help
understand some of these issues and will also provide structural information
which permits an understanding of the bonding properties of small metal clusters
as a function of the position of the elements in the periodic table.