* 9412995
* A Facility for Research and Education at Wachapreague,      Virginia
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Mark Luckenbach, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

The Caribbean Marine Research Center (CMRC) is one of six National Undersea
Research Centers. CMRC's marine field station on Lee Stocking Island (LSI) in
the Exuma Cays, Bahamas comprises 28 buildings, a 915-meter airstrip, nine
research vessels, wet and dry submersibles, and recompression chamber and an
underwater habitat. The station affords access to a pristine marine environment
with a diverse array of tropical habitats including shallow and deep coral
reefs, grassbeds, sand flats, mangroves, submerged carbonate terraces, subsea
caves, blue holes, tidal channels and stromatolites, a unique bio-geological
feature. During 1993, 131 visiting scientists and students conducted research in
the fields of benthic ecology, invertebrate biology, fisheries ecology,
oceanography, coral reef ecology, paleo-oceanography, macroalgal ecology,
aquaculture, global climate change, coral bleaching and marine geology. In
addition, a limited number of field courses and workshops were held at LSI.
However, the station is hindered by a paucity of accommodations for visiting
scientists, and the lack of a suitable lecture and workshop facility, which
prevents CMRC from meeting numerous requests to conduct field courses, workshops
and research. The proposed partnership between CMRC, The College of William
&amp; Mary (W&amp;M), and NSF would significantly enhanced the utility of one of
the most productivity marine field stations in the Caribbean. Specifically this
project will provide for the construction of a dormitory and lecture/workshop
building at LSI. Key contributions by CMRC include property for the facility,
support services, and administrative framework for coordination of activities,
and maintenance of the building over the facility's lifetime.