* 9412795
* Toward Other Planetary Systems (TOPS) - An Educational      Workshop for Teachers and Students, June 12-19, 1994
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1994
* Karen Meech, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 10/31/1994
* USD 20,000.00

9412795 Meech A workshop for high school teachers and students on the theme of
'Toward Other Planetary Systems' TOPS will be held in Hilo, Hawaii from June
12-19, 1994. The theme of exploring the formation of planetary systems and the
conditions for life and intelligence in space will be used as a platform to
introduce high school students and teachers to areas of planetary science that
are pushing the limits of ground-based and space-based astronomical technology.
Discussions of how astronomers are using the telescopes on Mauna Kea, Hawaii and
in space to search for evidence of planet formation in other solar systems will:
(i) open up a new awareness of the forefront of astronomical research in Hawaii
and supported by NSF and (ii) will provide an exciting basis for young students
to consider careers in astronomy and finally (iii) will provide a wealth of new
teaching materials to science educators at the high school level. One of the
primary goals is to make the TOPS theme a means by which new educational
materials are introduced to high school teachers so that they could better bring
stimulating science into the classroom at the ages when students are first
beginning to think about potential careers. The workshop consists of lectures,
equipment demonstrations, science experiment demonstrations, joint and separate
student-teacher activities, computer demonstrations, discussion groups about
careers and job opportunities, a tour of the Mauna Kea Observatory facilities,
and a nighttime observing session.