* 9412146
* Bulk and Interface Bonding in Ceramics and Intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1995,07/31/1999
* John Spence, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/1999
* USD 276,000.00

Spence 9412146 A three year program of research is proposed of atomic bonding in
crystals, at interfaces and at defects. Ceramics and intermetallic compounds
will be studied using a combination of ab-initio quantum molecular dynamics
computations, self-consistent calculations and experimental measurements of bond
charge distributions by quantitative convergent beam electron diffraction
method. The Zeiss Omega energy-filtering electron microscope at the Arizona
State University center for High Resolution Electron Microscopy will be used for
the experimental work. Principal Investors propose a new technique based on the
specular electron beam reflected from a metal-ceramic interface in the
transmission geometry for reflection imaging, microanalysis and bonding studies
of buried interfaces. This work is collaborative with C.P. Flynn. For perfect
crystals, in which bonds have been "seen" for the first time only recently,
Principal Investors propose bond charge distribution measurements in titanium-
aluminum and a series of ionic crystals in order to test the accuracy of self-
consistent computations based on the local density approximation. Measured bond
distributions will be compared for titanium-aluminum with and without manganese
doping, which is found to reduce brittleness. In ferroectric crystal Principal
Investigators plan comparisons of charge transfer between titanium and oxygen in
strontium titanate and isostructural barium titanate oxygen in order to
understand why one is ferroelectric and the other not. %%% The proposed research
seeks to investigate the origins of atomic bonding in crystals, at interfaces
and defects. Ceramics and intermetallic compounds will be studied using a
combination of theoretical calculations and experimental measurements of bond
charge distributions by quantitative techniques. ***