* 9412828
* U.S.-Poland Cooperative Science:  Design and Chemistry      of Modified Nucleosides for Nucleic Acid Synthesis
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Paul Agris, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 11/30/1997
* USD 33,725.00

9412482 Agris This US-Poland Research project between Dr. Paul F. Agris of North
Carolina State University, and Dr. Andrzej Malkiewicz of the Technical
University of Lodz, is on "Design and Chemistry of Modified Nucleosides for
Nucleic Acid Synthesis." How modified nucleoside chemistry, structure and
dynamics relate to function of RNAs, but also DNA, is not understood. Once
understood, even for a small number of base modified nucleosides, this varied
collection of chemistries and structures can be applied to the design and
engineering of molecules important to biology and medicine. The evolution of the
more than 80 modified nucleosides in RNAs and DNA is connected with their site-
selected positioning and altering of nucleic acid chemistry and structure; the
potential to accomplish this is as varied as are the chemistries and structures
of the modifications. The cooperating investigators will develop new
technologies and methods for studying the site-selected incorporation of both
native and non- native modified and stable-isotope labeled nucleosides in RNA
and DNA, applicable, initially, to fundamental nucleic acid biochemistry
(molecular evolution, nucleic acid structure). The mutual benefit from the
cooperative project derives from the perfect complementary experiences of the
two investigators. Dr. Malkiewicz is broadly experienced in the organic chemical
syntheses, chemistry and analyses of modified nucleosides and small oligomers
containing modified nucleosides; whereas Dr. Agris is broadly experienced in the
biosynthesis and analyses of both the structures and functions of modified
nucleosides in RNA. This project in biochemistry fulfills the program objective
of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in Poland and the
United States to combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence. ***