* 9412965
* Atomic Processes, and Thermal and Mechanical Properties of  Nanophase Ceramics via Multimillion Particle Parallel       Molecular Dynamics Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Rajiv Kalia, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1998
* USD 186,000.00

9412965 This computationally intensive research will investigate the
relationship between structure and physical properties of nanophase ceramics
with multimillion particle molecular dynamics simulations on parallel computers.
Synthesized by in situ consolidation of nanometer size clusters, nanophase
materials possess ultrafine microstructures with a large fraction of atoms
residing in grain boundaries. Nanophase ceramics display superior mechanical
properties and have much lower sintering temperature. Multimillion particle
simulations will be performed with interparticle potentials that include effects
of charge transfer, electronic polarizabilities, steric repulsion, and covalent
interactions. The purpose of these atomistic simulations will be to determine
(1) structural correlations, in particular the nature of defects in nanophase
ceramics; (2) kinetic roughening of interfaces; (3) atomic diffusion and other
dynamical processes; (4) thermal properties of nanophase ceramics; and (5)
mechanical properties including crack propagation and fracture and the mechanism
of ductility in nanostructured ceramics. %%% The computational research will
utilize a number of parallel computers to determine the properties of a new
class of ceramic materials. The research will involve developing new computer
codes for these next generation computers and carrying out sophisticated
computations. The use of parallel machines and large numbers of interacting
particles will allow realistic simulations to be carried out.