* 9412718
* Special Project:  Visiting Scientist Programs for Minority  Institutions and Small Colleges
* CSE,EIA
* 10/15/1995,09/30/2002
* Richard Alo, University of Houston - Downtown
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 09/30/2002
* USD 227,387.00

; R o o t E n t r y F gv) C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t G O b j e c t
P o o l gv) gv) % ! " # $ & ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; < = > ? @
A B C D E F G H I J K F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ;
e = e G j j j j j j j x D Z T 7 x j x j j j j ~ j j j j 1 9412718 Alo This
project is designed to strengthen the research and related educational
activities in computer and information science and engineering at minority
institutions without doctoral programs. For the twenty-five selected
institutions, it provides funds for Visitation Programs by recognized computer
scientists, engineers and educators who can respond to the needs of the program
proposal submitted by the institution to the Program Committee and who will
establish a working relationship with the institution that is expected to extend
beyond the period supported by this grant. The project includes a strong
evaluation component that extends throughout the period of the grant. Oh +' 0 $
H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9412718 Tracey Zeigler Tracey Zeigler @ @
S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( @ @ Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; c K @ Normal a
" A@ " D efault Paragraph Font 1 Tracey Zeigler \\CLM18\TZEIGLE$\WWUSER\ALO.DOC
@HP LaserJet 4/4M LPT1: HPPCL5E HP LaserJet 4/4M D k @ X HP LaserJet 4/4M D k @
X D Times New Roman Symbol & Arial 1 Courier (W1) " h $ 7 9412718 Tracey Zeigler
Tracey Zeigler ; ;