* 9412890
* High-Performance Computing for Participating Media          Radiative Heat Transfer Workshop, March 29-30, 1994,        Albuquerque, NM
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1994,09/30/1995
* Russell Skocypec, Department of Energy Albuquerque Operations Office
* Interagency Agreement
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 09/30/1995
* USD 38,000.00

9412890 Lowrey This workshop will address high-performance computing in
participating media radiative heat transfer. Experts form the fields of
radiative heat transfer and high-performance computing will be brought together
to discuss and identify opportunities for exploiting the advantages of high-
performance computing for solving radiative heat transfer problems that are
otherwise intractable. The goal is to: (1) educate participants from the
radiative heat transfer community about the opportunities of high-performance
computing; (2) educate the participants from the high-performance computing
environment about the unique and demanding aspects of radiative heat transfer;
and (3) provide a vehicle for the participants to explore interdisciplinary
development in transport modeling, computational algorithms and hardware
strategies that will enable a significant improvement in the ability to
accurately and efficiently simulate complex radiative heat transfer. There will
be approximately 35 participants. The workshop will be held at the Doubletree
Hotel, Albuquerque, New Mexico, March 29-30, 1994. The findings and
recommendations regarding new research directions and funding needs will be
documented in a workshop proceedings. Copies will be widely distributed among
all major research entities, funding agencies, and targeted industries in the
country. A summary of the results will be presented at the 6th AIAA/ASME
Thermophysics and Heat Transfer Conference and the 10th International Heat
Transfer Conference. The results will be placed on national electronic
information networks.