* 9412302
* Restructuring Local Democracy:  Political Activism Under    Economic Transformation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Lynn Staeheli, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 07/31/1997
* USD 154,905.00

9412302 STAEHELI This research project will examine the ways that political
activism has been affected by the increase in flexible employment that has
accompanied economic restructuring in the United States. The initial premise is
that flexible employment (i.e., part-time work, off-shift work, temporary
contracts, self-employment, and work undertaken at one's home) and the
concomitant changes in wage levels, job security, and time availability lead to
re- evaluations of the potential for political activism. The household and the
broad range of financial and interpersonal resources it encompasses is the
context in which decisions about activism are made. The local political
structure and perceptions about the local political structure are crucial
intervening factors that also affect decisions regarding political activism.
Trends in employment and activism therefore will be examined in four different
cities using a two-stage research strategy. The first stage will involve the
construction of narratives that set the structural context of economic
restructuring. The second stage will involve extensive telephone surveys in
which household members reconstruct their employment and political histories.
This stage also will involve intensive in-person interviews with political
activists. The telephone surveys will provide baseline information regarding the
nature of employment restructuring, political activities, and household
adjustment strategies, while the intensive interviews will focus on the ways
that work, politics, household, and local context are interconnected. Political
activism is a crucial element for maintaining and strengthening democratic
institutions. This research project will add to theories related to
restructuring, the state, and citizenship, and it will provide valuable new
insights about the ways that economic change affects the form and character of
local democracy. The results of the study therefore will have significant
theoretic al and practical implications for understanding and improving
democratization processes.