* 9412500
* Real-Time Algorithms for Automatic Vasculature Map          Generation and Feature-Based Location Determination From    Intra-Ocular Image Sequences
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1995
* Badrinath Roysam, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 04/30/1995
* USD 49,047.00

Laser eye surgery is the most effective known procedure for treating choroidal
neovascularization (CNV) found in a variety of conditions including age-related
macular degeneration, histoplasmic choroiditis, etc. However, the current rate
of success of this procedure is less than 50% for eradication of the CNV
following one treatment session, with a recurrence and/or persistence rate of
about 50%. This research will make possible an instrument that will drastically
reduce this failure rate. The instrument consists of a computerized multi-
spectral 3-D fundus camera with an associated head-up display and a real-time
laser tracking system. The tracking system uses a set of automatic image
analysis routines that allow accurate mapping of the pathologies, and
computerized laser treatment planning. The core image-processing problems that
are being addressed are: (i) constructing a wide-area map of the retinal
vasculature from an image sequence; and (ii) determining the location of the
current frame relative to the wide-area map constructed in step (i) to an
accuracy of 2 pixels, or better, at a frame rate of at least 30 per second. The
above problems are being solved by the development of a fast algorithm for
matching point sets with unknown correspondences, in the presence of a small
number of noise points. This algorithm operates by limiting the search to a
minimally- sufficient subset of the most reliable image feature points. In
addition, the proposed algorithm is being implemented on a linear array of
processors, further enabling real-time operation.