* 9412550
* Vertical Isolation for Very Large Scale Integration         Circuits Formed by Low Temperature Oxidation of Silicon
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Terry Alford, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/1998
* USD 89,517.00

9412550 Alford Research will be carried out to develop a fundamental
understanding of the processes associated with the low temperature oxidation of
Silicon in contact with Cu silicide. It is planned to: 1) investigate the
kinetics of the phenomena, 2)characterize the oxide layer, and 3)use the
orientation dependence on growth rate to form vertical isolation oxides in
integrated circuits. We expect to characterize the growth kinetics to obtain
activation energy, substrate orientation, identity of moving species through the
use of implanted markers, and the influence of dopants and impurities. The
integrity of the grown oxide will be quantified by electrical measurements of
metal oxide capacitor structures, ion beam analysis of composition, density, and
impurities, and transmission electron microscopy to assess microstructure
properties. %%% The primary goal of this program is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the low temperature oxidation of Silicon in contact with Cu
silicide. An important feature of the project is the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area of materials and processing
research. This research will contribute to improving the general perform ance of
advanced devices and integrated circuits used in computing, information
processing, and tele communica tions. ***