* 9412027
* REG: Image Enhancing and Processing System for Moire and    Holographic Interferometric Studies of Microelectronic      Packages
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Veeramani Prakash, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Oscar Dillon
* 07/31/1995
* USD 24,065.00

9318671 Dehmelt This proposal, "Single Atomic Particle at Rest in Free Space 4
(SEPARIS 4)", is for the continuation of efforts to approach the fundamental
limits of resolution and accuracy in optical spectroscopy for an individual
atomic ion elastically bound in a purely electric rf trap. The aim is an
accuracy of; one part in 1018. The best "accuracy" and 1000-day stability
realized in the past is 1013 or 105 less. The new "accuracy" would mean that
independent frequency measurements on the same atomic line by two different
groups in the same laboratory agree to better than 1018 and long term (108 sec
or 1000 days) stability is as good. This would have numerous implications for
measurements in fundamental physics and cosmology. The precision of current
atomic clocks is already being strained by the extraordinarily high timing
stability of the millisecond pulsars and the needs of space missions. The mass
loss of other pulsars due to gravitational radiation could not have been
observed without precise atomic clocks. Closer to home the Global Positioning
System relies crucially on precise atomic clocks. There seems to be an unlimited
field of new applications in metrology as more and more measuring tasks are
reduced to precise frequency measurement.