* 9412997
* Environmental Monitoring Facility for the Black Rock Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1996
* Harry Simpson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1996
* USD 16,870.00

9412997 Schuster, W. The Black Rock Forest Consortium, a group of fourteen New
York-area academic institutions, will install environmental monitoring facility
at its field station, the 1500 hectare Black Rock Forest. The Black Rock Forest
is located in the Hudson Highlands, 80 km north of New York City, and possesses
a wide variety of terrestrial and aquatic habitats for study. It has carefully
protected and managed for nearly a century, and has been utilized by the Black
Rock Forest Consortium since 1989. The forest has become a focal point for
scientific field studies and education for thousands of faculty and students
from Consortium institutions. Despite many natural features that make it a
logical location for scientific field work, the Black Rock Forest lacks a
meteorological facility. An increasing trend in use of the station for
biological and environmental science studies that created a need for such a
facility. The facility will continuously record a range of important
meteorological variables at two locations within the Forest, and will include
precipitation sampling equipment. Data will be downloaded, and entered into a
widely-available database, and equipment will be maintained on a regular, weekly
basis by Black Rock Forest staff. The facility will be one component of a
regional network of monitoring stations spanning 330 km along the Hudson River.
The resulting data will significantly improve the quality of ongoing studies in
plant ecology, aquatic ecology, dendrochronology, and biogeochemistry, and will
stimulate the expansion of scientific and educational use of the Black Rock
Forest.