* 9412668
* Anatomical data for a dynamic phonetic model
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Osamu Fujimura, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 06/30/1996
* USD 35,446.00

9412668 Fujimura ABSTRACT This one-year project constitutes a preparatory data
installation for a computational simulation of the speech production process, in
particular the tongue movement in speech utterance. The simulation of this
process is one of the components of a new computational model of phonetic
implementation. It describes a syllable-based organization of speech. It
computes articulatory gesture patterns and resulting articulatory (and based
thereon acoustic) signals. In the last component of this model, called signal
generator, the speech organs, centering around the tongue, under muscle
contraction control, move to produce speech signals in a new dynamic
3-dimensional finite-element model. In the one-year project, new tongue data
will be analyzed and incorporated into this finite element computational
framework. This work will be carried out principally by Mr. Chao-Min Wu,
currently a graduate student in the Bioengineering Program at OSU, whom the PI
advises for a PhD dissertation. The specific tasks of the research project are
(1) to supplement tissue boundary data of the tongue and other oral structures,
which are obtained from MRI head scans of several subjects, with internal muscle
structure data which are available in detailed anatomical drawings, and (2) to
construct a basic finite element model of the tongue and adapt it for each
subject and then to the tongue shapes in different vowel articulations, by a
method of nonuniform geometrical mapping. The model designs will be improved by
successive approximation through comparing their transforms for available MRI
data from task (1). The data created in this project will be available for use
by researchers in phonetics in general, and will be useful for any theory of
phonetics. The anatomical data to be produced along with the newly developed
software will be made available also for any other tongue modeling and similar
articulatory studies. ***