* 9412396
* Karl Pearson's Biometric Laboratory and the Spread of       Statistical Methods in Science
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Theodore Porter, University of California-Los Angeles
* Fixed Price Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 06/30/1996
* USD 80,000.00

Karl Pearson was in many ways the founder of modern statistics as a set of
methods applicable to quantitative data from almost any science. While there is
good historical literature about Pearson's own development as a statistician and
the relation of his work to his eugenic commitments, there is remarkably little
about the spread of Pearsonian statistical methods to the sciences that adopted
them. Dr. Porter is emphasizing the expansion of statistics through a study of
Pearson personal contacts and correspondence. Pearson's biometric laboratory
began taking in postgraduate students and other visitors. Some of the most
important statisticians in several disciplines worked with him directly for
extended periods. To see how this network spread from Pearson's lab to the
various scientific disciplines, Dr. Porter is examining both the Pearson archive
and the published record of those who introduced modern statistical methods to
their disciplines. Dr. Porter is keenly alert to the scientific and
institutional contexts within which such people worked. This study contributes
not only to the history of statistics as such, but also to our understanding of
the expectations, standards, and values that have made statistical rules of
inference so central to the drive for objectivity in the modern social and
natural sciences.