* 9412974
* Enhancement of Research Capacity for Konza Prairie Research Natural Area - Phase II
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* David Hartnett, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 192,161.00

Konza Prairie Research Natural Area (KPRNA) is a 3,487 ha. tallgrass prairie
preserve 15km south of the Kansas State University campus that is owned by The
Nature Conservancy and managed by the Division of Biology. Over 80 projects,
involving 14 Departments and 5 colleges on campus and dozens of researchers from
off campus, are being conducted on the site, with current extramural funding of
almost $6,000,000. Current facilities include a large stone ranch house and
barn, a small laboratory, 30 km of fencing, 17 km of maintained gravel roads, a
16.4 km bison enclosures and bison handling facility, and fire management
equipment for the experimental burn treatments imposed on the site (which
requires 61 km of maintained fire guards). Over 90% of the research on the site
resolves around the bison or fire experimental manipulations, or the 5,000 ft2
behavioral research facility in the loft of the barn. Research on KPRNA has
grown significantly in the last decade and the site has reached its carrying
capacity with the current facilities. Therefore, KPRNA has embarked on a three
phase development plan that includes I) producing a long range Master Plan, II)
stabilizing and renovating the existing facilities and equipment, and III)
constructing a new laboratory and living quarters for visiting scientists. This
proposal is to complete Phase II - specifically, to construct new bison handling
facilities, upgrade our fire management capabilities, and to renovate an
existing behavioral research space. The new facilities will allow effective and
safe handling of the bison, and the fire management equipment will enhance our
ability to conduct prescribed burns and fight unwanted fires. The behavioral
research facility will be renovated with new support columns for the loft and
new flooring. Concurrently, matching funds will be used to upgrade the other
equipment and facilities on the site, especially the stone house, which is used
by scientists for offices, sleeping qu arters, and meeting areas. The completion
of Phase II is critical to increasing research capacity, and allowing a move to
the next level of development and productivity.