* 9412117
* Dissertation Research: Spatial Interactions and the Role of Facilitation in a Colorado Desert Plant Community
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Henry Howe, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1996
* USD 5,000.00

9412117 Howe The purpose of this research is to experimentally test hypotheses
derived from a census and five-year recensus of &gt;7500 mapped woody perennials
of 26 species in Joshua Tree National Monument. Most of these species show
strong intraspecific and interspecific aggregation, and herbivory of unknown
effect. Experimental results will be interpreted in light of a 10-year re-
census, scheduled for March 1994. Using exclosures around members of the
dominant woody perennial and in open areas nearby, we propose to distinguish
effects of intra- and interspecific competition, granivory, herbivory,
desiccation, and facilitation in establishment, growth, and/or mortality of new
seedlings over two years, and in growth and mortality of seedlings, and
juveniles already present. Using protected and unprotected transplants of
seedlings, we expect to test effects of competition and facilitation of
controlled samples of a long-lived perennial that is not browsed by vertebrate
herbivores, a short-lived perennial that is heavily browsed by jackrabbits,
against a standard seedlings of the dominant shrub, which suffer moderate to
heavy vertebrate herbivory. Exclosures and transplants will distinguish
processes that account for extensive bare ground and aggregated spatial
dispersions of key woody perennials common at this site. %%% This dissertation
research provides a nice integrate map data from permanent plots with field
experiments to assess some of the important determinants of spatial pattern and
plant associations in a desert community.