* 9412106
* Research Equipment Grant:  Diagnostics of Hot Capillary     Discharge Plasmas for Efficient Soft X-Ray Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Jorge Rocca, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 06/30/1996
* USD 63,995.00

9412106 Rocca The Department of Electrical Engineering at Colorado State
University proposed the construction of an x-ray streak camera/stigmatic
spectrograph combination to be utilized as a powerful diagnostics tool in the
development of efficient new sources of x-ray radiation based on fast capillary
discharges. Important technological and scientifiv applications require the
development of efficient and compact sources of x-ray radiation. Results of
recent experiments conducted at Colorado State University show that very fast
discharge excitation of capillary channels with risetimes of the order of 10ns
can generate dense plasma columns with electron temperatures of a few hundred eV
utilizing currents that are more than an order of magnitude smaller than those
utilized to generate hot plasmas in Terawatt pulse power machines. Such
capability for efficiently generating plasma columns of small diameter (=200um)
by direct discharge excitation could provide a new route towards compact and
efficient soft x-ray lasers. Also, the direct transfer of electrically stored
energy into reproducible hot capillary plasmas of small diameters could result
in a compact and efficient source of incoherent x-rays. The proposed instrument
will image into a flat field with high spatial and spectral resolution the soft
x-ray radiation emitted by the capillary discharge. An x-ray camera, placed in
the focal plane of the stigmatic spectrograph will provide for temporal
resolution necessary to map the evolution of the soft x-ray radiation in a
single shot. This combination will constitute a powerful instrument to identify
line amplification as well to characterize the dynamics of these promising
plasmas which are presently significantly less understood than laser created
plasmas. The novel design of the proposed instrument will also for rapidly
reconfiguring it into two additional complementary modes of operation to
generate: a) sets of simultaneously acquired spatially resolved spectra and b)
electronically reco rded pinhole images of the plasma. ***