* 9412895
* Representational Granularity in the Philosophy of           Mathematics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Kenneth Manders, University of Pittsburgh
* Fixed Amount Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 12/31/1997
* USD 80,000.00

Does the way one writes something in mathematics make any theoretical
difference? This is a question that Dr. Manders is addressing in this research.
Representational differences have been regarded as of little theoretical
significance in the philosophy or foundations of mathematics. Differences of
notation or language have been seen as of merely practical interest, as long as
they can be bridged by inference-reserving translations. Dr. Manders aims to
identify features of representation central to conceptual function in
mathematics, and assign them a philosophical role. Notably, he is studying
contrasts in "representational granularity" between content-linked
representations; roughly, these are differences among representations such as
photographs, diagrams, formulae, and text, as to how they break up contents they
share into individually representable pieces. He hopes to show how granularity
differences underlie the function of concepts, generality, and proof; and thus
should share center stage in the philosophical picture of intellectual
understanding. It would follow that philosophy of mathematics, in order to get
its sights on mathematical understanding, must engage mathematical practices in
a way that is sensitive to these features of mathematical representation. Doing
so promises to re-involve philosophy of mathematics with current mathematical
practice and with the history of mathematics. Dr. Manders argument uses case
studies: an analysis of Descartes' geometry, and subsequent geometrical
practices in which algebraic representation predominates; and a contrasting
analysis of diagram-based geometrical practices. He wants to show how strengths
and weaknesses of several such practices as vehicles for the understanding may
be understood from grain size differences between their respective
representations.