* 9412816
* Function of RecO Protein in Recombination and Repair in     E. coli
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/2001
* Cynthia Luisi-DeLuca, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2001
* USD 505,000.00

9412816 Abstract The bacterium E. coli provides a good model system for the
study of genetic recombination. The ease with which it is maintained and
genetically manipulated has allowed the isolation and analysis of a large number
of recombination deficient mutants and the subsequent identification and
analysis of the genes and respective gene products. Many of the genes involved
in homologous recombination are also required for some aspect of DNA repair.
There are at least three distinct recombination pathways termed RecBCD, RecE,
and RecF which differ from each other with respect to the gene product(s)
required. Both the RecBCD and RecF pathways function in wild type cells, and
both are believed to require the recA gene product. At least twelve additional
recombination genes are involved in some aspect of RecF pathway recombination,
yet very little is known about the interaction between the RecF pathway gene
products and how they function together in recombination. All RecF pathway
mediated recombination requires the recO and recR gene products. In addition,
both gene products are essential for DNA repair following UV irradiation or
mitomycin C exposure. Purified RecO protein shares some biochemical activities
with RecA protein including D-loop formation, and RecO can substitute for RecA
in vivo, suggesting that the two proteins are functionally similar. The goal of
this research is to further investigate the function of RecO protein in vivo,
and to identify and characterize the biochemical properties associated with RecO
in vitro that are relevant to RecO function in recombination and DNA repair. ***
One aspect of DNA metabolism that is not well characterized at the molecular
level is general recombination. Recombination mechanisms are essential to
generate genetic diversity, to maintain cell viability after DNA damage, and to
accurately segregate chromosomes during meiosis. %%%