* 9412985
* Peracids as Replacements for Chlorine-Containing Compounds  in the Bleaching of Wood Pulps
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Raymond Francis, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 11/30/1998
* USD 225,000.00

Dr. Raymond C. Francis, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Engineering -
Syracuse, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division under the Environmentally Benign
Synthesis and Processing Initiative for an evaluation of peracids as
replacements for chlorine containing compounds in the bleaching of wood. Major
efforts will be directed at evaluating the metal catalyzed decomposition of
caroates and peracetic acid, the oxidation of lignin models and cellulose with
caroates and peracetic acid, and finally the oxidation of actual kraft pulp. A
combination of these results will permit the optimal conditions to be designed
for the use of caroates and peracetic acid as replacements of chlorine
containing bleaches by the paper industry. The peracetic acid research will use
potentially hazardous, highly concentrated peracetic acid. These experiments
will be conducted in the Houston laboratories of the industrial collaborator,
Solvay Interox. Wood pulps are usually bleached during paper manufacturing with
chlorine containing compounds. The reaction between these bleaches and lignins
produces organochlorine compounds which are believed to be harmful to the
environment. The peracids are strong oxidants which also can oxidize lignins.
However, they do not generate chlorine containing organics and their effluents
can be recycled, concentrated, and disposed of in environmentally sound ways. As
the use of peracids in wood pulp processing is a relatively new concept and this
project involves a comprehensive investigation of both the relevant organic and
inorganic chemistry. The results will assist the paper industry to determine the
optimal conditions under which peracids should be used.