* 9412077
* Dissertation Research:  Monoamine Neurotransmitters as      Factors in Behavioral Change
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* David Norris, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 9,965.00

The vertebrate neuroendocrine system, using information derived from both
internal and external environments, controls development, growth, and
reproduction. The brain integrates this information and secretes
neurotransmitters and neurohormones to alter pituitary function and bring about
endocrine based events and behavioral changes. Such changes are very important
in mediating major life events that help animals adapt to environmental changes.
Because of the varied modes of reproduction that exist in teleost fishes, fishes
are a useful system to look at how both the internal and external environments
influence sex determination and sexual behaviors. One particularly useful mode
of reproduction is a sexual plasticity known as sequential hermaphroditism where
an individual can begin life as one sex, reproduce as that sex for at least one
breeding season and subsequently undergo sex reversal and reproduce as the
opposite sex. Such a change is accompanied by drastic changes in behavior. This
system allows for investigation into the role of the brain in sex determination
and sex-specific behavior. The purpose of the proposed research is to identify
changes in monoamine neurotransmitters in the brains of a protogynous coral reef
fish (Thalassoma duperrey) throughout the process of sex reversal and in
relation to daily, semi-lunar and annual influences. Because there are
relatively few vertebrates that exhibit a natural sex reversal once sexual
maturation has been achieved, this system is an excellent model in which to look
at changes in behavior and neurochemistry that accompany sex reversal and
possible control mechanisms for such a reversal. This work will contribute to a
better understanding of the relationship of neural control mechanisms for sex
specific behaviors. By using animals which can act as both sexes in one
individual at different times in the life history, one can gain a better
understanding of how changes in sexual behavior may be controlle d in other
animals, including humans. In addition the presence of diandry (two different
male phenotypes, one being a male throughout the life history and the other
being first female and then male) offers the opportunity to compare behaviors of
two different types of males. The proposed work will provide information on the
changes in monoamines associated with sex reversal and accompanying behavioral
changes as well as some insights into possible cause-effect relationships. This
system provides a unique opportunity for the study of neural correlates of sex
determination and sexual behavior.