* 9412061
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Domestice Violence and     Family Law in Senegal, West Africa
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Susan Philips, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 09/30/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9412061 Philips This Dissertation Improvement project examines the cultural,
ideological, and behavioral dimensions of domestic violence and law among the
Wolof of St. Louis, Senegal. Study subjects will include female and male
disputants and legal professionals participating in domestic violence cases at
the Regional Tribunal. Anthropological methods, including structured and
unstructured interviews, court observations, and participant observation will
elicit information on a number of subjects pertaining to law and domestic
violence. The chief objective of this study is to determine to what extent the
law provides a means for challenging domestic violence, and, alternatively, in
what measure it maintains the conditions enabling domestic violence to persist.
To pursue this objective, three sets of questions will be investigated: (1) what
beliefs do female and male disputants hold regarding the law, gender, and
violence, and how do these beliefs shape the demands disputants make on the
legal system?; (2) how do legal professionals interpret the law, and how does
this affect their handling of cases and case outcomes?; and (3) do case outcomes
offer remedies for women facing domestic violence? Information obtained from
this research will be of potential use to legal professionals and scholars in
the United States, Senegal, and the rest of the Islamic world.