* 9412141
* Regional Organization of Chiefdoms in the Alto Magdalena,   Colombia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,12/31/2001
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2001
* USD 167,284.00

9412141 Drennan With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Robert Drennan and
his colleagues will conduct four seasons of archaeological reconnaissance and
excavation in the Alto Magdalena region of Colombia. This area has long
attracted the attention of archaeologists because of its striking stone statuary
and elaborate burial mounds. With previous NSF support, Dr. Drennan has
documented aspects of the regional social, political and economic organization
of the prehispanic inhabitants of one part of the Alto Magdalena. The results
indicate the emergence of small scale regional chiefdoms beginning about 1 A.D.
Dr. Drennan will now expand his work to include a larger portion of the Alto
Magdalena. In conjunction with his colleagues, he will first conduct a broad
scale regional survey. On the basis of the results, several localities will be
examined in more detail and select excavations will be carried out.
Archaeologists have observed that in many parts of the world simple agricultural
societies were transformed into more complex entities which incorporated large
numbers of people and exhibited clear cut social stratification. In the earlier
stages such entities are termed "chiefdoms" and archaeologists wish to
understand the processes which led to their rise. The Alto Magdalena region is
unusual in this regard because it appears that status differentiation, when it
emerged, was not accompanied by great variations in individual wealth. Usually
the opposite is true. Through his expansion in areal coverage Dr. Drennan and
his colleagues wish to understand the process in more detail. This research is
important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists. It will shed new light on the emergence of complex societies and
assist in the training of graduate students.