* 9412983
* Dissertation Research:  Identity and Popular Culture in San Carlos Reservation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Steven Feld, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/1995
* USD 7,950.00

9412983 Feld This project involves the dissertation research of a student in
cultural anthropology from the University of Texas. The student will study how
Native Americans on the Apache San Carlos reservation in Arizona adapt and
refashion American popular culture in constructing their Indigenous identities.
Focusing on contemporary popular music, the student will conduct participant
observation among a range of musical practitioners. The central focii of the
project will be the formal properties of various musical expressions, the social
positions of the participants, the way the music deals with contemporary power
relations of Indians and the dominant culture, how historical, biographical and
emotional issues are encoded in the songs. The student will play music with
local musicians, and will transcribe and analyze musical and linguistic texts,
and interview musicians and listeners about life historical experiences with
popular music. This research is important because popular music is a major part
of the self-identification of young people. By studying the role of music in
minority life, how people adapt dominant culture to express their subordinate
existence, the project will add important understanding of minority cultures in
the stressful condition of culture contact in contemporary life. This knowledge
will be valuable to a wide range of social actors and institutions, from
schools, who need to know how to motivate students towards academic interests,
to work places, who need to understand what young people are interested in to
deal with them successfully.