* 9412648
* Engineering Faculty Internship:  Evaluation of a Continuous Improvement Model in a Shared Responsibility Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1995
* Ken Currie, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Pius J. Egbelu
* 06/30/1995
* USD 25,000.00

9412648 Currie The objective of this project is to evaluate the continuous
improvement models at the Saturn Corporation in Spring Hill, Tennessee. Under
the project, the process in which information is gathered, analyzed, and
conclusion reached under the continuous improvement model will be evaluated
according to standard engineering design practices. The effectiveness of teams
of workers to generate alternatives and make consensus based decisions will be
evaluated by observations and involvement by the project team. Interview with
team members from both union and management will be conducted concerning the
adequacy of training received and recommended changes to improve the
effectiveness of the system. Additional tasks to be performed under this project
include the evaluation of the transfer of recommendations to work units for
implementation, documentation and evaluation of the effectiveness of
communication and group dynamic process, evaluation and documentation and
incentives and motivation of team members and their work unit members to accept
recommended improvements, and corporate policies encouraging increased
productivity. The potentials for this project include the strengthening of the
understanding of continuous improvement by the students and faculty involved in
the project. Valuable insights will be gained into engineering practices and
management philosophy under continuous improvement programs. Similarly, the
outcome of the project will help Saturn Corporation and other similar
manufacturing organizations on how to refine continuous improvement models and
consequently, develop strategies to maximize the benefits from such program.