* 9412732
* Programmable Blind Adaptive Multivariate Filtering
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* William Gardner, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/1999
* USD 185,650.00

In wireless communications, including cellular communication systems, spread
spectrum overlay systems, and signals intelligence applications, the degradation
caused by rapidly time-varying multipath and unknown cochannel interference can
be reduced by adaptive spatial filtering using antenna arrays. This research is
pursuing a flexible framework for adapting a spatial filter without using a
training signal, array calibration data, or knowledge of spatial characteristics
of the desired or interfering signals. It is derived from two conceptually
different perspectives: canonical correlation analysis from multivariate
statistics, and the conditional maximum likelihood problem for a data-derived
training signal obtained from a user-programmable transformation of the received
data. The transformation can be programmed by the user to sort and separate the
received signals on the basis of the differing degrees to which they exhibit one
or more user-selected statistical properties. Many such useful transformations
are being examined. The performance of the new method is being investigated
analytically and by computer simulations to quantify its capabilities of signal
separation, multipath mitigation, and interference rejection. Preliminary
results suggest that the new method can converge very quickly to yield signal
estimates that are comparable to those obtained by the MSE method that uses
perfectly known training signals. More generally, the objective of this research
is to develop and evaluate a new and very general approach to programmable blind
adaptive multivariate filtering that has broad application to sensor array
processing in addition to wireless communications.