* 9412089
* LMER: A Comparative Study of the Transport &amp; Transformation of Materials From Rivers Through the Land-sea Margin
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1994,09/30/2001
* William Wiebe, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/2001
* USD 3,024,216.00

9412089 Wiegert This project will study the transport and transformation of
inorganic and organic materials carried from the land into the sea by the five
major coastal rivers of Georgia. Each river differs in landscape
characteristics, geological setting, flow rate, inorganic and organic loading,
and pH, but they are confined within a 120 mile segment of coast and, thus,
share similar temperature, rainfall, and tidal regimes. These rivers offer a
unique opportunity for the comparative ecological study of the impact of the
land, via rivers, on the nearshore ocean and of the ocean, through tidal
flooding, on the riparian and ocastal wetlands. The first pahse of these studies
will focus on 1) measuring the hyprodynamic characteristics of the rivers and
estuaries that are necessary for understanding and quantifying the flux of
materials and 2) measuring chemical and physical changes in concentrations and
bioactivity of constituents as they pass through distinct communities. A series
of laboratory and field experiments to further extend knowledge of the
interaction of land, river, sea and riparian and coastal wetlands are also
planned. Modeling will be an integral part of all phases of the work. Simple
one-compartment models will be used to guide the selection of samples and sites
for the component measurements. Multicomponent, mosaic and landscape/watershed
models will be used to integrate all phases of the work on fluxes and
modifications. Important parameters will be identified on the basis of model
sensitivity analysis and appropriate data gathered to reduce the error in
parameter evaluation. Specifically, measurements will be made it the kinds,
amounts, and metabolic activity of materials carried from above the land/sea
margin to the near coastal zone. Associated with the is effort, the hydrodynamic
processes repsonsible for transport will be addressed. Field experimetns will be
done to ascertain fate of materials as water is displaced out of the estuary
onto and off of the major vegetational subsystems. Laboratory
experiment/analysis will be em;ployed to examine details of material processing
that cannot be observed or measured in the field. Materials studied will include
the suspended load of inorganic particles, the dissolved compounds of nitrogen,
phosphorous (both inorganic and organic forms) and silica, and the organic
carbon compounds. Results will proved useful at several levels, from that of
basic research in marine science, through coastal zone management, to the level
of global change, predicting impact on the interaction of land and sea in the
boudary area regarded as the land/sea margin.