* 9412929
* Dynamic Processes in Glassy Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1994,04/30/1998
* Robert Yaris, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/1998
* USD 328,473.00

9412929 This work is a collaborative effort between an experimental group under
the direction of Professor Jacob Schaefer and a theoretical group under the
direction of Professor Robert Yaris. The experimental group has developed new
methods using solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance to accurately measure
interchain distances between labeled atoms in polycarbonate. In this grant
period we will measure additional interchain distances to further characterize
the structure of the glassy state of polycarbonate. In addition, we will study
blends of polycarbonate with a derivitized polycarbonate to study the changes in
dynamic behavior. This work will also be combined with dynamic mechanical
studies on the mechanical properties of polycarbonate and the blends. The
theoretical group has developed a general method to simulate the long-term
dynamics of a system and has applied this to a simplified model of
polycarbonate. In this grant period we shall extend this simulation, in several
steps, to polycarbonate itself using constraints and parameters obtained from
the experimental group. %%% Glassy polymers (plastics) are very important
industrial materials. In particular, polycarbonate has very unusual physical
properties -- it is bulletprooof glass. We are studying it in order to
characterize and understand its molecular dynamic properties. The long-range
goal of the study and modeling is to develop an understanding of the connection
between the microscopic dynamics of polymer glasses and their macroscopic
physical properties.