* 9412584
* Acquisition of a Dilution Refrigerator and Superconducting  Magnet System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Allen Goldman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1996
* USD 127,250.00

Matching funds are provided for the acquisition and the construction of a unique
facility for the study of superconducting films and structures in magnetic
fields at ultralow temperatures. The instrument consists of a high cooling power
dilution refrigerator, capable of achieving temperatures below 5 millikelvin, a
7-tesla horizontal/8.5- tesla vertical vector magnet system, and associated
pumps, power supplies, and gas handling system needed for the operation of the
refrigerator and magnet system. Since many of the investigations involve the
study of films prepared by deposition onto substrates held at low temperatures,
the equipment will be built into an existing ultrahigh vacuum growth chamber.
This will be done in a manner which permits insitu deposition of films onto cold
substrates, but which also retains the option of free-standing operation of the
refrigerator and magnet. Funds also are provided for the purchases of a nuclear
orientation thermometer which will serve as a primary temperature standard, and
a dc SQUID system which will be configured in a voltage-measuring mode to gauge
transport properties at very low current excitations. The equipment would be
used to extend the measurement of properties of superconducting films and
structures in high magnetic fields (7 to 14 tesla) to ultralow temperatures
(below 0.005 kelvin). The facility would be used to investigate the quantum
properties of selected electronic systems in the limits of ultralow temperatures
and two dimensions. For such systems, under appropriate conditions, quantum
fluctuations are more important than thermal fluctuations, and many systems
exhibit quantal rather than thermal phase transitions. The particular interests
are in insulator-to-superconductor transitions in both ultrathin films and
junction arrays, the macroscopic quantum tunneling of vortices in
superconductors, and the critical fields of reduced transition temperature
superconductors. These studies have important implicati ons and applications in
developing and characterizing new technologically significant materials.