* 9412813
* Dissertation Research: Evolution of Luminescent Signals in  Cypridinid Ostracodes: A Molecular Phylogenetic Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Robert Wayne, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 07/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9412813 MORIN This award will provide laboratory supplies for DNA sequencing to
enhance the dissertation work of a PhD graduate student. The organisms being
studied are cypridnid ostracodes, very small Crustacea which live in Caribbean
waters and exhibit remarkable bioluminescent courtship displays that, like
fireflies, are specific or distinctive for each species. Prior work using
morphological information has helped to divulge relationships among some members
of this interesting group but the relationships of other members remain to be
resolved and the molecular data (DNA sequences from 3 mitochondrial genes) of
this project should contribute new and useful information for this purpose. Once
a phylogeny or pattern of relationships has been established, it can be utilized
in testing hypotheses about the evolution of different components of the
sequence of bioluminescent display behaviors. %%% Support for the training of
graduate students in modern systematic methodologies is important for
maintaining a workforce of scientists capable of addressing the questions and
issues of biodiversity which are of increasing global concern. The results of
this study can be used to elucidate patterns of courtship behavior that are
important for maintaining reproductive isolation or the distinctness of species.
***