* 9412456
* The Object Data Bank:  A Collaborative Project Proposal to  Provide a Standardized Realistic Stimulus Set of Common     Objects for Experimental Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Michael Tarr, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1996
* USD 67,214.00

TARR This object databank is intended as a collaborative project among
experimental psychologists to develop a set of standardized stimulus materials
depicting familiar common objects. The ultimate goal of the project is to make
available to the research community a set of 300-500 photorealistically
illuminated and shaded objects. Each object will be developed using
3-dimensional computer-aided design (CAD) modeling techniques and will be
rendered using state-of-the-art raytracing. A given object will be available in
several standard formats for researchers to use in generating their own stimulus
images without the need of duplicating the time-intensive modeling required for
even a single object. To facilitate researchers who need only high quality
images but not specific control of lighting, textures and colors, objects will
also be available as collections of already rendered images, each object
depicted in realistic colors at a minimum of 12 3-dimensional viewpoints
generated by 30 degree rotations around the vertical axis. The set of objects
will initially be based on the widely used set of 2-dimensional line drawings of
objects introduced and distributed by Snodgrass and Vanderwart (1980). This set
of familiar common objects has been used in many different experimental settings
and has provided ease of stimulus preparation and some stimulus standardization
between differing research paradigms. The goal is to begin by creating
3-dimensional analogs of each item in the Snodgrass and Vanderwart set -- this
provides the added advantage of offering some previously collected norm data
about object categories, as well as some basis for comparison with earlier
studies. To illustrate some of the many potential applications of this new set
of objects, several proposed experiments are included from the areas of object
perception , visual memory, scene recognition, neuropsychology of object
recognition, neuropsychology of memory, clinical assessment of attentional
disorders. Many of the proposed st udies would be impossible without realistic
images of common objects. It is expected that the stimulus set will have far
wider applications than even this broad range of disciplines, the common theme
being that highly realistic visual stimuli can only enhance the ecological
relevance of current paradigms, as well as make available new paradigms that
were previously unrealizable. ***