* 9412901
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Responses of Motorists and the Neighborhoods They Drive Through to the January, 1994   Los Angeles Earthquake
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1996
* David Mark, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 03/31/1996
* USD 9,975.00

9412901 MARK The January 1994 earthquake in Los Angeles destroyed parts of four
major freeways. This event presents a unique opportunity to explore the impacts
of such disruptions on both motorists who used those freeways and on
neighborhoods that receive the displaced motorists. Due to modified commuting
patterns, members of different ethnic and socioeconomic groups are necessarily
interacting in ways that they did not interact before. White middle and upper
income commuters are now travelling surface streets in predominantly lower
income and ethnically African American and Hispanic neighborhoods. Preliminary
evidence suggests that significant interactions between commuters and residents
of these neighborhoods are occurring and that these interactions are changing in
intensity over time, suggesting that contact is stimulating improved relations
bewteen these groups. This study will be based on three forms of data
collection. Commuters will be identified via license plate numbers and sent a
sequence of mailed questionnaires. Neighborhood residents and businesses will be
interviewed in person. Finally, systemmatic observations of the interactions
along major arterials will be undertaken in order to identify the nature of
those interactions and to corroborate information collected by interviews and
surveys. Documenting the nature of changes in attitudes and behaviors between
these different social groups will have broad implications for understanding
basic attitudes and attitude changes brought about by new levels of interaction
in a racially and economically polarized, and geographically segregated, urban
society. The research will further provide insight into the impact of disasters
on travel behavior of residents which should prove useful in planning for such
events. As a doctoral dissertation research award, this project will also
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a stong independent
research career. ***