* 9412035
* Theoretical Studies of Charge Shift Processes in Solution:  Role of Solute-Solvent Electronic Structure and Solvation   Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1997
* Hyung Kim, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 10/31/1997
* USD 210,000.00

Hyung Kim of Carnegie Mellon University is supported by a grant from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to perform theoretical studies
of charge shift processes in solution. He will study solute-solvent electronic
structure variation with a fluctuating nonequilibrium solvent environment and
it's effect on charge shift processes. A novel quantum chemical method will
incorporate the solute-solvent electron correlation within a dielectric
continuum solvent description. An improved solvent coordinate description, which
properly accounts for solvent response to variations in the solute geometry
during reaction, will also be developed. The theory will be applied to the first
singlet electronic transition in formaldehyde, dissociative electron attachment,
ultrafast excited-state electron transfer and state-dependent rotational
dynamics in solution. Excellent theories are now available for understanding gas
phase chemical reactions involving binary encounters between molecules. However,
most chemical reactions of technological importance occur in condensed phases
consisting of reacting solutes dissolved in non-reacting solvents. The effect
which the solvent has on chemical reactions, and theoretical methods for dealing
with this complex interaction are still very much in their infancy.
Nevertheless, progress in this area of research can have an important long range
impact on our fundamental understanding of chemical reactions of industrial
significance. Kim's research is helping to provide a theoretical basis for the
interpretation of solvent effects on chemical reactions in condensed phase
systems.