* 9412660
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Structural, Problem-       Solving, and Life-Cycle Issues in The Organizational        Adoption of Work-Family Programs
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1995
* Kevin Leicht, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/1995
* USD 5,289.00

This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral Dissertation Research
program. It is a study of the determinants of the adoption by American
corporations of specific programs to reduce the conflict between work and family
obligations. Data will be collected from existing reference sources and through
telephone interviews with corporate human resource departments in order to carry
out an event history analysis of the factors that trigger the establishment of
corporate family programs. As the proportion of married women in the work force
has increased dramatically, the problems of juggling family and work obligations
have increased. Some corporations have responded by establishing on-site day
care, flexible work schedules, and other family programs, while others have done
very little along these lines. There is a pressing need to understand what
factors are most likely to lead to the establishment of corporate family
programs, a need this project will help to fill. In addition to the scientific
gains to be achieved by the research, this award will materially assist a highly
promising student in completing research for the Ph.D. dissertation. Thus it
contributes to the future scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough
training of the next generation of social scientists.