* 9412712
* Analytical Techniques for Probabilistic Production Costing, Geographically Differentiated Marginal Cost, and            Reliability Indices in Interconnected Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Garng Huang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Marija Ilic
* 08/31/1999
* USD 143,311.00

9412712 Singh The primary objective of this proposal is development of a
realistic and viable methodology for probabilistic production cost and marginal
cost calculations in interconnected power systems. Probabilistic production cost
and reliability evaluation are two interrelated areas of probabilistic modeling
of power systems. Some recent advancements in multi-area reliability analysis
methods will contribute to the proposed solution of problems in production
costing, and similarly the solution of some problems in production cost
calculation in the proposed research will lead to enhancement of the capability
of multi-area reliability analysis techniques. The end product is expected to be
an integrated approach for production cost, marginal cost, and reliability
indices. Several problems have been identifies whose solution will provide
significant advancement of the probabilistic production cost modeling of
interconnected power systems and to lead to viable solutions. These problems
are: Find a decomposition-simulation procedure which, considering all loads
states, can find indices after each unit addition by single decomposition. Find
efficient techniques for determining production cost and geographically
differentiated marginal cost. Develop methods for more accurate modeling of
correlated area loads in an interconnected power system. Develop a methodology
for incorporating load dependent transmission model in the decomposition
process. Develop a methodology for incorporating time dependent interchanges in
the decomposition process. Investigate DC Flow vs Network Flow model. Find
solutions to problems associated with area-wide dispatch. Develop the concept of
equivalent assistance for a looped network. Investigate the use of continuous
distributions. Find an algorithm for parallelization of the decomposition-
simulation p rocess ***