* 9412284
* U.S.Bulgaria Cooperative Research Analytical and            Computational Studies of Oscillations in Age-structured     Population Models
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1998
* Jia Li, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 10/31/1998
* USD 29,441.00

9412284 Li This grant supports a US-Bulgaria Joint Cooperative Research Project
on "Analytical and Computational Studies of Oscillations in Age-Structured
Population Models" between Dr. Jia Li and Dr. Mark J. Friedman of the Department
of Mathematical Sciences of the University of Alabama Huntsville, and Dr. Tanya
Kostova of the Laboratory of Numerical Methods of the Institute of Mathematics
of the Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria. The topics of research will include
analytical and computational studies of oscillations in age-structured
population models. The results of the study are expected to have an impact in
both mathematical and biological sciences, as the main goal is to disclose the
underlying mechanisms of the possible (and often observed in nature) oscillatory
behavior of the size of a single population. Understanding such mechanisms is
one of the most important questions in the theory of population dynamics. The
collaboration will benefit both sides as the participating researchers have
close but different and complementary experience in treating such models. The
research will focus on the spectral analysis of the linearization of the age-
structured model, which is a nonlinear partial differential-integral equation,
on its simplifications in various forms, such as systems of ordinary
differential equations and equations with delay, and finally on its general
setting. An important part of the project will be numerical simulations and
numerical tracing of bifurcating periodic solutions. All results will be given a
suitable interpretation for the natural sciences. This project in mathematics
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
leading experts in Bulgaria and the United States to combine complementary
talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
***