* 9412082
* Evaluation of the Direct Effects of Anthropogenic Aerosols  on the Radiation Balance of the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1995,04/30/2000
* Ronald Ferek, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 04/30/2000
* USD 971,732.00

Hobbs/Abstract Aerosols may plan an important role in the radiation balance of
the atmosphere on local, regional and global scales. Recent estimates suggest
that the globally-averaged climate forcing due to the direct effects of
anthropogenic sulfate could be similar in magnitude (but opposite in sign) to
that produced by anthropogenic "greenhouse" gases. However, there are large
uncertainties associated with estimating the aerosol effects. The purpose of
this research is to obtain measurements on atmosphere aerosols (with emphasis on
those that derive from anthropogenic sources) that will reduce these
uncertainties. The proposed research consists of two main activities. (a)
Measuring aerosol size distributions, chemical composition, hygroscopic growth
factors, light-scattering efficiency, backscattering of solar radiation, and
singlescattering albedos in the Pacific Northwest, California, the eastern
United States, Alaska and Brazil. (b) Conducting an aerosol "column-closure"
experiment off the east coast of the USA. Calculations of the effects of
aerosols on solar radiation, based on detailed airborne measurements of the
physical and chemical properties of the aerosols, will be compared with
satellite measurements of the backscattering of solar radiation of ground-based
measurements of the attenuation of solar radiation.