* 9412068
* Dissertation Research: Predicting the Demography & Short-   term Evolution of Arabidopsis Thaliana in Response          to Increased UV-B Radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Ken Paige, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1996
* USD 6,500.00

9412068 Paige The information gained from the proposed experiments has the
potential to make important contributions to both basic and applied fields of
ecology, evolutionary biology, and agriculture. In terms of basic science,
research is likely to shed light on two specific areas. First, this research
will provide the first insights into the response of natural plant populations
to increasing UV-B radiation. The research will determine if genes for UV-B
tolerance are fixed within natural populations or if there is variation for this
trait that would allow for the evolution of more tolerant genotypes. Second,
basic questions concerning the population biology of Arabidopsis will be
addressed. The investigators will determine the number and frequencies of the
genotypes within this population and identify the phenotypic traits that
distinguish these genotypes in the field. The research will provide insight into
how these genotypes arise and how are they maintained. The significance of this
research to applied biology is clear. Two of the proposed experiments will
contribute to knowledge of plant UV-B protective mechanisms. It is important to
identify the traits that protect plants from UV-B radiation and to understand
the mode of inheritance of these traits. Once this is known, this information
can be incorporated into conventional breeding practices and minimize the
potential impacts of UV-B damage.