* 9413823
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Computer Analysis of     Discourse Prosody
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Hundraj Gopal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1995
* USD 44,489.00

Gopal Through its Academic Research Infrastructure competition, the National
Science Foundation provides funds to permit Dr. Hundraj Gopal to purchase
instrumentation for linguistic analysis. The equipment centers around several
personal computer-based workstations which are networked. Each of the
workstations will be configured to perform acoustic analysis of speech for
prosodic information and playback/recording of conversations for auditory
analysis. Each of the workstations includes a portable digital tape recorder,
condenser microphone, a high-powered PC equipped with a 16-bit sound card, 16 MB
RAM, 1 GB of hard disc, a math co-processor, headphones and loudspeakers. The
software required for discourse prosody, including word processing, database
processing and speech analysis is also provided. Prosody constitutes a
distinctive feature of spoken language. The term refers to the melody or rhythm
with which it is spoken. Every language has distinct pitch, stress and timing
patterns. While linguists have focussed on smaller segments of speech for many
years, only recently have they turned to such larger units which are amenable to
prosody analysis. Only recently has the relevant technology developed to the
point where this aspect naturally-occurring speech can be examined. This work is
important for several reasons. It will increase scientific understanding of
human speech. It will aid in the training of students and it may have important
implications for such practical issues as computer recognition of speech.