* 9413930
* Reaction Mechanisms and Simulations of Industrial Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1995
* William Goddard, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Komornicki
* 12/31/1995
* USD 171,000.00

Professor William A. Goddard at the Beckman Institute of the California
Institute of Technology is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to perform research involving theory and
simulation on problems relevant to new catalysts and chemical processes. The
goal of the research is to determine a set of general concepts and principles
which will form the basis of mechanistic understandings. These understandings
would make it possible to predict some of the properties of new systems without
measurements or calculations. The strategy to achieve this goal is to make use
of ab initio quantum mechanical, QM, results combined with molecular dynamics,
MD, studies of reaction kinetics. The need to perform these QM and MD
calculations on realistic models of systems of practical industrial interest is
given high priority. The work is divided into method development and the
application of QM and MD to specific catalytic problems of industrial
importance. There is enormous opportunity for theory and simulation to aid in
designing, developing, and engineering the catalysts and chemical processes
important to industry and society. With reliable simulations to reduce the
number of experiments, U.S. industry could save many millions of dollars per
year and could cut years off development cycles by focusing on the most
promising catalysts and processes. To help provide the scientific basis for
designing, characterizing, and optimizing new catalysts, the supported research
involves a broad attack on the mechanisms of several industrially significant
catalytic processes. This theoretical work involves collaborations with
industrial and university experimentalists. From detailed studies which combine
ab initio quantum theory and molecular dynamics simulations, it is expected that
the concepts and principles needed to design new types of catalysts will be
extracted. These studies will demand size and time scales which stretch current
methodologies and, hence, considerable emphasis is placed on developing new
methods.