* 9413715
* Acquisition of X-Ray Diffraction Equipment for              Macromolecular Crystallography
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Karl Volz, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 08/31/1996
* USD 308,335.00

ABSTRACT Introduction. X-ray structure analysis is a critical tool for a large
group of major researchers at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC), a
group whose annual research funding currently totals 4 million(Sec III). Seven
laboratories are engaged in ten different macromolecular structure projects that
require area detector technology. There is now a campus wide effort for
establishing a comprehensive, centralized x-ray diffraction facility at UIC to
serve the many needs of these basic science research projects. As part of that
larger plan, this proposal if for acquisition of a state-of-the-art area
detector and related equipment for macromolecular crystallography. Proposed
Instrumentation. The equipment to be procured from this proposal consists of
five main components: 1) a rotating anode x-ray generator, the strongest in-
house source of x-ray photons available; 2) an area detector, for the most
efficient measurement of the thousands of diffraction data; 3) a low temperature
device, for lifetime extension of the radiation sensitive samples; 4) a host
computer, for detector operation, and primary data collection and processing;
and 5) a graphics workstation and software, for calculation of structures from
the data, and display and analysis of the results. Price quotes and product
information for the x-ray equipment have been received from four different
suppliers. Although the detailed budget (Appendix V, p.20) is written for one
specific supplier, the other quotes are at an equivalent total amount. The
actual make of the equipment and type of area detector to be procured
(fluorescent screen vs. imaging plate vs. multiwire) will be finalized after
detailed performance comparisons if an award is made. Research and Training to
be Conducted. The research activities to be conducted with the proposed x-ray
equipment will be three-dimensional structural determination of molecules.
Structures of biological macromolecules will consti tute the majority of the
work. These include the protein crystallography projects described in the
research activities section (pp. 4-11) The non-biological macromolecule projects
(metallocluster compounds) require are detector technology in that their cell
dimensions, solvent content, and radiation sensitivity rival those of standard
protein crystallography work. The training will be primarily for doctorate level
graduate students from the participating departments. The structural aspects of
their research will be supervised by a core of three principal investigators
with expertise in x-ray structure determination, who will closely interact with
the interested laboratories. The training will concentrate on the application of
x-ray structure analysis to their basic science research projects. An important
feature of the planned x-ray facility will be in its relationship to the
Molecular Biology training program initiated this year at UIC. The program
includes three of the six departments participation in this proposal
(Microbiology &amp; Immunology, Biochemistry, and Physiology &amp; Biophysics).
The structural biology component of the training program will be substantially
enhanced by the presence of the x-ray facility. In turn, this arrangement will
increase the pool of potential graduate students for structural biology, and
thus promote utilization of the x- ray facility to its maximum potential.
Activity Resulting from Funding. An x-ray at UIC will have a significant impact
on research performance on our campus by providing the necessary
crystallographic tools for the ongoing structural projects. This will improve
the success rate of our many laboratories in securing external agency funds.
Because the facility will bring a focus to structural analysis for our
multidisciplinary group of basic science researchers, it will also foster
interaction and further collaboration among the participants.