* 9413733
* The Development of an Integrated Eye Tracker, Driving       Simulator and Virtual Acoustic Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Donald Fisher, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

Fisher With support from the National Science Foundation and industrial
collaborators, Dr. Donald Fisher and his research team will develop a state-of-
the-art video based eye tracker, a research level driving simulator and a
virtual acoustic environment which are fully integrated with one another. The
system consists of an advanced eye tracker to be developed by Applied Sciences
Laboratory, a driving simulator developed by Illusion Technologies Incorporated
and an acoustic environment which mimics or simulates the reverberant
characteristics of an automobile. The planned system would supersede a current
instrument which makes use of a "moving window" paradigm, and which permits a
wide range of research in psycholinguistics, reading comprehension, visual
scanning and scene comprehension. The research and research training that will
be undertaken with the level driving simulator and sound equipment will nicely
complement and extend the ongoing laboratory activities. It would, for the first
time, allow the study of the basic cognitive processes in complex, dynamic
displays using window and boundary paradigms that have been successfully
employed in more simple situations. The range of potential behaviors to be
examined will also expand. Researchers and psychology and communications
disorders can use the eye and head tracking equipment to study sound
localization and detection. Exercise scientists can use detailed information on
driving responses to study the slowing of motor processes with advancing age.
Increased understanding of visual scanning of complex dynamic displays and
dynamic decision making in realistic, highly stressful conditions will also be
possible. On a more practical level, the basis research proposed will provide a
first step in the development of in-vehicle collision avoidance devices.