* 9413889
* Acquisition of a Sum-Frequency Generation Instrument for the Study of the Spectroscopy, Structure, and Chemistry of     Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Thomas Bein, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1996
* USD 180,000.00

With the funds provided by the Academic Research Infrastructure Program this
group plants to construct a state-of-the-art laser system for the purpose of
studying interfaces making use of both second harmonic generation (SHG) and
infrared-visible sum frequency generation (SFG) techniques. The 60 picosecond
laser output will be tunable in the range 1.2 to 18 micrometers with pulse
energies between 5 and 100 plus microJoules/pulse. The facility, which will be
housed at the Purdue Chemistry Laser Facility, will constitute a cross-
disciplinary Center for the Study of Interfacial Materials and Chemical
Processes. The Facility will be used for the study of liquid-liquid, solid-
liquid, and gas-solid interfaces with research topics including: 1) SFG studies
of chemically sensitive surfaces and monolayer reactivity; orientation and
vibrational spectra of molecules at lubricated solid interfaces under variable
shear forces; surface spectroscopy of environmental particles; SHG studies of
the nickel cluster electrocatalyst aryl thiol self assembled monolayers; SFG
spectroscopy of adsorbed species at electrochemical interfaces; time resolved
SFG studies of photoactivated, catalytic organometallic thin films; nonlinear
optical and microscopic studies of photopolymerization on metal surfaces;
interfacial orientation and biological effectiveness of dopamine receptor
ligands; solvent fractionation and structure of immiscible liquid interfaces. A
pulsed laser facility capable of second harmonic generation and sum frequency
generation will be employed in broad ranging studies of liquid-liquid, liquid-
solid, and gas-solid interfaces. The research ranges from the study of
electrolytes in contact with solid electrodes and the corrosive effects of water
on clay surfaces to the biological effectiveness of dopamine receptor ligands to
the study of immiscible liquids in the presence of a third miscible component.