* 9413514
* Acquisition of a Phosphor Imaging Analysis Work Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Lilian Hsu, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 07/31/1996
* USD 50,400.00

The major research instrumentation being requested is a phosphor imaging and
analysis work station which will make possible quantitative autoradiography of
many biochemical and molecular biological determinations. In recent years, the
advancement in gel separation methods and sequencing technology has given us the
ability to resolve differences down to the singlenucleotide and single-amino
acid level. At the same time, increasingly clever molecular biological
manipulations are enabling us to address ever detailed aspects of the mechanism
of many fundamental life processes. To achieve the most rigorous answers, it is
not sufficient to only pinpoint qualitative differences, but also to support the
detected differences with careful quantitative measurements. The phosphor
imaging technology, which has emerged in the past decade, is enhancing our
ability to achieve quantitation of molecular differences with great accuracy,
speed, safety, and extraordinary sensitivity. When joined with the data storage
and data analysis capability of computers, we have a powerful combination that
is revolutionizing the way quantitative molecular sciences are being done these
days and will be done for the decades to come. The type of research activities
to be conducted initially with the phosphor imaging unit will include
quantitative determination of in vitro transcription reactions, Southern blot
hybridization analysis, DNA sequence analysis, and DNA footprinting studies. The
quantitative aspect of these studies is crucial in reaching the most rigorous
interpretation of the data and conclusions. In terms of research training, the
availability of such a unit will encourage quantitative thinking and reintroduce
much of the needed vigor into many molecular biological investigations. The ease
of usage of a phosphor image with its impressive speed, capacity, sensitivity,
and image manipulability will become evident quickly. Although the work of three
major users will benefit from th e phosphor imaging system initially, we fully
expect other researchers in nearby institutions to take advantage of this
versatile piece of equipment. Furthermore, as Mount Holyoke College is an
undergraduate institution devoted to training young women scientists, we also
expect to develop laboratory-teaching exercise units that will incorporate the
use of this state-of-the-art instrumentation.