* 9413726
* Purchase of Equipment for Integrated Research on Plant      Responses to Environmental Stress
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Jerry McClure, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 09/30/1996
* USD 104,717.00

ABSTRACT This project seeks funds to purchase instrumentation that will be used
to conduct research specifically in the area of "plant responses to
environmental stress". The funds requested will not only provide our "plant
stress" research program with modern instrumentation, but will also strengthen
our capabilities for training graduate and undergraduate students in the most
contemporary techniques in plant stress physiology. The focus of the research to
be conducted within the scope of this proposal is somewhat broad in the sense
that it will encompass several different research projects. However, all of the
research projects that will be enhanced by this project fall into the general
category of plant physiology and metabolism as a response to environmental
stress. One of the projects that will use the requested instrumentation centers
on the development of physiological selection criteria for breeding drought
resistant genotypes of grain sorghum. This continuing international research
program with Mexico which has received federal and state support, has developed
into a fruitful collaboration which is now involving several researchers and
students from both Miami University and the Autonomous University of Tamaulipas
in northeastern Mexico. In a second research program that will use the requested
instrumentation, we are studying the role of epidermal flavonoids as W-B
response molecules and W-B protection mechanisms in plants. We have synthesized
(only one of two labs in the world to do this), a specific inhibitor of plant
phenolics that is capable of completely inhibiting the synthesis of flavonoids.
This inhibitor has uniquely enabled us to test the hypothesis that epidermal
flavonoids are important W-B screens in plants.