* 9413457
* Acquisition of Improved Laser System for New Experiments in Atomic Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Jacob Leventhal, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/1999
* USD 112,700.00

9413457 Leventhal The equipment supplied by this grant consists of laser systems
that will significantly increase the wavelength range and the quality of the
laser radiation available in the Atomic Physics Laboratory at UMSL. This upgrade
will permit maximum utilization of the facilities and fuller exploitation of
experimental techniques recently developed in this laboratory. The experiments,
all of which rely on sequential excitation of atoms using multiple laser beams,
are aimed at elucidating fundamental properties of atoms. Recent work has
exploited new experimental techniques developed in this laboratory for measuring
atomic parameters with unprecedented accuracy. Two of these techniques,
precision dc Stark spectroscopy and Floquet spectroscopy, are based on the dc
and ac Stark effects respectively. Both employ highly excited atoms to magnify
atomic responses to the fields. A third technique, developed for the study of
photoionization of excited atoms, employs a variety of laser beam polarization
schemes to acquire data which, in conjunction with angular momentum algebra,
make it possible to determine the cross sections for photoionization to specific
final angular momentum states. The increased range of available laser
wavelengths will greatly expand experimental capabilities. The new state-of-
theart device would make it possible to study a wider variety of atomic
processes in considerably greater detail than currently possible. The narrower
bandwidth would permit finer resolution of spectral features while the higher
available intensity would allow excitation of atomic transitions that cannot
currently be accessed. As with all laboratory resources, the requested system
would provide experience and training for the many undergraduate students who
participate in this research. It would also benefit the secondary school
teachers who gain valuable laboratory experience during summer training
sessions. Thus, this equipment, in addition to its intrins ic value as a
laboratory tool, would serve an educational function, training students and
teachers in the operation of state-of- the-art instrumentation. ***