* 9413705
* Acquisition of Instruments for a Fiber-Optic Sensor and     Communication Lab
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Victor Vali, California State University-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 08/31/1998
* USD 170,912.00

9413705 Daneshgaran The objective of the proposed project is to equip a fiber
optics laboratory for R&D on sensors and communications. The funds requested
will permit the equipping of a fiber optics facility that will make possible
state of the art R&D as well as provide a good training facility for
undergraduate and Masters students. Since CSULA is a minority institution, the
laboratory is closely related to real industry needs and interests. Three
economic technology-rich growth areas targeted by the Administration are
addressed by the work to be conducted in the laboratory: manufacturing process
monitoring and control, environmental monitoring, and fiber optics communication
for the information superhighway. A dozen projects are identified in the
proposal, with applications in areas including geophysical, manufacturing
process control, automotive sensors and displays, communications, microwave
remote control, and optical beam steering . Two--a geophysical strainmeter and a
towed array-- that have garnered particular interest by funding agencies are
described in more detail. A number of the projects are derivatives of patented
Hughes technologies, that the company is interested in seeing reduced to
practice. Student involvement will be through several vehicles. The laboratory
will be used for engineering design clinic projects funded by industry. It will
also provide an extension to a Senior Design Laboratory that was built with $350
K of funds from Hughes, and will be used by seniors to fulfill their design
project requirements. In addition, R&D at the frontiers of fiber optics
applications and funded by federal and state science and technology agencies
will be conducted with student participation. The laboratory will help bridge
the gap between undergraduate, masters, and traditional doctoral graduate
education by provide hands-on research experience. In addition, the close
collaboration with industry will help students make the transition to industry
upon graduation. The principal scientist involved in the project have
complementary skills in fiber optics, electro-optics signal processing,
communications, and control. The project is to be codirected by Dr. Victor Vali,
who has set up and conducted fiber optics research at three institutions, and
Dr. Fred Daneshgaran, who specializes in signal processing and communication
theory. It is felt that the industry-oriented, multidisciplinary approach
proposed here is lacking in may of the existing fiber optics work conducted in
institutions of higher education. The total project cost over a three year
period are $315,468, of which $220,828 is requested form NSF. Dr. victor Vali is
contributing his time to set up the laboratory and to instruct students, staff
and faculty on its operation. Funding for the twelve research areas described in
the proposal will be the subject of subsequent proposals to interested agencies.