* 9413236
* Research Training Group on Transition Metals in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2001
* Michael Johnson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 06/30/2001
* USD 963,775.00

9413236 Johnson This award renews support for an Research Training Group (RTG)
that is a joint effort of 15 faculty in the Departments of Chemistry,
Biochemistry, Microbiology and Genetics at the University of Georgia. The
program provides training for undergraduate and graduate students in detailed
understanding the role of transition metals, such as iron, molybdenum and
tungsten, in a variety of biological systems. The general area is sometimes
called inorganic biochemistry; its importance is underlined by observations that
indicate that at least a third of known enzymes include a transition metal ion.
Areas of research pursued by the faculty include systematics, genetics and
metabolism of hyperthermophilic bacteria, structure-function studies of a
variety of metalloproteins of bacterial, fungal and mammalian origin, regulation
of gene transcription by mercury, and de novo design and synthesis of
metalloproteins. The collaborative research and training sponsored by the RTG
has three facets, all aimed at providing trainees with an understanding of where
metalloproteins come from, their role in the organism, and the structure and
function of metalloproteins at the molecular level. The first facet involves
undergraduates in faculty research programs during the summer; students are
recruited nationally with emphasis on students at small colleges who might
otherwise not have the opportunity to participate in hands-on research. The
second facet is directed at graduate students; required training includes
lecture and laboratory courses in microbial genetics, enzymology, bioinorganic
chemistry, and molecular modeling, other required and elective courses, and
thesis research. The third major portion of the training program is a 10-day
summer workshop taught by RTG and external faculty. About 25 RTG students and 50
first or second-year graduate students and a few postdocs and junior faculty
from other U.S. institutions attend the workshop. The workshop will continue on
a biennial basis duri ng the renewal period as NSF support phases out. Though
the workshop was first offered in 1991, it has already had a significant impact
on the education of graduate students from around the country. ***