* 9413196
* Development of a High Magnetic Field Pulsed Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) System for Materials Research
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1996
* W. Gilbert Clark, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1996
* USD 115,420.00

Partial support is provided to the University of California- Los Angeles for the
development of a novel, compact pulsed nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
instrument for research in condensed matter science. The new instrument will
operate over a broad range of steady magnetic fields that extends up to the
highest available. The main parts of the system consist of: (1) A compact,
portable, medium-power pulsed NMR spectrometer with frequency coverage up to 2
GHz, (2) a low- helium consumption 9-T superconducting solenoid for experiments
at UCLA, and (3) a wide variety of probes to accommodate different magnets and
experimental conditions of temperature, NMR frequency, and sample alignment.
Experiments below 9 T will be conducted at UCLA. For the higher fields (up to 45
T), the spectrometer will be transported to the laboratories at other
institutions that house the high-field magnets. Since many of these magnets do
not have the field stability and homogeneity necessary for NMR measurements,
correction coils will be added to the probes to overcome these difficulties. The
NMR research topics to be investigated with the system include the static and
dynamic properties of spin density waves, vortex pinning and dynamics in
superconductors, and nanocrystal compounds. A secondary use by UCLA
investigators of the 9 T magnet that involves very little liquid helium
consumption will be thermal, magnetic and frequency dependent electrical
transport investigations of correlated electron systems. In these applications,
the field at the sample will be swept by maintaining the magnet in the
persistent mode and physically lowering it to move its fringing field past the
sample. Aside from studies at UCLA, collaborations will be established with
other investigators to use the NMR spectrometer at various high field
laboratories.