* 9413466
* Acquisition of Dual Purkinje Eye Tracking System:  Research in Attention, Vision and Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Russell Tomlin, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1995
* USD 40,798.00

Posner With National Science Foundation support, the University of Oregon will
purchase a Dual Purkinje Eye Tracking system and related accessories. Developed
by Stanford Research Institute and Forward Technologies, the eyetracker
determines the direction of eye gaze over a large two-dimensional visual field.
It operates with infrared light and does not interfere with normal vision. The
system is accurate to 1 minute of arc and outputs a signal every millisecond.
This temporal as well as spatial accuracy are essential in tracking smooth
pursuit eye movements. Dr. Michael Posner and his colleagues will use the
instrument to pursue three lines of research. The first involves a study of
communication between identified neural areas in reading. Previous studies have
shown that specific neural areas are involved in processing visual, phonological
and semantic codes of visually presented words. Under the planned research,
studies will be extended to actual reading situations. Eye movement will be
monitored and brain electrical activity recorded. A second set of experiments
involves the role of attention in language production. The eye tracking system
will be used to measure allocation of attention in real time while subjects
produce descriptions of animated events they witness. A final area of research
involves perceptual-motor transformations in the visual motion domain. In
instances where apparent motion of a stimulus differs substantially in velocity
from its real motion, the investigators wish to discover which course the eye
actually tracks.