* 9413438
* Dissertation Research:  Ceramic Standardization in          Household Production at Bezuapan, Veracruz, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1996
* David Browman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1996
* USD 9,974.00

Browman With National Science Foundation support and under the direction of Dr.
David Browman, Ms. Georgia Britt will collect data for her doctoral
dissertation. She will analyze ceramic material from the archaeological site of
Bezuapan which is located in Veracruz, Mexico. Prior excavation of individual
households has yielded large samples of ceramics from well defined stratigraphic
contexts. All date from different intervals within the Late Formative period.
Evidence indicates that the ceramics were made within each household. Ms. Britt
will examine these materials from a number of perspectives to determine the
degree of standardization within each ceramic type within each sample. She will
record metric as well as technical and decorative attributes. The underlying
goal of this research is to study the relationship between ceramic production
and social organization. Archaeologists have argued that as societies grow more
complex, the degree of economic specialization increases and the degree of mass
production increases. They have also assumed that standardization increases as
well and that degree of standardization in ceramics and other common objects can
be used as an indirect measure of social complexity. However these assumptions
have not been carefully tested. Other kinds of archaeological evidence indicate
that the Late Formative period in Veracruz marks a time of increased social
complexity. By the following Early Classic period a clearly divided hierarchical
society had emerged. In conjunction with other researchers who have examined
ceramics from the later period, Ms. Britt will focus on the Late Formative to
determine whether, in fact, social complexity and ceramic standardization are
related. This research is important for several reasons. It will help to refine
a tool which is of wide archaeological use. It will also assist in the training
of a promising young scientist.