* 9413228
* Neural Processes in Cognition
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2001
* James McClelland, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 06/30/2001
* USD 899,932.00

9413228 Schneider This award renews support of a Research Training Group (RTG)
that includes 27 faculty from 13 departments at the University of Pittsburgh and
Carnegie Mellon University. Most faculty are affiliated with the Departments of
Psychology, Neurobiology, or Mathematics. The RTG provides training for
undergraduates, graduates and postdoctoral fellows with a focus on understanding
the role of neural processes in cognition through computational and experimental
approaches. Research programs of individual faculty involve modeling of
individual nerves and other types of excitable cells, characterization of
properties of neural networks, localization of metabolic activity in the brain
through use of magnetic resonance imaging and other techniques, a variety of in
vitro and in vivo physiological studies, and investigations of the effects of
disease on cognition in humans and animals. The RTG sponsors about 5 new
graduate and 1-2 new postdoctoral students per year, and supports summer
research by 3 undergraduates per year. Trainees at all levels are recruited
nationally. Graduate trainees are admitted through one of 13 participating
departmental Ph.D. programs or through an interdepartmental neuroscience Ph.D.
program at the University of Pittsburgh. Graduate training includes required and
elective courses in neuroscience, cognition and mathematics. A number of the
courses were developed specifically for the RTG. Additional training includes
participation in seminars and workshops sponsored by the RTG, as well as
individual and collaborative research. ***