* 9413698
* Acquisition of a 300 MHz NMR Instrument
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* James Goodwin, Jr., University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1997
* USD 176,750.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9413698 Eric Beckman This proposal is for the partial replacement
of an exciting MSL 300MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) instrument used for
both liquids and solids, with an AMX 300MHz instrument manufactured by Bruker.
The magnet, preamplifiers and high power amplifiers of the existing instrument
will be retained, while the console, computer, and disk drives will be replaced.
Further, new probeheads will be acquired. The MSL300 instrument while vital to
many research programs ongoing at the University, has reached the point where
maintenance costs have become prohibitively expensive because of the frequent
need for repairs and replacement of parts. Further, obtaining the right parts
has itself become increasingly difficult. Finally, the manufacturer does not
provide new software for this type of instrument, as it does for newer models.
The main areas of research currently underway involve materials synthesis,
processing of heavy molecules (particularly coal and petroleum resid,
individually or in co-processing schemes), and catalysis, including
characterization of catalysts. The NMR analyses play an essential role in the
structural studies of materials, products, and catalysts, in determinations of
mechanism, in kinetic studies of reactions, and in the development of various
processes, and is the only instrument with MAS capability (i.e. which can
analyze solid samples) in Pittsburgh. Research which currently employs the NMR
is sponsored by NSF, DOE, EPA, DOD, and a number of industrial concerns,
including local companies such as Miles, Calgon, and Westinghouse. In 1994,
sixteen graduate students, working under the supervision of the Principal
Investigators on this proposal, need to use the NMR instrument in their
research. In addition to supporting their research projects, unique instruments
such as the MAS-NMR provide invaluable training experiences for graduate and
undergraduate students. From 1990 to the present, the Co-PI has been the
director of th e NMR facility, responsible for maintenance, repair, and user
scheduling. The current NMR instrument is in use at least six days per week and
is made available to researchers both within and from outside the University.