* 9413220
* Choices, Transitions, and Constraints: An Interdisciplinary Program in Animal Behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Ellen Ketterson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 08/31/2001
* USD 967,500.00

9413220 Ketterson This award renews support of a joint effort of 14 faculty that
provides education and research training for undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral students. This Research Training Group (RTG) is a central focus of
the recently-established Center for the Integrative Study of Animal Behavior at
Indiana University. The faculty, who come from the Departments of Biology,
Psychology, Law, and Medical Sciences, bring six subdisciplinary perspectives to
the RTG: sensory physiology, behavioral ecology, evolutionary biology,
developmental psychobiology, animal learning, and behavioral neuroscience.
Graduate students who participate in the RTG are drawn from three graduate
programs: biology, psychology and an interdisciplinary program in neuroscience.
The RTG provides students with academic year and summer assistantships, travel
support or research support. The courses, seminars and other educational
activities of the RTG result from the integration across 5 areas of research:
communication, sex and reproductive behavior, learning and motivation, ontogeny
and evolution, and spatial organization of behavior. As well as representing
natural combinations of faculty research interests, these areas provide foci for
the development of student research projects. Several of the courses required of
RTG trainees have been newly developed by RTG faculty; students must also
participate in a year-long seminar on scientific integrity developed jointly by
the RTG and the Poynter Center for Study of Ethics and American Institutions. In
addition to the core faculty, there are 10 adjunct faculty in five other
departments whose have related research interests and whose students benefit
from the courses and seminars and other educational activities of the RTG. ***