* 9413018
* Ancient DNA Studies of Social and Political Organization at the Chiribaya Alta Site in Southern Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Sloan Williams, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1998
* USD 168,573.00

9413018 Williams With this grant from The National Science Foundation, Dr. Sloan
Williams will develop models which will allow her to reconstruct forms of
prehistoric social organization using DNA data obtained from the analysis of
ancient bone. In the course of archaeological fieldwork in southern Peru, Dr.
Williams and her collaborators have excavated a series of cemeteries which
contain well preserved human skeletal remains. The graves also yielded numerous
burial goods which provide information on the social and occupational status of
the associated individuals. Using current biochemical techniques it is possible
to extract and analyze DNA from these bones and with the data thus collected
determine the degree of relatedness among individuals. On this basis it should
be possible to reconstruct biological affinity and relate this to social and
occupational organization. DNA analysis has provided a valuable research tool in
many areas of science and is permitting researchers not only to answer old
questions with greater precision, but also to expand the boundaries of potential
inquiry. Because ancient bone sometimes preserves DNA it may permit
archaeologists also to venture into new realms. Dr. Williams is breaking new
ground in this direction. Her research is important not only for what it may
reveal about Peruvian prehistory, but also because the techniques she develops
may be useful in a wide range of archaeological situations.