* 9413239
* Paleorecords of Global Change: Understanding the Dynamics   of Ecosystem Response
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2002
* Margaret Davis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 07/31/2002
* USD 966,482.00

9413239 Davis This award renews support for a Research Training Group (RTG) at
the University of Minnesota. Participating faculty include members of the
Departments of Geology, of Geography and of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior. The
RTG emphasizes training at the undergraduate and graduate student level with
focus on understanding the relationship of past climate changes and various
changes in the physical and biological landscape. Research areas include studies
of the effects of climate on the growth and diversity of vegetation, on marine
organisms, and on lakes and other aspects of the physical landscape, using the
geological record as an indicator. Recent effects of human habitation
(anthropogenic change) on climate and the landscape are also studied using
techniques similar to those used to look at more ancient effects. Funds provided
by the award will be used to support training of graduate students through short
(3 month) or medium term (1-2 year) fellowships, small research awards for costs
of research or meeting attendance, and travelling awards that allow the trainees
to attend short courses at other institutions or allow students from other
institutions to come to the RTG to learn specialized techniques. Training of
undergraduates is supported both during the summer and academic years. Since the
analysis of the localization and distribution naturally occurring isotopes plays
a key role in the RTG's research activities, an important aspect of the award
has been partial support for purchase and operation of modern sampling and
analytical instrumentation to be used by the trainees. ***