* 9413689
* Acquisition of Multi-User Instrumentation for the Epitaxial Growth and Fabrication of III-V Nitride Semiconductor       Materials and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Umesh Mishra, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1996
* USD 230,000.00

Instrumentation will be acquired for the metallo-organic chemical vapor
deposition (MOCVD) and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) synthesis of III-V nitrides
using funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program. The major items
include a RF heated III-V MOCVD nitride system and a nitrogen plasma source for
MBE growth. The aluminum, gallium and indium nitride materials are the most
promising materials for optoelectronic devices to operate in the ultraviolet to
blue wavelength regime. The research activities will focus on: 1) development of
novel epitaxial growth technologies for III-V nitride semiconductors, 2)
fundamental studies of the epitaxial growth mechanism, and 3) the fabrication of
UV/blue laser diodes, high temperature electronics, and vacuum electronics
devices. This research involves substantial support and interest from industrial
collaborators. Studies of the epitaxial growth of III-V nitride semiconductors
will be conducted with the ultimate objective of producing high quality laser
diodes for use in the ultraviolet and blue wavelength regimes. The III-V nitride
semiconductors are useful materials for high temperature electronics and also
for vacumn electronics devices. The III-V nitrides are technologically important
materials for devices, particularly at shorter wavelengths and at higher
temperatures.