* 9413248
* Legume Cell Cycle Genes to Monitor Stress (Salinity and HighTemperature) Response During Early Nodulation,              U.S.-Pakistan Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Peter Gresshoff, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 38,410.00

9413248 Gresshoff Description: This project supports a joint project by Dr.
Peter Gresshoff, of the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, and Dr. Kauser
Malik, Director of the National Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic
Engineering (NIBGE) in Faisalabad, Pakistan. The research aims at understanding
the mechanisms affecting the nodulation in legumes planted under stress
conditions such as heat and salinity. The work is to seek more information
concerning the cellular targets of these stresses. As nodulation is a
prerequisite of symbiotic nitrogen fixation, the work will focus on this initial
step. Nodulation starts through cell division possibly induced in G2 arrested
cortical cells. Plans call for using molecular probes and PCR primers for two
cell-cycle genes (namely cyclin-B and cdc2) which were recently isolated from
soybean in Gresshoff's laboratory. Focus will be on non-radioactive PCR
techniques to define how stresses modulate the expression of these critical
genes. The objectives of this cooperative project are: to transfer technology
from soybean to the mungbean system; train the research team in Faisalabad to
use molecular probes and primers to evaluate the impact of heat and salinity
stress on early nodulation of mungbean; determine the degree of evolutionary
divergence between the soybean and mungbean gene arrangements; and further
develop the knowledge base of cell cycle involvement in meristem initiation and
maintenance. Scope: This project meets a number of important objectives of the
Division of International Programs: it allows cooperation of two respected
scientists, with complementary capabilities, to do important scientific work; it
allows a foreign scientist in a developing country to build the experience
necessary to continue this useful research beyond this project; and it helps
understand the causes of a problem that affects productivity in marginal lands
around the world. The Pakistani scientist is one of that c ountry's most
distinguished researchers in the field, with an impressive record of scientific
publications. As a result of his work, the NIBGE was recently established, with
him as its first director. ***