* 9413727
* Acquisition of Instrumentation to Support of                Interdisciplinary Research in Plasma Manufacturing of Thin  Film Coatings and Electronic Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* James Beck, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/1997
* USD 200,000.00

9413727 Asmussen Plasma assisted processing of thin films has been identifed as
an important, emerging manufacturing technology for producing wear, heat, and
corrosion resistant surfaces and for the fabrications of electronic and photonic
materials. In order to achieve the commercialization of these plasma processes,
intelligently controlled, user-friendly plasma manufacturing technology must be
developed. One class of plasma machines that have exhibited great potential to
address many plasma assisted manufacturing problems are microwave plasma reactor
systems. Their electrodeless nature together with their ability to create high
densities of excited and charged species have made both high-pressure and low-
pressure discharges an attractive technology for many plasma processing
applications. Past and ongoing research by the investigators and others has
demostrated the potential of these microwave plasma machines in the commercial
manufacturing of hard thin film coatings and electronic and photonic materials.
Of particular note, are the microwave processing applications related to diamond
thin film deposition and the processing of silicon and III-V electronic and
photonic materials. Building upon these past successes, their research
activities described in this proposal are concerned with the continued
development, optimization, and intelligent control of this important
manufacturing technology. The proposed work will be carried out in the
Electronics and Surface Properties of Materials (ESPM) Center Laboratories at
Michigan State University. In the Center, microwave plasma machines and
associated plasma processes are being developed by an interdisciplinary group of
engineering faculty. Thus, the requested instrumentation will augment an already
very active research laboratory and will allow ESPM Center research activities
to more rapidlly expand into new materials characterization technologies,
process optimizations, and plasma process control, and will enhance ongoing
research in plasm a machine development, modeling, and diagnosis. In particular,
the requested equipment will provide the instrumentation needed for new,
specific plasma process development and optimization activities, will provide
additional computer resources for plasma machine modeling and reactor control
efforts, will enable new and strengthen ongoing materials and microstructure
characterization efforts, and will provide instrumentation required for the
recently initiated plasma process control activities. Finally, requested
instrumentation will allow plasma machine development to proceed into new
creative direction. A substantial fraction of the requested equipment funding is
for instrumentation for new ESPM Center efforts and will aid new Center faculty
members with their instrumentation needs. Thus, it is expected that this request
will greatly improve the Center's research capability on intelligent process
control, plasma process development, and materials characterization techniques.
The requested laboratory instruments represent and important addition to the
capabilities of the ESPM Laboratories and it will allow the Center to more
effectively perform its interdisciplinary research and education missions.