* 9413017
* SBIR Phase II: Fourier Transform Infared Diagnostics        for Environmental Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Michael Serio, Advanced Fuel Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1997
* USD 299,341.00

9413017 Serio This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) is to support
continued research on development of a flue gas monitoring system for
determination of the potential air contaminants in emissions of gases from
combustion processes. The system is based on the application of principles
derived from the use Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy in monitoring
nitrogen, sulfur and chlorine in an on-line, diagnostic instrument that can be
used for the determination of the composition of effluent gas streams. The
proposal leading to this recommendation results from successful completion of a
Phase I, Small Business Innovation Research project in which the technical
feasibility of the concept proposed was demonstrated. In Phase II, the
investigator plans on assembling a working field prototype and to validate its
precision, accuracy and stability during operation in full-scale combustion
systems as a step toward determination of the concept's commercial feasibility.
Exhaust gases from combustion of fossil fuels and from combustion of solid
wastes results in the production of byproduct gases that pollute air into which
they are discharged. Results of this project are expected to determine the
commercial feasibility of producing an instrument that could be used to monitor
nitrogen and sulfur oxides and potentially toxic gases in the exhausts from
combustion processes.