* 9413559
* Chemical Vapor Deposition Equipment for Thin Film           Integrated Sensor Fabrication
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Kensall Wise, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/1997
* USD 111,000.00

9413559 Wise This proposal requests funding to significantly upgrade the
equipment for producing chemical-vapor deposited (CVD) thin dielectric films at
the University of Michigan. Specifically, the proposal seeks funding to upgrade
the pumping system on our existing LPCVD system for silicon nitride and silicon
dioxide in order to overcome serious problems with down-time that have been
experienced over the last several years. These problems have seriously impeded a
number of important research programs. In addition, the proposal seeks funding
to install a new CVD system for the deposition of low-temperature oxide (LTO)
and phosphosilicate glass (PSG). While these processes are basic and standard
throughout the microelectronics industry, they have never been available at
Michigan, seriously limiting our research capabilities and the types of
structures that can be addressed. The lack of these films has been a major
factor limiting our research on surface micromachined microstructures, which are
useful in the development of a great many integrated sensors and microactuators.
Specific immediate uses of the LTO/PSG system include the conformal chip-level
encapsulation of integrated sensors for use in chronically-implantable neural
prostheses, the development of planarized feedthroughs for hermetically-sealed
microsystems, and application in a number of microsensors and microactuators for
use in transportation systems and automated semiconductor manufacturing. The
proposed equipment directly affects the programs of 26 faculty and nearly 50
graduate research students at the University of Michigan; in addition, it will
permit an expanded range of projects in two laboratory courses at the University
and will allow structures such as those produced by surface micromachining to be
introduced into the courses in a practical way. The field of sensors,
microactuators, and microsystems ("MEMS") us expanding on a worldwide basis and
is generally accepted as very important to areas such as health ca re,
environmental CLOSEOUTDOC I T FTMON94 DOC $9 L MAY24PANDOC q ? X REIMFORTDOC WJ
JIN TX8 Y f CONRAD TX8 p` i WISE TX8 +c