* 9413973
* Development of X-Ray Scattering Facility for Surface and    Interface Science at the Advanced Photon Source
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Edward Conrad, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 532,000.00

The development of a moveable surface scattering chamber to be situated at the
Advanced Photon Source for the study of surfaces and interfaces will be funded
with the assistance of the Academic Research Infrastructure Program. The
facility will include instrumentation for surface cleaning and diagnostics,
electron spectroscopy, and in-situ molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) growth
capabilities. Sample holders will be designed for use in the 10-2500 K
temperature range. The X-ray scattering will feature a state-of-the-art 6 circle
diffractometer. The surface scattering chamber will normally be set up on a
bending magnet beamline. The research topics to benefit from this facility
include: 1) surface crystallography and phase transitions of clean metal and
semiconductor surfaces; 2) alloy and multicomponent surfaces; 3) chemically
induced structural changes; 4) nonmetal-to-metal transitions in ultrathin films;
5) step-flow growth; 6) buried interfaces; 7) self-assembled organic monolayers;
8) magnetic scattering from surfaces and interfaces; 9) time-dependent studies
of surface phase transformations; 10) coherent X-ray scattering from surfaces. A
moveable surface scattering chamber for use at the Advanced Photon Source
synchrotron will be developed for the study of surfaces and interfaces. The
research will involve the structure and phase transitions of surfaces including
time- dependent studies and unusual nonmetal-to-metal transitions in ultrathin
films, chemically induced changes in surfaces, buried interfaces, magnetic
scattering from surfaces, and coherent X- ray scattering from surfaces.