* 9413757
* Acquisition of Growth Chambers for the National Phytotron
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1999
* David Patterson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 700,000.00

ABSTRACT Duke University requests $700,000 to enhance capabilities of the
National Phytotron by the addition of 18 new controlled environment (CE)
chambers. The Phytotron, an NSF-funded national research facility established in
1968, consists of 40 artificially lighted CE growth chambers and 6 glasshouses
that provide more that 477 m2 of controlled environmental space for advanced
research in environmental plant biology. These CE units are used to reproduce
different types of environments -- ranging from the arctic to the desert to the
tropics. This allows researchers to have precise control over environmental
conditions, e.g., air temperature, irradiance, carbon dioxide, relative
humidity, and nutrient concentration, thereby providing an opportunity to gain
increased understanding of the complex interactions between plants and their
environment, which is virtually impossible to do under natural, uncontrolled
field conditions. The Phytotron hosts, on yearly average, 17 students, 4
postdoctoral scientists, and 20 senior scientists, 73% of whom are off - campus
users. The Phytotron's current CE growth chambers have operated continuously for
25 years. While some have been upgraded, their limited analog controls are not
adequate for precise and flexible control of multiple environments variables,
e.g., temperature, light, and humidity. In addition, these older chambers lack
sophisticated computer-based monitoring capabilities, thus limiting researchers'
abilities to monitor experiments and to reproduce short-term, variable
environmental conditions, which are critical to understanding processes like
carbon allocation, photosynthesis, and acclimation. Over the past decade, the
environmental factors that researchers have most frequently manipulated in the
Phytotron are the effects of carbon dioxide and temperature -- other factors
include drought stress, nutrient availability, photoperiod, UV-B radiation, and
salinity. With Excelle nt lighting, digital controls, and real time monitoring,
the 18 new controlled environment chambers will provide the flexible, quality-
controlled environment needed by a range of projects, including molecular,
whole-plant (including such as areas as leaf physiology and growth dynamics),
biotic interactions (e.g., plant-plant and plant-animal interactions and
pathogens), population genetics, and ecosystem microcosms. Acquisition of these
18 state-of-the-art chambers will have an immediate and substantial impact on
U.S. ecological research, particularly studies on the effects of global change
on plants and ecosystems, efforts to scale processes across biological levels of
organization, and basic molecular and physiological studies of carbon fixation,
allocation, and respiration. This instrumentation will build upon and enhance
NSF's investment in ecological research and allow the National Phytotron to
address national needs in the biological sciences, including graduate and
postgraduate education, and to remain one of the most important centers for
controlled environment research in ecology in the United States.