* 9413393
* Research Equipment Grant-Development of Testbed for Ultra-  Fast Opto-Electronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Milton Birnbaum, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/1997
* USD 200,000.00

9413393, PI-Garmire: This proposal is to develop a testbed to advance the state
of the art in 10-90 GHz optoelecetronic devices for fiber and wireless
communications as part of the emerging national information highway. The tested
will enable study of the high speed switching capabilities of functional, mode-
locked semiconductor laser. Monolithic mode-locked devices, in the range form
10-90 GHz, and achieve functionality by digitally switching mode-locked
frequencies. To minimize switching time and optimize efficiency, it is necessary
to understand the interplay between nonlinear gain and the cavity resonance
structure. Ultra-fast optical pump-probe experiments are needed on multi-
functional RF-modulated lasers, with time resolution much faster than the
modulation rate. The 1.3 um and 1.5 wavelength regions are needed because of
their application to local area network and long-haul communications.
Development is needed for this testbed because there is no system in existence
that combines ultra-short pulse generation at wavelengths of interest for
optical communications with the electrical timing required to study modulated
semiconductor lasers. One developed, the proposed testbed will provide the basis
for collaboration between investigators at University of California, Berkeley
and University of Southern California. These researchers combine expertise in
optical pump-probe studies and expertise in advanced semiconductor lasers and
cavity dynamics. Also involved in the development will be experts in tunable
solid state lasers. A single mode-locked Nd:YAG laser will be used to pump both
a Cr4+:Forsterite laser near 1.3 um and a Cr4+:YAG laser near 1.5 um. New
crystals and new approaches will also be sought to active greater wavelength
tuning and greater ease of operation. Mechanisms for timing synchronism between
the optics and electronics will be designed and built; the aim is to achieve the
most practical and reliable systems to use in opto-electronic device studies. If
sufficient funds can be found, a synchronously pumped mode-locked optical
parametric oscillator will also be built and its performance compared to tunable
mode-locked lasers. The outcome will be a unique testbed, located primarily at
the Center for laser Studies at USC, with complementary facilities at UC
Berkeley, designed for study of opto-electronic devices. This testbed will be
made available to researchers form other universities, industry, and government
laboratories. Research using the testbed should result in new functional opto-
electronic laser designs, along with definition and demonstration of performance
measures in multi-GHz communication systems. This testbed will be made available
to researchers from other universities , industry, and government laboratories.
Research using the testbed should result in new functional opto-electronic laser
designs, along with definition and demonstration of performance measures in
multi-GHz communication systems. This testbed will also further the basic
science of carrier dynamic as a function of time and position within functional
semiconductor lasers. Matching support will come form several compainies, the
Center for Laser Studies Industrial Affiliates Program, and from USC's gift
program for research.