* 9413959
* Development of an Integrated Multi-Disciplinary Sensing     System for the R/V Roger Revelle
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/2000
* Daniel Rudnick, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Shor
* 09/30/2000
* USD 1,652,602.00

9413959 Pinkel This award will provide funding to develop and install two
multidisciplinary research systems on the AGOR 24 (R/V Roger Revelle) research
vessel, currently under construction. The first will be a SeaSoar system which
will purchased and modified to maximize capabilities for biologic, chemical and
physical oceanographic sampling. It will be able to profile the top 400 m of the
sea with 3 km horizontal and about 1 m vertical resolution. The system will be
used to measure fluorescence and other biological tracers, physical forcing on
organisms, and micro- to meso-scale patterns and dynamics of plankton in various
marine environments. The second system will be a Multi Scale Doppler Sonar
(MSDS). This system will be developed to provide sampling capabilities not
currently available in commercial systems. It will consist of a nested pair of
long range (60 kHZ) and high resolution (160 kHz) sonars. This system will be
used for studies of deep zooplankton populations, plankton vertical migration,
island upwelling processes, frontal hydrography and water mass convection. These
systems will be available on the R/V Roger Revelle for investigators procuring
UNOLS ship-time. The University of California, San Diego will provide matching
funds for this project, which is supported under the Academic Research
Infrastructure program. ***