* 9413847
* Development and Construction of a Fiber-Fed, High-ThroughputEschelle Spectrograph for the Michigan-Dartmouth-MIT        Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/1994,05/31/1999
* Douglas Richstone, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 05/31/1999
* USD 170,605.00

ABSTRACT AST-9413847 Mateo, Mario The PIs will build a high-efficiency, multi-
object fiber-fed echelle spectrograph for the Hiltner 2.4m telescope at
Michigan-Dartmouth-MIT observatory. The design will optimize resolution,
compactness, and allow for easy changes of echelle grating/cross disperser
combinations, and form direct mode (single objects) to fiber mode (multiple
objects ). The capabilities and versatility of this instrument will
significantly enhance the research capabilities of the Michigan-Dartmouth-MIT
(MDM) Observatory and make the 2.4 telescope competitive with far larger
telescopes for certain observational problems. Detailed studies in a number of
areas of fundamental astronomical importance will be undertaken by the large
community of MDM astronomers. These projects include; a) studies of the dark
matter content of dwarf galaxies in the Local Group and beyond, b) detailed
measurements of the temporal evolution of key elements in disk and halo stars,
c) direct measurements of the kinematics of gas in the halos of our Galaxy and
external spirals, d) observations of the detailed kinematical properties of
supernova and nova shells in our Galaxy and in external systems, e) definitive
studies of the kinematics of star clusters including the first direct attempts
to measure the degree of equipartition in clusters, f) systematically monitoring
stars in open and globular clusters to search for spectroscopic binaries, g)
measurements of the distance to the Galactic Center via precise kinematics
observations of Cepheids along the solar circle, and h) probing the physical
conditions and chemical composition of the diffuse interstellar medium in our
Galaxy. The variety of topics underscores the scientific community that will use
the new spectrograph and the versatility of the instrument itself. ***