* 9413894
* Micellar Systems for Modulating Microwave Heating of        Chemical Reaction Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1997
* T. Alan Hatton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/1997
* USD 97,410.00

Abstract - Laibinis - 9413894 Microwave-based heating of chemical systems holds
the promise of increased energy efficiency and superior temperature control over
chemical processes. Particular advantages of microwave heating appear to be the
abilities to increase reaction rates (by seemingly superheating the reaction
medium) and to heat systems uniformly (by applying heat from within a vessel
rather than by conduction from its walls). In this work, surfactants will be
used to structure fluids as a means for enhancing the desirable chemical
processing features of microwave-based heating. The abilities to control and
structure the polarity of a liquid phase through the formation of micellar
domains are expected to yield new methods for tailoring and optimizing the
heating liquid phases by incident microwaves. The methods will produce
environmental and processing benefits by reducing energy consumption in the
heating of chemical streams and by producing uniform heating profiles within
reaction vessels. This latter ability will avoid exposing reaction mixtures to
the elevated and spatially variant temperatures that typically reduce reaction
specificity and lead to enhanced material decomposition and waste products. It
is the goal of this work to develop new processing methods for controlling the
heating of chemical systems by microwaves, in particular, for non-polar chemical
phases where the use of microwave radiation for heating has been ineffective.
The strategy uses the abilities of self-assembled polymer and surfactant systems
-- micelles, reverse micelles, vesicles, liposomes, etc. -- to produce specific
isolated micro-domains of different polarities within a liquid continuum. The
resulting polar and non-polar domains represent specific regions within the
liquid that will absorb the incident microwave radiation differently, with the
polar regions being responsible for efficient energy absorption and subsequent
rapid thermal dissipation to the contacting non-polar phase. In these self-
assembled systems, the dielectric properties, contents, sizes, and relative
amounts of the individual domains can each be readily changed, and their
manipulation should provide a controlled method for modifying the microwave
absorbing characteristics of a liquid phase. Aqueous dispersions should allow
for the efficient absorption of the incident microwave radiation and the use of
frequencies (2.45 GHz) and hardware presently dedicated for microwave heating.
From an industrial standpoint, an important aspect of the work is that the
energy absorbing properties of reaction/solvent systems will be varied by
straightforward chemical means and will not require changes to the microwave
hardware.