* 9413557
* Acquisition of Equipment for Molecular Engineering and      Investigation of Selected Organic and Organometallic        Materials with Potential Applications in Photonic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* M. George, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 230,000.00

Academic Research Infrastructure Program funds will be employed to acquire
equipment for the molecular engineering and investigation of selected organic
and oarganometallic materials with potential applications for photonic devices.
The equipment will in include a neodymium yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser
with a 5 nanosecond pulse width with substantial output at the second and third
harmonics; a pulsed dye laser with substantial wavelength tunability to be
pumped by the YAG laser; a optical isolator; a fast digital oscilloscope;
various optical components such as mirrors, beam splitters, polarizers, etc; a
Langmuir-Blodgett trough for the preparation of Langmuir- Blodgett molecular
films; and an interface and control computer. The research will be on
photorefractive and other nonlinear optical and electro-optical properties of
organometallic materials and doped organic materials and polymers. These
materials will be studied to investigate their suitability for applications such
as phase conjugate mirrors, light modulators, optical switches etc. The
photorefractive studies will be studied by four-wave mixing, optical phase
conjugation, beam coupling, and diffraction efficiency approaches. Doping with
different metal complexes or donor- acceptor groups and changing the length of
the pi-electron chains will be used to yield large nonlinear and electro-
optical responses. Several lasers and associated optical equipment will be
acquired for the purpose of studying the photorefractive properties of organic
and organometallic materials. The study of these materials will determine their
suitability for use in optical devices such as phase conjugate mirrors, light
modulators, and optical switches.