* 9413814
* Development of a High Speed WEB Line (ARI/MME)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Karl Reid, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1996
* USD 125,000.00

9413814 Good State-of-the-art equipment to support research in the Web Handling
Research Center (WHRC) will be developed. The WHRC is a National Science
Foundation Industry/University Cooperative Research Center in its ninth year of
operation with twenty corporate sponsors. The term "web" describes materials
that are manufactured and processed in a continuous-strip form, e.g., thin
plastics, paper, textiles, metals, and composites. Web handling refers to the
physical mechanics related to the transport and control of continuous-strip
materials through processes and machines. The equipment to be acquired will
support several research projects, including: (1) winding webs at high speed and
accelerations, (2) longitudinal dynamics and tension control in multi-span web
transport systems, and (3) the wrinkling of webs. The sucessful research
performed with the web line should have an impact upon productivity within web
handling industries. The amount of web handling which is done within industry is
immense as many automated manufacturing processes demand the continuous strip
form. The investigator's will be able to validate and improve some of the most
critical mathematical models that have been developed. The result will be an
improved knowledge base which engineers can use to design web process lines that
produce the required product without defects and losses resulting in improved
productivity.