* 9413480
* Near Infrared Wavelength Spectroscopy of Planetary Nebulae
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1995,10/31/1996
* Lauren Likkel, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 10/31/1996
* USD 17,999.00

9413480 Likkel The near-infrared spectra of Planetary Nebulae (PNe) will be
studied in order to characterize them in terms of electromagnetic emission
processes. This research is especially timely because it involves infrared
wavelength observations which were not possible until recently. The initial
observations of the project will be pursued by using the infrared camera, GRIM-
II, on the 3.5m telescope at Apache Point Observatory in New Mexico. The
Washington State University Program in Astronomy has access to this telescope
and has the facilities to reduce the data from the observations. A major thrust
of this project is to understand what effect emission lines, etc, have on the
infrared wavelength bands ,J, H, and K, observed using photometric detectors.
What are the various contributions to the brightness of the observed J, H, and K
infrared wavelength bands? By answering this question, J, H, and K colors of PNe
can be interpreted more accurately. Trends and correlations between the
morphology, excitation, composition, and other characteristics of the PNe, will
be identified so that the results can be generalized to other nebulae. The
results of the research will provide useful information that will benefit
astronomers studying PNe. The results will also be useful to researchers
studying similar objects, such as symbiotic stars, BE type stars, and ultra-
compact ionized Hydrogen (HII) regions. Useful and interesting results of the
research will provide a basis on which a more extensive project may be planned.