* 9413023
* Structure Elucidation by Electrospray and Laser Desorption  Mass Spectrometry, U.S.-Pakistan Collaborative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1997
* David Smith, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/28/1997
* USD 40,000.00

9413023 Smith Description: This project supports the participation of a
Pakistani scientist, Dr. M. Saleh Ajaz, from the H.E.J Research Institute of
Chemistry, University of Karachi, Pakistan, in a collaborative project with Dr.
David L. Smith of the Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy Department at Purdue
University. The project is intended to isolate and determine the structures of
certain proteins and natural products. Specifically, two important classes of
proteins will be examined: casein isolated from camel milk, and hemoglobins from
several species of birds. It is intended to locate sites of phosphorylation in
the casein and to compare the three- dimensional structural features and
dynamics of casein and hemoglobin from different species. The utility of new
mass spectrometric ionization methods (electrospray and laser desorption) for
determining the molecular weights of biologically active natural products that
cannot be analyzed by conventional mass spectrometric methods will also be
investigated. Scope: This project seeks to accomplish two objectives: the
analysis of specific proteins using modern and innovative techniques; and
familiarizing the Pakistani scientist with the modern techniques used in the
U.S. to enable him to maintain a parallel research activity at the H.E.J.
Institute in Pakistan, for joint work with the laboratory of Dr. Smith. The
long- term parallel activities will be beneficial to both sides because of the
access in Pakistan to different species, and their ability to do first-rate
analytical chemistry research. The development of this long-term linkage meets
the objectives of the Division of International Programs. ***