* 9413939
* Development of a Computing Infrastructure for Political and Social Science Research
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1999
* Robert Hanneman, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1999
* USD 137,919.00

Hanneman With National Science Foundation support, the University of California,
Riverside, will develop a networked computing infrastructure for the departments
of political science and sociology. This will consist of: a central Unix machine
providing remote-login service for all users as well as data-storage facilities;
two fast workstations providing processing power for users working on large data
sets or computationally intensive problems; 16 Pentium based machines and
various other PCs which will serve as X-Windows terminals. Several existing
machines will be upgraded to have X-Windows capability and all will be connected
via the University's ethernet. The server and workstations will run a variety of
statistical software through SAS, SPSS and Gauss and these will provide primary
tools for data analysis. This system will be used by both faculty and graduate
students and serve both research and training purposes. Projects to be conducted
involve analyses of: congressional roll-call data, data on Supreme Court
opinions, the performance of different maximum- likelihood estimators on the
choice problems faced by voters in multiple-candidate elections, simulation of
models of social processes, Mexican politics, and the sociology of garment
manufacturing in Los Angeles. Currently the research in the departments of
sociology and political science is constrained by computer limitations. This
award will remedy that situation.