* 9413418
* Acquisition of an Advanced Flow Cytometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Donald Weeks, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 08/31/1996
* USD 256,170.00

With this proposal, we request funding for the purchase of a multi-purpose
state-of-the-art flow cytometer / cell sorter (Becton Dickinson FACS VantageTM
Cell Sorter system or Coulter EPICS Elite ESP system) to update and expand our
current multi-user Flow Cytometry Core Research Facility of the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) Center for Biotechnology. The new equipment will replace
our fourteen year-old Coulter EPICS V system which now requires frequent
repairs. This instrument has only a short life span remaining. The present flow
cytometer is also inadequate for the needs of several investigators on the UNL
campus who wish to perform bivariate chromosome analysis, multicolor
fluorescence analysis, and state-of-the-art sorting of chromosomes and cells in
their research endeavors. As a multipurpose facility, we are requesting
accessories for a new flow cytometer which will permit: a user friendly
operating system; multicolor fluorescence analysis and at least two laser
capability; cell sorting in less time; computerized drop-delay setup; large-
particle analysis and sorting; sorting of 1-100,000 cells into microtitier
trays, onto microscope slides or filters. Importantly, the new flow cytometer
system we have chosen is designed to accommodate future upgrades and
applications. Even with the limitations of the present instrumentation, projects
in over 25 research laboratories have benefited from the services provided by
the Flow Cytometry Core Research Facility. Acquisition of a state-of-the-art
instrument will better service current users and most certainly will attract
additional users whose needs cannot be met with the instrument presently in use.
Examples of specific research activities that would result from the availability
the new instrument include: 1) Univariate and bivariate flow karyotyping and
sorting of chromosomes from important plant species for the purpose of
construction of chromosome-specific DNA libraries. Work is already in progress
with tomato and corn chromosomes. We will actively seek collaboration from
genome researchers throughout the world who want sorted chromosomes from other
important plants. Our goal is to make our Flow Cytometry Core Research Facility
an internationally recognized center for plant genome analysis and chromosome
sorting research. 2) Flow cytometric analysis of nuclei of animals and plants
(both crop plants and native plants), and cell lines from animals and plants for
the determination of ploidy level and/or estimation of nuclear DNA content. 3)
Immunofluorescence analysis (1-4 color) and sorting of blood cell subsets and
cell lines for the expression of surface antigens, receptors or internal
substances.