* 9413812
* Acquisition of Computer, Video and Sound Technology for     Cooperative Research on Discourse and Function in           Descriptive and Cognitive Linguistics
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Colette Craig, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1996
* USD 66,921.00

Tomlin With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Russell Tomlin and his
collaborators will purchase: computing equipment needed to develop animations
and other video elicitation materials for cognitive research; computing
equipment needed to run multiple subjects for experimental research; and video,
sound and computer equipment needed for field research and data analysis. The
Department of Linguistics at the University of Oregon focuses on empirical,
data-oriented research in two principal inter-related areas: descriptive
linguistics and cognitive linguistics. The equipment provided will permit the
department to develop the infrastructure needed to expand, in a significant
fashion, both empirical and experimental research. The group will develop
discourse elicitation and experimental tools suitable for the field situations
but also well-grounded in cognitive principles of language use which can be
tested in a laboratory setting. On this basis, insights drawn from careful,
cross-linguistic description can serve to develop sound cognitive theories of
language and language use. Large numbers of languages in many parts of the world
are on the verge of extinction as the pools of native speakers die out. The
Oregon department has focussed on collecting such rapidly disappearing
information and using it to develop broader language theories. The proposed
equipment has a visual component which will permit investigators to present a
carefully controlled scenes which can vary in specific ways and use these as
elicitation devises to provide insight into grammar and discursive form. The
equipment will be used not only by a number of professional linguists but also
by many graduate and undergraduate students.