* 9413039
* Symposium on High Salinity Tolerant Plants, Karachi, Pakistan, December 12-16, 1994
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Irwin Ungar, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/1995
* USD 33,000.00

9413039 Ungar Description: This project supports participation by a U.S. team of
scientists in a joint seminar at the "International Symposium on High Salinity
Tolerant Plants" which is to be held from December 12-16, 1994 at the University
of Karachi, in Karachi, Pakistan. Topics to be presented at the plenary lectures
include: the use of halophytes in arid zones; mechanisms used by halophytes for
overcoming salinity; population biology of halophytes; genetic diversity in
mangroves; mechanism of salinity tolerance in mangroves; genetic transformation
of halopytes as a technique for improvement of crops; salt tolerance of
lacustrine and coastal varieties of dune plants; mechanism of salt tolerance in
herbaceous halophytes; and seed bank ecology. The symposium will also include
submitted papers from some 30 countries. A proceedings of the refereed papers
and other presentations will be published after the symposium and will be
available in the U.S., Pakistan, and other countries. Scope: The project
supports a symposium in an area of major importance to many countries that have
large irrigation systems, including the U.S. and Pakistan. Research in this
field combines several important scientific disciplines including biophysics,
biochemistry, genetics, as well as engineering and irrigation practices.
Scientists from Pakistan, who have made significant advances in experimenting
with salinity-tolerant plant varieties in the last two decades, will be able to
share their insight in the field. Participants from the U.S. and from the U.K.,
Germany and Australia will provide expertise in the basic mechanisms leading to
the desired salinity-tolerance in plant varieties. The exchange of information
during the symposium should lead to better collaboration and integration of
results, and possibly to significant improvements, worldwide, in understanding
how to increase crop yields in salt-affected or marginal lands. ***