* 9413763
* Acquisition of a Multi-User Thin Film Synthesis and         Processing Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1999
* John Vetelino, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1999
* USD 500,000.00

A state-of-the-art advanced materials synthesis and processing facility focusing
on the growth and fabrication of ceramic- based thin film materials will be
funded with the assistance of the Academic Research Infrastructure Program. The
facility will include a multi-technique thin film materials synthesis chamber
equipped with a microwave plasma source, effusion cells, electron beam
evaporators, magnetron sputter sources, and a Kauffman ion source.
Characterization capabilities will include in-situ reflection high energy
electron diffraction (RHEED), mass spectrometry for controlling growth
processes, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and a novel Hall probe for
in- situ film characterization. Three major areas of research will be impacted
significantly by the facility, namely 1) solid state micro-sensors, 2)
nanomechanics of materials, and 3) surfaces and interfaces in hetero-epitaxial
oxide systems. In the sensor work, which has connections with local industry,
the synthesis and processing of well-defined doped metal-oxide films will be
developed with the goal of understanding and controlling the molecular scale
mechanisms by which surface microstructure, dopant type, and operating
temperature influence sensor performance. A broad based advanced materials
synthesis and processing facility for the growth and fabrication of ceramic-
based thin films will be operated for the study of solid state microsensors
based on metal-oxide ceramic films. The nanomechanics of these ceramic thin
films will be studied, as well as the surfaces and interfaces occurring in
heteroepitaxial oxide systems.