* 9413762
* Acquisition of X-Ray Microanalysis System and Related       Specimen Preparation Instrumentation for Electron Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Mary Lynne Collins, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 186,973.00

ABSTRACT The Biological Sciences Electron Microscope Laboratory is a teaching
and research facility in the Department of Biological Sciences at the University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM). Currently, the electron microscopes in this
facility are being used by students and staff in Biological Sciences, Physics,
and the Materials, Mechanical and Civil Engineering departments as well as the
Center for Great Lakes Studies and the Laboratory for Surface Studies.
Researchers in each of these groups have expressed a need for quantitative and
qualitative elemental analysis in conjunction with the structural studies
currently being conducted. The Biological Sciences Electron Microscopy (BSEM)
Laboratory and the Laboratory for Surface Studies (LSS) at the University of
Wisconsin- Milwaukee (UWM) are requesting a system of instruments to upgrade the
existing electron microscopes in order to meet this need. This instrumentation
falls into 3 equipment groupings: analytical, biological specimen preparation
and materials specimen preparation. The analytical needs of the researchers will
be met through the acquisition of energy dispersive x-ray spectrometers (EDS)
for the existing scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmissions electron
microscope (TEM) both of which are located in the BSEM lab. The preparation of
biological specimens for elemental analysis is not compatible with conventional
chemical fixation, but requires specialized techniques and instrumentation.
Therefore, we are requesting cryogenic equipment for processing biological
samples for elemental analysis for both scanning and transmission electron
microscopy. Finally, for inorganic materials, specialized equipment is needed
for the preparation of plan-view and cross-sectional specimens to allow the
imaging, diffraction and elemental analysis of surfaces, interfaces and small
particles in TEM. The requested equipment will complement the existing
instrumentation for SEM materials pr eparation. This system of instruments will
be used as an integral part of the research and graduate training programs at
UWM. The requested instrumentation will open up new possibilities for research
in the biological sciences as well as in materials and engineering research
benefiting both ongoing projects and future planned research. Cryofixation
combined with elemental mapping will enable researchers in the department of
Biological Sciences and the Center for Great Lakes Studies to gain a better
understanding of the mechanisms and impact of prokaryotic and eukaryotic
organisms in biogeochemical cycling in aquatic environments. In addition, the
cryo-preparation instrumentation will greatly enhance the capacity for
immunolocalization studies. The cutting and thinning equipment requested for
materials specimen processing is required for TEM analysis of brittle and
ductile materials. This instrumentation will be used for the preparation of thin
cross-sectional and plane-view specimens for elemental analysis and imaging with
the existing TEM; it will also be required for the preparation of specimens for
an atomic resolution 200kV field emission TEM, for which separate funding is
being sought (NSF/DMR 9406752; the Instrumentation for Materials Research
Program). Finally, the cutting and polishing tools will aid in the preparation
of suitable flat surfaces for elemental analysis of bulk specimens in the SEM.