* 9413295
* Paleoecological Setting of Eocene Echinoderms at Seymour    Island, Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Richard Aronson, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/1998
* USD 68,540.00

9315927 Blake 9413295 Aronson This award supports a study of echinoderm fossils
from the Eocene La Meseta Formation of Seymour Island in the Antarctic
Peninsula. This formation represents shallow marine conditions and it contains
one of the most diverse fossil echinoderm assemblages in the world. The Seymour
Island echinoderm fauna has characteristics more like Paleozoic echinoderm
communities than like the great majority of other Cenozoic shallow water
communities. Current thinking suggests that morphologically novel marine
organisms originated primarily in near shore, heterogeneous environments, and
then expanded to offshore, more homogeneous environments. After the Paleozoic,
this pattern of near shore-offshore pattern is thought to have been driven
largely by predation pressure. The La Meseta echinoderm occurrences suggest that
the community reorganization that began in the Mesozoic may not have been
completed until the early Cenozoic. This research will extend the taxonomic work
on the echinoderms from Seymour Island and it will evaluate the significance of
predation in stelleroid and crinoid populations. This information will allow a
comparison with other echinoderm occurrences, both fossil and modern, and will
provide a rare view of echinoderm paleoecology. Specifically, this research will
allow an important test of the hypothesis that predation pressure in shallow-
marine near-polar environments during the Eocene was an important forcing
mechanism for echinoderm communities. ***