* 9413029
* Gordon Conference on Fibronectin, Integrins, and Related    Macromolecules, to be held February 1995 at Oxnard,         California
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1995
* Jean Schwarzbauer, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1995
* USD 3,500.00

9413029 Storm The Gordon Research Conference on "Fibronectin, Integrins, and
Related Macromolecules" will be held in February, 1995 in Oxnard, California. As
the paradigm of an extracellular adhesin, fibronectin interactions with a
transmembrane receptor have proven applicable to a number of cellular adhesion
systems. Many other extracellular glycoproteins have been described with
biological properties similar to fibronectin, most of which have been sequenced
and some of which have known three dimensional structures. These molecules are
involved in a wide variety of basic cellular functions in metazoans, of
significance to such areas of study as embryogenesis, tissue organization,
hemostasis, wound healing, immune functions, and pathological states. Proteins
of this type have also been discovered in higher plants, and their functions in
plants remains to be understood. The challenges to the field over the next
several years are to comprehend and organize the large amount of new structural
information and design experiments based on it, learn the relative biological
importance of the several seemingly redundant adhesion systems in animal
tissues, and apply the new insights to practical ends. The 1995 Gordon Research
Conference will serve as a valuable forum to present and discuss new
information, identify problem areas, and plan new approaches. This grant
provides partial support for expenses of conferees with limited travel funds who
would otherwise not be able to attend, as well as applicants whose research
involves plants. ***