* 9413519
* Acquisition of a FACSort for Studying Lymphocyte Differentiation and for Undergraduate Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Roberta Pollock, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 08/31/1996
* USD 133,881.00

ABSTRACT We are requesting funding for a Becton Dickinson FACsort. There are
three main objectives for the acquisition of this instrument. 1) The FACsort
will be used extensively in ongoing studies on lymphocyte differentiation. These
projects involve 6 to 8 undergraduate students every term, including the summer.
2) The FACSort will be an integral part of the undergraduate Immunology course.
3) Experiments using the FACSort will be introduced into the Molecular Biology
course. Thus, a large number of undergraduates will gain experience with the
fluorescence activated cell sorting through both undergraduate courses and
research experience. Two research projects at Occidental College require cell
sorting. Dr. Pollock's research centers on somatic mutation of immunoglobulin
(Ig) variable (V) region genes. Somatic mutation plays an important role in
generating antibody diversity. We are developing an assay to detect and isolate
lymphocytes undergoing somatic mutation of immunoglobulin genes. The assay uses
a DNA construct encoding a fusion protein composed of a rearranged V gene,
containing a stop codon, linked to a lacZ reporter gene. If somatic mutation
reverts the stop codon, the entire fusion protein is translated and lacZ
expressed. LacZ expression is readily detected by fluorescence assays. This
construct is being used in cell lines and to make transgenic mice. These mice
will be used to ask: 1) where can somatic mutation be detected; 2) when is
somatic mutation seen after immunization; 3) when does somatic mutation first
occur during ontogeny; 4) which germinal center cells show active somatic
mutation; and 5) what is the phenotype of cells undergoing somatic mutation.