* 9413798
* Acquisition of Advanced Instrumentation for Research in Turbulence, Chaos, Combustion and two-Phase Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Fazle Hussain, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 07/31/1996
* USD 385,111.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9413798 Fazle Hussain A coherent, multi-purpose measurement system
to address the future challenges in a number of major areas of hydrodynamics
will be developed. The instrumentation will help studies about the structure,
dynamics and control of turbulence phenomena, including two-phase and free
surface flows, utilizing: (i) particle image velocimetry (PIV), (ii) multipoint
vorticity and pressure measurements, and (iii) data processing. The first system
component consists of lasers, cameras, frame digitizes, particle size and high-
speed computational equipment necessary to implement cine holographic particle
velocimetry (cine HPV) and digital PIV. The second component system contains a
128-channel data acquisition system (with 16-bit resolution, low noise and
sample rates up to 100 kHz/channel) and real-time signal analyzers. The third
system component consists primarily of a graphics workstation for analysis of 3D
velocity and vorticity fields obtained via (i) and (ii) and also numerical
simulation. The Aerodynamics and Turbulence Laboratory (ATL) at the University
of Houston has both fundamental and applied studies in hydrodynamics and related
topics (e. g. dynamics of coherent structures (CS), turbulence management, chaos
in open flows, and vortex reconnection and core dynamics, hemispherical
microphone arrays, CS education). Combination of experimental and numerical
techniques have been used to address various topics: (i) the nature and
dynamical significance of CS in free shear flows, including their role
transition, entrainment mixing and combustion, and (iii) the role of vortex
reconnection in turbulence cascade. A major thrust here is implementing cine
HPV, which can provide time-resolved, 3D velocity, vorticity and temperature
field data. A time-resolved flow field measurements techniques using HPV is the
most promising future flow measurement technology. The new instrument will
implement cine HPV, capturing evolving flow fields at rates up to 1 kHz. In
addition, the velocity and pressure measurements will be applied to study CS
dynamics in technological floes and develop innovative numerical simulation
techniques (wavelet-based large-eddy simulations) and to analyze in detail
turbulence phenomena. The use of these instruments will not only advance our
understanding of flow physics but also train graduate students and researchers
in state-of-the-art measurement techniques, thus paving the way for further
innovations. These instruments will be used primarily by researchers at ATL but
will also be available to researchers in engineering, mathematics and physics.
***