* 9413215
* Statistical and Computational Methods for Data Management   and Analysis in Molecular Genetics
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/2001
* David Roos, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/30/2001
* USD 1,592,579.00

9413215 Ewens This award provides support for an interdisciplinary training
program in computational aspects of modern genetics. Topical areas include
algorithm development, molecular evolution, sequence alignment, statistical
inference, and other aspects of biological informatics. These areas are central
to one of the most multidisciplinary approaches to modern biology. The faculty
group includes 19 investigators from the departments of computer and information
science in the school of engineering, the departments of mathematics and biology
in the school of arts and sciences, and the departments of genetics and human
genetics in the school of medicine. The group includes junior and senior
investigators, several of international reputation. The training program will
center around 8 new or existing core, additional new elective courses, a journal
club and seminars. Students are expected to enter with backgrounds in computer
science, mathematics or biology. Training will emphasize molecular biology, and
genetics, computer science, statistics and probability, but will be tailored to
the needs of individual students and an optional industrial internship program
is planned. This award is also being supported by the Computational Biology
Activity and by the Database Activity in the Biological Science, both in the
Division of Biological Instrumentation and Resources. ***