* 9413019
* Developmental Change in Speed of Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1999
* Robert Kail, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 12/31/1999
* USD 188,048.00

The goal of this project is to determine the influence of age-related change in
mental information processing speed on cognitive development, specifically
developmental change in memory, reasoning, and academic skills. The subjects in
the research will be 5- to 20-year-olds. In each of six experiments we will
measure three types of construct: global speed of processing, criterion
performance (e.g., memory, analogical reasoning), and specific constructs
hypothesized to link processing speed to the criterion measure. The causal links
between these construct types will be evaluated using path analysis and
structural equation modeling. Results from this project should shed light on how
age-related change in processing speed contributes to age-related change in
memory, reasoning, and academic skills. Specifically, although age-related
change in speed of processing may be particularly salient in performance on
speeded tasks, its influence may be much more widespread, affecting performance
whenever a number of activities must be completed in a fixed period of time. In
these situations, poor performance may result because processing speed was too
slow for the processes necessary for task performance to be completed in the
time allotted. For example, speed of processing may explain why, relative to
adolescents and young adults, children can rehearse less information per unit of
time and, consequently, remember less accurately. The planned experimentation
will help determine the extent to which age- related change in processing speed
is in fact a causal force in the development of memory, reasoning, and academic
skills.