* 9413008
* National High Field FT-ICR Mass Spectrometry Facility
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1994,12/31/1999
* John Eyler, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 12/31/1999
* USD 5,000,000.00

ABSTRACT PROPOSAL: 9413008 PI: MARSHALL, A. G. INSTITUTION: FLORIDA STATE
UNIVERSITY This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
Program will aid in the development of FT-ICR-Mass Spectrometry Facility in the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory at Florida State University. The
research to be performed with this instrumentation include the following: direct
sequencing, chemical reactivity, and shape analysis of gas-phase proteins up to
antibody size (150,000 Da); direct optical absorption spectroscopy and electron
paramagnetic resonance of mass-selected trapped ions; and routine direct
identification of unseparated components of mixtures as complex as crude oil.
This Facility will have the highest-field ICR mass spectrometers in the world.
The technological development in FT-ICR will have major impact in biological and
analytical chemistry, and the NSF center will enhance the spread of these
development to a broad community of users. Methods Development at the facility
will include research on: a) internal and external ionization techniques, b) ion
Sources for thermolabile and/or solid compounds, c) IR laser desorption (LD) and
d) vaporization of high boiling point mixtures. In-house core group research
will be concerned with applications of FT-ICR-mass spectrometry to: a) peptide
and protein sequencing, b) hydrogen-deuterium exchange in proteins, c)
phospholipid identification and structural analysis, d) EPR spectroscopy of
mass-selected trapped ions e) glow discharge FT-ICR for elemental analysis and
depth profiling in semiconductors, and f) optical spectroscopy of trapped ions.
User Facility: In the first year 50% of instrument time will be available to
users outside Florida State University, increasing to 80% in subsequent years.
Education Outreach: The facility will provide an outstanding training ground for
st udents and other scientists in academic and industry. The program will
include a large number of graduate and postdoctoral student, and visiting
professors and industrial scientists. Intern programs will reach high school and
undergraduate students and teachers. Representation by female and minority
groups are specifically included. Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-
ICR) mass spectrometry is the most versatile technique for unscrambling and
quantifying ion-molecule reaction kinetics and equilibria in the absence of
solvent (i.e., the gas phase). Applications, range from protein structure to
crude oil.