* 9413706
* Acquisition of Advanced X-ray Detectors for Geoscience      Research at the Advanced Photon Source
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* Mark Rivers, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 08/31/2000
* USD 1,254,461.00

9413706 Rivers This award provides partial funding required to design, purchase
the components of, and install X-ray detector systems for a group of five
experimental stations comprising the GeoCARS sector at the Advanced Photon
Source (APS) of Argonne National Laboratory. The University of Chicago's
Consortium for Advance Radiation Sources (CARS) is committed to providing the
remaining funds needed to complete the X- ray detector system. GeoCARS is an
organizational sub-unit of CARS, dedicated to the construction and operation of
a multi-user facility at APS designed to meet the needs of the earth science
research community in using synchrotron radiation. The APS, to be commissioned
at Argonne in 1995, will provide hard X-rays with 1000 times higher brilliance
than the brightest existing synchrotron source in the U.S., and the earth
science research community will gain access to this powerful tool for
characterizing the structure and composition of earth materials by making use of
the GeoCARS sector's experimental stations at APS. The extremely high X- ray
brilliance available will permit unprecedented levels of spatial and energy
resolution in X-ray diffraction and scattering, X-ray absoption spectroscopy,
and X-ray microprobe and microtomography studies applied to earth science
research in ultra-high pressure, environmental geochemistry, soils science and
agronomy, and waste disposal. The goal of this project is to instrument the
GeoCARS sector at APS with X-ray detectors that will take full advantage of the
spatial, energy, and time resolution characteristics of this remarkable and
powerful new X-ray source. ***