* 9413951
* Acquisition of a Helium Liquefier System and Bulk Liquid    Nitrogen Storage Container
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Michael Naughton, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1996
* USD 296,640.00

The Academic Research Infrastructure Program funds will be used to acquire a
helium liquifier system, a bulk liquid nitrogen storage con-tainer and bulk high
pressure gaseous helium containers. These acquisitions will form the basis for a
highly efficient, helium recycling, cryogenic facility serving a
multidisciplinary scientific and engineering community at SUNYBuffalo. The
facility will provide services to faculty and graduate students in 8 academic
departments in addition to 2 research centers, namely the Center for Electronic
and Electrooptic Materials and the New York State Institute for
Superconductivity. The facility should provide cryogenic liquids in a more
convenient and economical manner to the users of cryogenic liquids. The
principal users from the Department of Physics are involved in research on: the
superconductivity of quasi-1D-metals; two-dimensional 3Helium on the surface of
4Helium films; D- ions and many electron effects on hydrogenic donors in gallium
arsenide quantum wells at high magnetic fields; the study of II-VI magnetic
semiconductor based structures and quantum wells; transport and magnetic
properties of high critical temperature superconductors; high pressure studies
in epitaxial and bulk semiconductors. A helium liquifier system with efficient
helium recycling will be developed for the users of liquid helium that will
increase the convenience of liquid helium use in addition to reducing the cost
of liquid helium. The facility will be used by faculty and students from eight
departments and two Centers. The facility will support research in the the areas
of superconductivity and semiconductor heterostructures and quantum wells.