* 9413486
* Development of a Core Facility for DNA Sequencing
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Bert Boyer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 07/31/1996
* USD 120,075.00

This Academic Research Infrastructure equipment proposal requests funds to
establish a Core Facility for DNA sequencing by purchasing (1) an Applied
Biosystems model 373 automated DNA sequencer, (2) GeneAmp PCR System 9600
thermal cycler, (3) Tektronix Phaser 200e printer, (d~) Genescan 672 software
kit, (5) Genotyper software and (6) Sequence Navigator Software (7) Power Mac
8100. The Applied Biosvstems model 373 DNA sequence is a state-of-the-art
instrument for many primer based DNA analyses including DNA sequencing, sizing
and quantitation. The machine will be used by research faculty at the University
of Alaska Fairbanks and will augment productivity of our molecular genetics
sequencing group in addition to graduate and undergraduate teaching. The
molecular genetics sequencing group (MGS) has seven core and seven affiliate
faculty. All projects within the MGS use some form of primer based DNA analysis.
The development of a Core Facility for DNA Sequencing will have a major impact
on research productivity. Because manual sequencing of DNA is highly labor
intensive, molecular biologists, who use DNA sequencing, have generally limited
themselves to relatively few ongoing research projects and even fewer
collaborations with colleagues whose important biological questions might be
elucidated by sequence analyses. Development of a Core Facility for DNA
Sequencing can only reduce the labor expenditure of technician time and thus
allow for larger numbers of cross-disciplinary and international collaborative
projects. The MGS core faculty include three molecular systematizes and four
molecular biologists. The seven affiliate faculty members have a wide range of
research interests including physiology, wildlife biology and marine sciences.
The common denominators among all members of the MGS faculty is that they work
on biological research projects in the Arctic or Subarctic and acquisition of
DNA sequence or size information is a significant component of their research
programs. Research excellence is evident from the past and ongoing research
activities of the individual investigators within the MGS group. Development of
the Core Facility for DNA Sequencing will foster continued growth and research
excellence by enhancing existing research projects and providing additional
opportunities for new projects. Below we describe the use, application, and
overall impact of a Core Facility for DNA Sequencing.