* 9413004
* New Strategies for the Enantioselective Synthesis of        Fluorinated Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1998
* John Welch, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1998
* USD 225,000.00

The focus of this research is the development of new stereoselective syntheses
of specifically fluorinated molecules. The work studies the reactivity and
selectivity of various fluorinated building blocks and how these factors are
effected by the presence of fluorine. Toward this end the stereoselective
reactivity of fluorinated ketenes, ketene equivalents or products derived from
them will be explored. Specific aspects include a study of the reactivity of
fluoroketenes in cycloaddition reactions, preparation of fluorinated transition
metal organometallic complexes as fluoroketene surrogates, use of optically pure
fluorinated beta-lactams as building blocks, use of optically pure fluorinated
cyclobutanones as intermediates, and use of fluorinated C,O- disilylketenes as
building blocks for the synthesis of fluorinated olefins. With this award, the
Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr. John T. Welch of the
Department of Chemistry at the SUNY Albany. Professor Welch will focus his work
on the development of new stereoselective syntheses of specifically fluorinated
molecules. This strategy will use the construction of reactive, functionalized
fluorinated intermediates that can undergo a variety of further stereoselective
transformations. Such systems include fluorinated ketenes, beta-lactams and
cyclobutanones. The methodology developed will allow the synthesis of optically
pure fluorinated compounds that can be used as probes in a variety of
mechanistic and biological problems, as well as materials applications.