* 9413741
* Digital Particle Image Velocimetry for the National         Diagnostic Facility
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Candace Wark, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 07/31/1997
* USD 147,647.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9413741 Greg Cardell The Fluid Dynamics Research Center (FDRC) at
the Illinois Institute of Technology will purchase a dual Nd:YAG laser system,
two high-resolution digital CCD video cameras, two high-performance
framegrabbers with image processing capability, and associated supporting
equipment, to develop and implement a high-speed Digital Particle Image
Velocimetry (DPIV) system dedicated to research in fluid dynamics at the FDRC.
In particle image velocimetry, small particles in the flow are illuminated by an
intense light sheet and the resulting scattering light is imaged using either
photographic film or video cameras. By taking two such images, separated by a
short time interval, the velocities of the imaged particles may be determined.
The technique provides two components of the instantaneous velocity field
everywhere in the imaged region of the flow, and there is some possibility that
the technique may be extended so that all three velocity components may be
obtained in the plane of the light sheet. With the advent of high resolution,
high sensitivity CCD arrays, it is now possible to obtain the spatial and
temporal resolution required for the study of turbulent high speed flows using
DPIV. The FDRC currently has funding for several projects utilizing the
Photographic PIV (PPIV) technique and its application to the study of
turbulence, and is in the process of developing a very high performance
processing system for photographic PIV images. However, the two different
techniques, PPIV and DPIV, are complementary: PPIV still has a significant
advantage in spatial resolution and sensitivity (allowing the study of high
velocity flows at higher spatial resolution) so that it is the method of choice
for extremely high resolution experiments. The DPIV technique is much more
convenient for obtaining and processing data quickly, particularly since there
is no film to be developed, and it is more convenient to digitally process and
archive the images. The DPIV syst em will be used for several research projects,
including, the study of equilibrium and non-equilibrium high Reynolds number
boundary layers, unsteady and separated flows, transitional boundary layers, and
high subsonic jet flows. The DPIV system will be used to support research in all
of the FDRC facilities, although it will be particularly useful in the National
Diagnostic Facility, which is a national resource for fundamental research on
high Reynolds number, high subsonic Mach number flows. The NDF will be used by
outside researchers for academia, industry, and government laboratories the two-
thirds of the time, and by researchers from the FDRC the remaining one-third of
the time. Hardware designs and software developed under this grant will be made
available to the community through the archives of the Center for Quantitative
Visualization at the California Institute of Technology.