* 9413899
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Study of Electronic      Materials and Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* R. Pandey, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 420,000.00

The research of this materials-oriented group of experimentalists is focused on
1) the development of nanometer fabrication and processing through molecular
beam epitaxy, scanning tunnel microscopy etching and chemical vapor deposition,
and electrochemical underpotential dep-osition, 2) the study of metallization
and contact regions to semicon- ductors, 3) development of passivation layers
such as metal nitrides and oxides and 4) development of new materials relevant
to electronics applications which include high critical temperature
superconducting films, thin magnetic films, ferroelectric films and bulk
crystals, wide bandgap oxide semiconductors, electrically conductive polymers,
and monomolecular layers and nanowires of metal alloys and intermetallics
precipitated from soluble metal precursors. The Academic Research Infrastrusture
Program funds will be employed to acquire additional instrumentation to augment
the present capabilities and to initiate a central materials characterization
and fabrication facility. The new instruments will include: 1) Laser Ablation
Thin Film Deposition System, 2) AC Susceptometer/DC Magnetometer, 3)
Environmentally Controlled Large Sample Scanning Microprobe, 4) Atomic Force/
Scanning Tunneling Microprobe for Elecrochemical Studies, 5) Coin- cidence
Counting Mass Spectrometer, 6) High Resolution Electron Energy Loss
Spectrometer. Item 5) will be custom built from in house designs. This research
is concerned with the fabrication and characterization of new electronic
materials and devices, in addition to developing an understanding of the
fundamental mechanisms associated with their properties and processes. The
research spans a broad range of materials from thin films superconductors,
ferroelectric and magmetic materials to wide bandgap semiconductors to
monomolecular layers and nanowires of metal alloys and intermetallic compounds.