* 9413910
* Acquisition of An Analytical Field Emission Gun SEM (Field  Emission Scanning Electron Microscope)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Vinayak Dravid, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 471,000.00

Funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will be employed to
acquire a field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FE SEM). Peripheral
attachments to be included are energy dispersive scattering (EDS), a liquid
nitrogen specimen stage, electron beam induced conductivity (EBIC), and
backscattered channeling detector and analyzer. The FE SEM will provide of
resolution better than 5 nanometers at 1 kiloelectronvolt, which is not
currently available with current SEMs at Northwestern. Several of the
peripherals are also new features for Northwestern researchers.The FE SEM will
be utilized in a large number of diverse research projects including: crack
propagation in structural ceramic composites, grain boundary phenomena in
electroceramics, microstructure and toughening mechanisms in advance steels,
polymer and membrane materials, ultrastructural analysis of chemosensory signal
transduction, heavy metal recognition in gene regulation, structure of the
enthrocyte membrane skeleton, advanced photonic and electronic devices,
nucleation and growth of diamond, and zeolite supported metallic and bimetallic
catalysts. A new field emission scanning electron microscope with much higher
resolution and new peripheral devices not currently at Northwestern will be
acquired for a broad range of research topics. These topics include the study of
ceramics, the improvement of advanced steels, the study of polymers and membrane
materials, the study of biochemical systems, the synthesis of diamond and
buckytubes, the development of advanced photonic and electronic devices, and the
study of zeolite-supported metallic catalysts.