* 9413755
* Acquisition of an FDDI Backbone for Data--Intensive Social  Science Computing
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* James Walker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1997
* USD 315,907.00

Winsborough With National Science Foundation support, the University of
Wisconsin's Social Sciences Computing Co-operative will purchase a Fiber
Distributed Data Interface backbone for its extensive computing network. This
high-bandwidth backbone is necessary to the very data-intensive research done in
the Co-op. work which uses a 50 gigabyte, on-line, data base of government and
privately collected data files from the U.S. and around the world. The current
network is an amalgam of older and more modern equipment using a 10 mb/s
ethernet specification. Some of the older technology is slow and some is fragile
and this seriously impedes research. The backbone is overloaded in the older
part of its topology and peak daily loads are several times industry
recommendations. It has become fragile and causes frequent interruptions for
researchers along its path. The network to be constructed will have from 30 to
60 times the current bandwidth. It will both serve current users and add
Department of Economics researchers to the system. The Social Sciences Computing
Co-operative is composed of five research and teaching agencies in the
University of Wisconsin and includes the Center for Demography and Ecology, the
Department of Sociology, the Department of Rural Sociology, the Institute on
Aging and Adult Life and the Institute for Research on Poverty. About 100
faculty and their teams of graduate assistants and professional researchers use
the co-op facilities. The research conducted focuses on human resources,
demography and the causes and consequences of global change, especially as it
relates to the physical environment. The work contributes in a significant way
to the increase in basic scientific knowledge much of it relevant to pressing
national needs.