* 9413475
* Circularly Polarized Soft X-ray Studies of Magnetic         Ultrathin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Brian Tonner, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/1997
* USD 270,000.00

9413475 Tonner Magnetic ultrathin films of transition metals will be studied
using a variety of surface sensitive techniques including polarized beams of
soft x-rays. The types of samples to be investigated include single element
ultra-thin films on single crystal substrates, ferromagnetic bi-layers, wedged
samples and superlattices. The properties to be investigated include enhanced
magnetic moments at surfaces, perpendicular magnetic anisotropy of ultrathin
films, and coupling between ferromagnetic layers. Novel magnetic properties
found in these materials will be related to possible applications and
improvements in magnetic devices. A newly developed x-ray magnetic circular
dichroism microscope will be used for fundamental studies of interlayer exchange
coupling in wedged samples and to understand micromagnetic interactions in spin-
valves, magnetic memory devices, and spin transistors. % % % % Magnetic
ultrathin films of transition metals will be studied using a variety of surface
sensitive techniques including polarized beams of soft x-rays. The types of
samples to be investigated include single element ultra-thin films on single
crystal substrates, ferromagnetic bi-layers, wedged samples and superlattices.
Novel magnetic properties found in these materials will be related to possible
applications and improvements in magnetic devices. A newly developed x-ray
magnetic circular dichroism microscope will be used for fundamental studies of
interlayer exchange coupling in wedged samples and to understand micromagnetic
interactions in spin-valves, magnetic memory devices, and spin transistors. ***