* 9413114
* Instrument Development Plan for Chemistry at the University of Minnesota
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Wayne Gladfelter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/1997
* USD 600,000.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
will assist the Department of Chemistry at the University of Minnesota in the
purchase of a high resolution mass spectrometer, x-ray diffractometer, and a
high field NMR spectrometer. The faculty members whose research is dependent
upon mass spectroscopy will greatly benefit from the acquisition of these
instruments. Research projects to be carried out with these instruments include:
(1) Probing Nucleation Phenomena in Chemical Vapor Depositions; (2) Gas Phase
Ion-Molecule Reactions; (3) An Investigation of Multielectron Transfer Reactions
in Organometallic Complexes; (4) Synthesis and Characterization of Transition
Metal-Gold Cluster Compounds; (5) Synthetic Modeling of Copper-Nitrogen Oxide
Interactions in Proteins and Heterogeneous Catalysts and Development of
C3-Symmetric and Optically Active Polypyrazole; (6) Surface Chemistry of
Chromatography Stationary Phases; (7) Stacking Faults and Polytypism in
Nanocrystalline Materials; (8) Detection of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) by
Linear Chain Pt Compounds; (9) NMR Studies of Metal Oxide Catalysts; and (10)
Catalysis with Supported Transition Metal-Gold Cluster Compounds. A high
resolution mass spectrometer is an instrument used to measure the precise
molecular weight of a molecular ion. This information is an important piece of
data used to help determine the atomic composition and, sometimes, the molecular
geometry of a molecule. It is one of the essential tools needed to learn the
detailed structure of newly synthesized molecules. The x-ray diffractometer is
used to make accurate and precise measurements of the full three- dimensional
structure of a molecule. The information obtained gives the precise values of
all the bond distances and bond angles of a given molecule and it gives accurate
information about the spatial arrangement of that molecule relative to the
neighboring molecules. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NM R) spectroscopy is the
most powerful tool available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometry is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The results from these NMR studies are useful in the areas such as polymers and
catalysis, and in biology.