* 9413520
* Acquisition of a Laboratory X-Ray Diffraction System with a Rotating Anode Generator
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Shiou-Jyh Hwu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 275,000.00

A X-ray facility consisting of a rotating anode X-ray generator and two
different diffraction systems on opposite sides of the generator will be
acquired with the funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program. One
diffraction unit will be a 4-circle diffractometer for accurate lattice
parameter and structural determinations of thin films, single crystals, and
powder samples. A second diffraction unit will involve an advanced 2-dimensional
array detector for small angle X-ray scattering from biological and thin film
samples. The facility will be employed to study: 1) the structure of lanthanide
endohedral fulleneres and fullerene-encapsulated metal clusters, the study of
low-dimensional mixed-valence compounds associated with superconduct-ivity and
and charge density waves, 3) various properties of the unique van der Waals C60
solids, 4) magnetic multilayer thin films, 5) diamond thin films prepared by
chemical vapor deposition and ion- implantation techniques, 6) growth of thin
ferroelectric films on crystalline and amorphous substrates, 7) genetic features
of regulatory proteins and the biochemistry and biology of repressor proteins,
8) the thermodynamic properties of natural minerals. A modern X-ray facility
with two types of diffractometers will be employed to study a diverse range of
materials by scientists in the Chemistry, Electrical Engineering, Biosciences,
Materials Science and Geology Departments. The materials studied will include
fullerenes, diamond thin films, repressor proteins, magnetic multilayers,
ferroelectric thin films, and natural minerals.