* 9413702
* Development of Variable - Temperature Near-Field Scanning   Optical Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Mark Lee, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 150,000.00

A near-field scanning optical microscope (NSOM) will be designed and constructed
to study samples in the temperature range 10 K to 400 K. Light in the wavelength
region 1500 to 400 nanometer range will be channeled down a fiber-optic wave
guide to a tapered end with an aperture of size 20 to 200 nanometers positioned
just above the sample surface. The NSOM is capable of resolution more than an
order of magnitude smaller than the diffraction limit and is the only optical
technique capable of probing structures with features on a scale much less than
1 micrometer. The NSOM will be employed for the study of spatial variation of
the current flow in high-temperature Josephson junctions. Defects near the
junction interfaces cause inhomogeneous current flow, but the characteristics
and distribution of the defects are largely unknown. A second project will study
the spatial dependence of the optical emmission from conducting polymer light-
emitting diodes. The NSOM tip will act as a localized collector of light emitted
from the sample. A near-field scanning optical microscope will be developed to
study spatial imhomogeneities on a scale much less than the diffraction limit of
ordinary light. The microscope will operate in the temperature regime 10 K to
400 K and will be used to study the spatial variation of the electrical current
in high temperature superconductor Josephson junctions and, secondly, the
spatial variation of light emitted from conducting polymer light-emitting
diodes.