* 9413941
* Construction of an Undulator-Based Synchrotron X-Ray        Scattering Facility for Materials Research on Complex       Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Anthony Cheetham, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 05/31/1999
* USD 1,114,950.00

Funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will be used in the
construction and implementation of an undulator-based x-ray beamline at the
Advanced Photon Source. The beamline, when completed, will include three fully
instrumented end stations optimized for grazing- incidence x-ray scattering from
surfaces/interfaces, high resolution delta-Q-resolution x-ray scattering, and
small- angle x-ray scattering. This x-ray scattering facility will be utilized
by a consortium of scientists from U. Pennsylvania, Princeton U., U. C. Santa
Barbara, U. Tennessee, Oak Ridge Natl. Lab., Brookhaven Natl. Lab., Los Alamos
Natl. Lab., and the Exxon Corp. Res. Lab., all of whom are members of the
"Complex Materials Collaborative Access Team" (CMCAT). Among the groups studying
complex fluids there are 14 senior scientists, 8-10 postdoctorals, and 9-12
graduate students. The complex fluids under study by this group relate to self-
assembled macromolecular systems at interfaces and/or in bulk and include
colloidal, miscellar, polymer and biomolecular systems. Some of the research
topics being studied include: lipid and surfactant mesophases; block copolymer
melts and solutions; surfactant/polymer association complexes; doped conjugated
polymers; fullerenes ("buckyballs"); ultrathin films and biomolecular materials;
heat proof proteins; multilayer biomembrane ordered hydro-gels; protein-polymer
complexation; in-situ diffraction of flow and confinement induced complex fluid
structures; electrochemistry; liquid surfaces. Funds will be employed for the
construction of an x-ray beamline to be located at the Advanced Photon Source at
Argonne National Lab. which will feature three fully equipped end stations. The
beamline will be utilized by a consortium of scientists from universities,
government laboratories, and an industrial laboratory for the study of complex
materials. Specific x-ray scattering studies will be done on complex fluids,
namely colloidal, micellar, polymer and biomolecular systems.