* 9413531
* Equipment to Improve the Capabilities of the Center for Ecological Research &amp; Education (CERE) Environmental Analytical Laboratory (EAL) &amp; Controlled Environment Facility (
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* G. Wayne Minshall, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 08/31/1997
* USD 203,650.00

We request support to acquire equipment needed to enhance our program of
environmental research, which emphasizes interactions of organisms and ecosystem
function. The equipment will significantly upgrade and expand two interactive
facilities used by the six PIs in our separate and collaborative research: an
environmental analytical chemistry laboratory (the CERE EAL) and a controlled
environment facility (the CERE CEF). The capabilities of these two facilities
are intimately linked; the laboratory components of most of our field-based
studies require controlled environment chambers, and both the field and
laboratory aspects require determinations of various nutrients and ions. Our
group includes plant, animal, and microbial ecologists with expertise in aquatic
and terrestrial ecosystems, whose work ranges from the level of organismal
behavior and physiology to community and ecosystem dynamics. Our group is highly
collaborative, and our individual and collaborative research is relevant to many
issues of conservation and management importance in the Intermountain West. We
provide significant research training opportunities at the undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral levels. Collectively, we are the major advisors for
44 graduate students, 5 postdoctoral research associates, and numerous
undergraduate research assistants or independent study students. We will replace
obsolete equipment and add new pieces of state-of-the-art equipment with
improved capabilities over those we currently have. We request two major pieces
of equipment that will greatly improve the sample processing capacity and data
quality obtainable from our analytical laboratory, an Alpkem FLOWSolution
autoanalyzer (model 3590, base system A001280) and a Carlo Erba NA1500 CHNS
combustion analyzer. These models are necessary to increase the sample number we
can process and, also importantly, to improve our abilities to accurately
determine low concentrations of nutrients and ions, especial ly nitrate,
ammonium, and total nitrogen. We also request two walk-in, four reach-in, and
four small benchtop environmental chambers to replace obsolete equipment and add
additional controlled environment space. These chambers will equip a controlled
environment facility that Idaho State University will build as part of a new
greenhouse complex, with construction scheduled to be completed in January 1995.
Although we understand that building cannot contribute to the match for this
proposal, this greenhouse complex has a building cost of greater than $300,000
and is being built largely to support the research and research training of our
group. The controlled environment room was added to the building plans in direct
support of this proposal, at an estimated additional floor-space cost of
$19,200. If this proposal is funded, we will be able to conduct our research
more effectively, to undertake more collaborative research and more
sophisticated research, to collect better quality data in a shorter time, and to
expand our research programs. This will provide increased number and quality of
research training opportunities to postdoctoral associates, graduate students
and undergraduate students.