* 9413554
* Instrumentation for Dating and Stratigraphic Assessment of  Archaeological Sites Using Amino Acid Diagenesis in         Carbonate Fossils
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* David Von Endt, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/1999
* USD 88,659.00

Hare This grant provides partial support to permit the Carnegie Institute of
Washington to purchase a high-performance liquid chromatograph, gas
chromatograph, combined gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer and an autosampler
for an amino acid analyzer. These instruments will be used by Dr. P Edgar Hare
and his colleagues to expand their research into the chemical changes in organic
matter in fossil mollusks and ostrich egg shell. For a number of years these
researchers have worked to use such reactions as a chemical clock to date sites
of archaeological significance. The methods they have developed are particularly
important for sites too old (older than ca. 45,000 years) and too young (younger
than ca. 400 years) for radiocarbon dating. In particular the group will focus
on the development and application of amino acid racemization and other
digenetic reactions in ostrich eggshell for dating African and Asian
archaeological sites. They will attempt to develop simultaneous equations for
both age and mean temperature history. They will also study digenetic changes
other than racemization for the dating of very old sites and continue to improve
the use of aspartic acid racemization for dating recent occurrences. The
techniques will be applied to a number of sites including late Holocene cores
from Lake Titicaca, Bolivia, archaeological sites in central Texas as well as
Nile Delta cores. Accurate dates are crucial in archaeological as well as
climatological, geological and other environmentally related sciences. Although
a number of techniques such as radiocarbon and argon/argon dating are available,
these and others have limitations both in the kinds of materials they require
and the time range they cover. Ostrich eggshell and many types of mollusc shell
are present in a wide range of archaeological sites. They also occur naturally
in a wide range of geological situations. The potential to obtain accurate dates
from such materials has widespread significance acr oss a range of disciplines.