* 9413712
* Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass-          Spectrometer (ICP-MS)
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* S. Bradley Moran, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/1997
* USD 199,056.00

Schilling 9413712 This award provides support, through the Academic Research
Infrastructure Program, for the acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma
Mass-Spectrometer (ICP-MS) as the basis for the establishment of an analytical
facility at the University of Rhode Island. This analytical facility provides a
needed and geographically centralized capability for researchers in atmospheric
and ocean chemistry, marine and terrestrial geology and environmental science.
Specifically, the PIs intend to study mid-ocean ridge hotspot volcanism and
mantle geochemistry, oceanic trace metal scavenging and related particle
dynamics, paleoenvironments, atmospheric trace metal geochemistry, and
terrestrial and marine sedimentology and geochemistry. ICP-MS instrumentation is
well suited to the proposed analyses because it provides increased efficiency
and sensitivity for elemental analysis and negates the need for extensive sample
preparation prior to analysis. The instrument will serve, particularly as the
core of an analytical facility, as a test bed for new analyses, a training asset
for faculty, researchers and students, and also as a regional analytical
resource accessible to researchers from neighboring New England universities and
research centers. The University of Rhode Island will provide 50% cost sharing
for this project. ***