* 9413725
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for the Research and         Development of High-Performance Cementitious Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Cheng-Tzu Hsu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 08/31/1997
* USD 448,715.00

9413725 Ansari, Farhad This is an instrumentation award. A new class of
concrete, high- performance concrete (HPC), is emerging, whose performance
cannot be predicted by extrapolation from knowledge of conventional concrete. It
provides a strong incentive to move the technical basis for concrete technology
from empiricism to materials science to ensure that developments in HPC have a
solid foundation and draw on developments in materials science and technology,
and in techniques for prediction of service life and control of the design life
of cementitious composites. The development of research programs in high-
performance cementitious composites is hindered by the lack of pertinent
instrumentation to support such programs. The instrumentation will enhance the
state of ongoing research, and will provide the university with tools for the
research and development of high-performance concrete. There is a critical need
for development of methodologies for the optimization of the critical procedures
in the manufacture and processing of HPC, beginning with the selection and
preparation of the constituent materials, their proportioning and mixing, and
continuing through placing and curing. The equipment in this project will be
employed in the research for characterization of fine particle industrial by-
products for the development of high-performance concretes. ***