* 9413211
* Research Training Group in Development Neurobiology         (Building the Brain: Cellular and Molecular Approaches to   Developing Neural Systems)
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1995,05/31/2001
* Bruce Oakley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 05/31/2001
* USD 1,098,062.00

9413211 Oakley This award renews support of a joint training effort of 15
faculty from six departments in the Schools of Arts and Sciences, of Medicine
and of Dentistry at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. The theme of this
Research Training Group (RTG) is developmental neurobiology. Faculty and student
research emphasize three aspects of the development of the nervous system:
neurogenesis, axonal navigation, and synaptogenesis. The research addresses
these issues in a variety of organisms, including invertebrates, fish, birds and
mammals using a variety of techniques from cell and molecular biology. The RTG
sponsors training at all three post-secondary levels. Besides opportunities for
student research, RTG faculty have created new courses at both the undergraduate
and graduate level. Graduate students are selected from students who apply to
one of two departmental Ph.D. programs or an interdepartmental Neuroscience
Ph.D. program, and receive support for up to three years. Postdoctoral fellows
are selected for one year of support from among candidates proposed by
participating faculty. Undergraduates are sponsored during both the academic
year and summer term. Participants in the summer research program are recruited
nationally. The level of involvement of undergraduates in the RTG is
particularly noteworthy; over 80 such students carried out research under the
auspices of the RTG during its first four years. ***