* 9413451
* RUI:  Background and Methodology for the Representation and Manipulation of Linguistic Corpora
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Nancy Ide, Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 03/31/1998
* USD 200,830.00

The goal of this project is to develop a sound basis and methodology for the
representation of corpora and linguistic information in corpora, as well as for
the design of text- handling tools, for use in corpus-based natural language
processing (NLP) research. The work is undertaken in collaboration with the
Laboratoire Parole et Langage in Aix-en- Provence, France. The project involves
(1) analysis of the needs of corpus-based NLP research, both in terms of the
kinds and degree of annotation required and the requirements for efficient
processing, accessibility, etc.; (2) analysis of general properties and
configuration of corpora, analysis of the relevant structural and logical
features of component text types, and the design of encoding mechanisms that can
represent all required elements and features while accomodating the requirements
determined in (1); and (3) specifications for text software design, coordinated
with (2), designed to avoid redundancy and maximize the modifiability,
extendability, and reusability of corpus-handling software. The methods and
materials developed in this project will provide a comprehensive framework for
the machine representation and manipulation of large corpora for corpus-based
NLP research, thus enabling both software and data to be easily shared, used,
and re-used in the future.