* 9413343
* U.S.-Philippines: First International Decade Volcano        Workshop on Taal, Luzon, Philippines, March 27-April 1, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Stephen Self, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 07/31/1996
* USD 23,450.00

9413343 Self This award provides funds to permit Dr. Stephen Self, Department of
Geology and Geophysics, University of Hawaii, to plan and conduct with Dr.
Raymundo S. Punongbayan, Mr. Ronnie C. Torres, and Dr. Eddie Listanco,
Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS), the
U.S.-Philippines First International Decade Volcano Workshop on Taal, Luzon,
Philippines. Support is provided for 10 U.S. scientists who are specialists in
relevant areas of geology in addition to the aforementioned U.S. and Philippine
coordinators. Some 24 other Philippine participants are supported from other
sources. The workshop will bring together international and local expertise in a
multidisciplinary approach to volcanological problems inherent in Taal volcano.
These problems include andesitic caldera magmatism, incremental growth of large
calderas, turbulent large-volume pyroclastic flows, phreatomagmatic eruptions
and base surges, monitoring of active Volcano Island and the potentially active
caldera, and influence of regional tectonic strain on volcanism and caldera
development. The Decade Volcano Workshop on Taal is timely and fits well into
the goals of the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction. Taal
volcano was designated as a "Decade Volcano," one of 12 to 15 worldwide, because
its attributes are regarded as the most dangerous among some 200 Philippine
volcanoes. These attributes include frequent activity, greatest number of
elements at risk, high population density in the region, excellent
accessibility, and a complicated and little understood volcanology. The PI and
the Philippine Coordinators have excellent reputations for their research in the
field of this proposal. This project is relevant to the objectives of the East
Asia and Pacific Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and developing country scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques a nd through
collaboration on problems of mutual interest and benefit. ***