* 9413903
* Acquisition of an Isotope Facility to Study Atmosphere-     Ecosystem Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* David Valentine, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1996
* USD 225,000.00

The focus of this project is to establish an isotope ratio mass spectrometer
(IRMS) in order to resolve very small differences in the isotopic compositions
of elements - primarily carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogen - in various
materials. This will facilitate fundamental insights into the major ecosystem
processes governing atmospheric composition at larger scales, and enable
research into several major environmental issues, including global climate
change and the carbon cycle, radiatively active trace gas exchange, ecosystem
management, sustainable agriculture, soil and water quality, conservation
biology, and atmospheric and terrestrial pollution. Some specific issues would
include: (1) How are the processes governing soil carbon storage and chemistry
modified by changes in climate and land use? (2) How are the known controls over
methane biogeochemistry manifested in ecosystem-level methane flux rates and
isotopic compositions? (3) What can the pedologic record tell us about past
influences of climate on soil formation? (4) How is the hydrological cycle
altered as a result of changing management, biota, and climate? (5) What is the
functional dependence of ungulate diet on geographic variation in forage
availability and quality, and how does this effect methane production during
digestion? Ultimately, the facility will provide crucial data for developing and
testing ecosystem-atmosphere models needed for the next generation of global and
regional environmental models. This facility will complement existing facilities
in an array of existing laboratories and research groups on the Colorado State
University campus and nearby. The Colleges of Agriculture and Natural Resources
at CSU already support laboratories necessary for the preparation of soil,
water, plant and air samples for mass spectrometric measurements, but these
samples now are analyzed off- campus. The Natural Resource Ecology Laboratory
maintains facilities for quantifying trace gas co ncentrations. This facility
will serve as a magnet to foster interdisciplinary collaboration among diverse
research groups. Collaborators at NCAR, the Institute of Arctic and Alpine
Research, and Carnegie Institute will provide complementary expertise and will
continue to collaborate in research using the facility.