* 9413550
* Acquisition of a Field Emission Gun Analytical Transmission Electron Microscope for Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Peter Davies, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1998
* USD 700,000.00

Funds fron the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will support the
acquisition of a Field Emission Transmission Electron Microscope (FE-TEM), an
instrument that is specifically designed for high-resolution chemical analysis.
The FE-TEM will include basic specimen stages, an x-ray flourescence
spectrometer, a GATAN imaging filter, and a charge- coupled-device (CCD) camera
and associated hardware. The FE-TEM will be employed in the study of: 1)
structure and properties of alloy and model composite interfaces; 2) the effect
of impurity segregation on the fracture mechanisms of metal/ceramic interfaces;
3) structural and compositional inhomogeneities in microwave ceramics; 4) the
effects of concentration gradients near grain boundaries on the properties of
electronic ceramics; 5) local structure and composition in catalytic materials;
6) morphological development of nanocrystalline ceramic composites from
polymeric precursors; 7) chemistry/property relations at the interphase region
in polymer/ceramic composites; 8) polymer interfaces and capillary wave
formation. A field emission transmission electron microscope with associated
peripheral hardware will be employed in the study of materials. A diverse range
of topics from composite interfaces, fracture of metal/ceramic interfaces,
microwave and electronic ceramics, catalytic materials, polymer/ceramic
composities, and capillary wave formation at polymer interfaces will be studied.