* 9413322
* RUI:  Reflection High Energy Electron Diffraction Profile   Analysis for the Growth of Wide-Gap II-VI Semiconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Shyang Huang, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1997
* USD 145,733.00

9413322 Hwang This project seeks to achieve an understanding of the relationship
between kinetic roughening and native defect formation in wide-gap II-VI
semiconductors. Kinetic roughening results from the stochastic nature of the
growth process and may lead to loss of control over surface stoichiometry.
Research towards the construction of a kinetic phase diagram that correlates the
degree of roughening and growth parameters will be conducted. Such a diagram
allows various growth conditions to be systematically explored so that optimal
growth parameters can be identified. The application of statistical physics and
surface physics to the study of defect formation is expected to provide new
insight into the issue of dopant compensation as well as the kinetic processes
on growing surfaces. %%% This project addresses the issue of dopant compensation
in wide-gap II-VI semiconductors from a surface physics point of view. The goal
of the research is to establish a relationship between kinetic roughening and
dopant incorporation for a class of materials that are being employed to develop
blue semiconductor lasers. Currently, doping control remains to be the main
challenge, and it is expected that the results of this research will have an
impact on the fabrication of these devices, and will contribute to improving the
general perform ance of advanced devices and integrated circuits used in
computing, information processing, and tele communica tions.