* 9413843
* Characterization of Dissolved Organic Matter in Seawater by Ultrafiltration and Chemical Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1994,04/30/2000
* Ronald Benner, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2000
* USD 404,383.00

9413843 BENNER Research on the sources and reactions of dissolved organic matter
(DOM) in seawater will focus primarily on the 20-30% of total dissolved organic
matter which can be gently isolated in relatively large amounts by tangential-
flow ultrafiltration. The three central objectives of research are: 1. To
identify the biological sources and transformations of the major DOM components.
2. To elucidate compositional trends among DOM constituents of different size.
3. To characterize in detail the compositions and associations of the various
organic materials comprising seawater DOM. Research to determine the biological
and diagenetic origins of DOM will emphasis rapid processes occurring in the
upper column where large differences in DOM concentrations and compositions are
observed. A better understanding of compositional trends among dissolved organic
materials of different size will help to delineate processes affecting DOM
cycling and to judge how representative ultrafiltered isolates are of bulk DOM.
More detailed characterizations of the compositions and forms of ultrafiltered
DOM will aid in distinguishing its biological sources, identifying key
transformations, and deconvoluting functional relationships among DOM
constituents. This line of research has already provided new insights on both
the reactive and refractory components of the immense seawater DOM pool and
should continue to yield information useful over a wide range of oceanographic
studies.