* 9413536
* Acquisition of a High-Resolution X-Ray Photoemission        Spectrometer System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Scott Cowley, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1996
* USD 223,000.00

A high resolution X-ray photoemission spectrometer (XPS) will be acquired with
funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program and will be employed in
the characterization of advanced materials such as ceramics, polymers, model
catalyst systems and composite materials. The XPS will have an energy resolution
of 0.50eV at a counting rate of greater than 100 counts per second and broad
range survey counting levels will be in excess of 7 million counts per second.
The facility will feature in-situ sample preparation with sample heating, gas
dosing for surface reactivity experiments, and depth profiling through inert gas
sputter removal. The spectrometer will be used for: characterization of
polymer/ceramic and polymer/ polymer interfaces; study of surface modifiers in
heterogeneous catal- ysis; understanding the processing mechanisms in
photovoltaic cell synthesis; identification of bonding configuations in ion
implantation surface modification; study of metal/ceramic interface properties;
study of radioactive waste remediation; studies of adhesion; and studies of the
corrosive behavior of ceramics. The X-ray photoemission spectrometer will be
employed for a wide range of materials studies. These include the studies of a
variety if interfaces and surfaces. The investigations will involve the chemical
reactivity and adhesion of surfaces, the surface bonding modifications resulting
from ion implantation, the catalytic properties of modified surfaces, and the
study of the synthesis of photovoltaic cells.