* 9413854
* Acquisition of Equipment for Research Concerning High Band  Width Distribution Computing
* CSE,EIA
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Sudhir Aggarwal, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 07/31/1997
* USD 122,150.00

9413854 Aggarwal The acquired equipment will serve as a testbed for research on
various aspects of distributed computing using high bandwidth interconnections.
There are three components to the proposed research: interfacing workstations to
high bandwidth networks using custom interfaces; development of systems software
to capitalize on the high-speed links; and exploration of applications that
exploit the capabilities of the high bandwidth network. The equipment to be
acquired includes high-end workstations, custom interface components for fiber-
optic based high-speed links, and video/audio peripherals for multi-media
applications. Specific projects involving the research testbed are: (1) physical
interface design to the high-speed links, design of low-level protocols for
kernel level communication primitives and the development of the necessary
operating systems services for reliable distributed computing; (2) design of
software to implement a distributed shared memory environment for parallel
computing; (3) investigation of a new paradigm for client/server computing using
a set of tightly coupled coordinating processes; (4) investigation of various
aspects of information retrieval and browsing in distributed databases; and (5)
exploration of issues in meeting real-time constraints for distributed
applications such as multi-media conferencing and rendering of scenes using
distributed ray tracing. ***