* 9413102
* Acquisition of SHRIMP S300 Ion Microprobe
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1999
* Michael McWilliams, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 07/31/1999
* USD 1,500,000.00

9413102 McWilliams This award provides partial funding for the acquisition of a
high-mass resolution, high-transmission ion microprobe that will be installed
and operated in the School of Earth Sciences at Stanford University. Stanford
University is committed to providing the remaining funds needed for the
acquisition of the instrument. The ion microprobe will be used primarily in
research projects in isotope geochemistry, cosmochemistry, geochronology, and
materials science. The facility will be open to scientists from Stanford
University, the U.S. Geological survey, and other research institutions. The new
design ion microprobe will be capable of quantitative in situ measurements of
isotopic and elemental compositions of geological materials with micron scale
spatial resolution in three dimensions and high sensitivity. *** 9406684 Johnson
This award provides partial funding for the support of a technician assigned to
the Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory in the Department of Geology and Geophysics at
the University of Wisconsin, Madison. The technician will assist in the
operation and maintenance of the laboratory's equipment that includes a
multicollector thermal ionization mass spectrometer and associated
instrumentation for sample preparation and data analysis. The laboratory is a
resource for mass spectrometric analysis needed in research and teaching
projects in the earth sciences by a large number of researchers on-campus and
off-campus. Research applications include work on Arctic Ocean sediments, mantle
geochemistry, volcanism, geochronology of carbonates in the Michigan Basin and
Wisconsin Arch provinces, and Archean and Proterozoic granites. The technician
will also participate in the technical developmental work of the laboratory,
including the development of new methods for the quantitative measurement of the
isotopes of hafnium. ***