* 9413421
* Acquisition of a High Performance Secondary Ion Mass        Spectrometer:  A Cameca IMS-6F
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Robert Davis, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 688,180.00

A Cameca IMS-6F Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer (SIMS) and associated peripheral
equipment will be acquired with funds from the Academic Research Program. This
new SIMS will replace a Cameca IMS-3F SIMS which has been used for more than a
decade, but is no longer a state-or-the-art facility that meets all the needs of
the adjacent user committee. The new SIMS model will give greatly enhanced
sensitivity, will provide much better spatial/depth resolution for depth
profiling, and will provide improved sample charging compensation. The new
equipment will make possible for the first time the analysis and detection of
carbon and oxygen negative ions. The facility will be used in research projects
involving: 1) thin film deposition and processing, 2) surface preparation
technology for microelectronic processing, 3) fabrication and measurement of
shallow junctions, 4) SIMS analytical technique and instrumentation development
involving automated sample charge neutralization control, high spatial
resolution SIMS imaging and digital control of depth profiling parameters. A
secondary ion mass spectrometer (SIMS) with state-of-the-art sensitivity, sample
charging compensation, and spatial/depth resolution for depth profiling will be
acquired to replace an older spectrometer that is no longer has state-of-the-art
capabilities. The new spectrometer will be used for thin film deposition and
processing, surface preparation technology for microelectronic processing,
fabrication of shallow junction devices and the development of new SIMS system
capabilities.