* 9413245
* Interaction of Germanium with Surfactants on the Silicon    (100) Surface
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Lucy Seiberling, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 255,000.00

9413245 Seiberling The influence of impurities (surfactants) on the
heteroepitaxial growth of germanium on the (100) surface of silicon will be
investigated. This materials system has been chosen because it represents a
model strained heteroepitaxial system, about which much is already known.
Surface impurities, such as H or Sb, have been found to dramatically alter the
morphology and structure of a growing layer. The transmission ion channeling
technique will be applied to investigate the atomic structure and composition of
monolayer germanium films growing on silicon in order to understand the
microscopic role played by the impurity atoms. % % % % An important goal in
materials science is to be able to build tailor-made materials with specific
desirable properties. A major step in fulfilling this goal is to learn how to
grow high quality crystalline layers of one material on another. Perfect growth
can be inhibited by various factors, including a tendency of the overlayer to
form islands, the creation of defects, etc. It has recently been shown that
certain impurities, often referred to as surfactants, can have a dramatic effect
on the structure and properties of a growing film. The mechanism by which
surfactants influence growth of germanium on silicon, an important technological
system, will be studied using a novel ion scattering technique. With this
technique it is possible to measure the atomic structure and the composition of
the growing film. ***