* 9413891
* Acquisition of Laboratory Equipment for Research in         Biological Anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* James Wood, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1998
* USD 232,085.00

Weiss With support from the National Science Foundation, Pennsylvania State
University will purchase a DNA synthesizer, automated DNA sequencer, gel
documentation system and biological microscope for work on molecular and
developmental genetics. The Biological Anthropological Laboratory (BAL) where
the instrumentation will be housed, plays a leading role in anthropological
genetics. However since the laboratory was established in 1986-87, sequencing
instrumentation has changed enormously and new systems are necessary to permit
the BAL to conduct effective research. New instrumentation will allow the
laboratory to address questions on a much larger scale, both in terms of the
numbers of samples processed and the amount of information obtained per sample.
Many of the BAL's projects require large sample sizes; the facility recently
received for example a priceless collection of over 12,000 South American Indian
blood samples. The BAL focusses on molecular genetic questions which are of
anthropological significance. It examines the evolution of evolutionary-
interesting phenotypes including, for example, the genetic basis of
susceptibility to diabetes and obesity in Amerindians, the evolution of genetic
susceptibility to tuberculosis and the genetics of variation in olfaction among
individuals. The laboratory also attempts to reconstruct various aspects of
evolutionary history. Currently, for example it is investigating the
colonization of the South Pacific through the analysis of patterns of molecular
genetic variation in Asian and Pacific populations. The BAL also places strong
emphasis on the training of students at all levels and the instrumentation
provided will not only help to maintain the high research standards of the
research group, but also provide students with the training and facilities
necessary to ensure productive graduate and post-graduate careers.