* 9413885
* International Symposium on High Performance Composites:     Commonalty of Phenomena; Rosemont, IL; October 2-6, 1994
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1995
* Krishan Chawla, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 01/31/1995
* USD 5,000.00

This grant supports an international symposium on Commonalty of Phenomena in
High Performance Composites at Rosemont, Illinois, October 2-6, 1994. The
objective of this symposium is to examine the state of our understanding in
processing, microstructure, and properties of high performance composites.
Composite materials are very diverse: different matrix materials different
reinforcements, different forms of reinforcements (fibers, whiskers, particles),
interfacial coatings, different arrangements and distribution of reinforcements
in a given matrix, etc. Notwithstanding such diversity, there is a myriad of
concepts, processes, methodologies of evaluation and characterization that cut
across different types of composites. Researchers working in this areas with
different composites (polymeric, metallic, intermetallic and ceramic matrix
composites will attend. Commonalty of phenomena in different types of
composites, such as the role of the matrix microstructure, interface, toughening
mechanisms, and fracture behavior are discussed. The technical papers will be
peer-reviewed and published. Composite materials have potential applications as
structural components in a wide variety of industrial components. Their use has
been limited by high cost and processing difficulties. This conference provides
timely coverage of the latest research concerning these materials.