* 9413530
* Acquisition of an EPR Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Vernon Parker, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 08/31/1996
* USD 167,000.00

The Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Utah State University requests
matching funds from NSF to purchase an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR)
Spectrometer. EPR is a fundamental spectroscopic technique with applications
that span both chemistry and biochemistry. The acquisition of an EPR
spectrometer by Utah State University would fill a void in our current
instrumentation facilities. A new EPR spectrometer would become the centerpiece
for several Chemistry and Biochemistry research programs and courses. The
current courses offered by the university that would utilize an EPR spectrometer
in their curricula are: Physical Chemistry, Advanced Synthesis, and Instrumental
Analysis laboratories as well as Physical Biochemistry and Magnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy. Each of these courses would instruct students in the fundamental
principles of EPR spectroscopy as well as the applications relevant to the
course outline, with additional "hands-on" operation of the instrument.
Instrument operation would include: sample preparation, data collection, and
data processing. The type of data collected (i.e. organic free radicals or
transition metal complexes) would depend on the course objectives and level. EPR
spectroscopy would also form a central element in research projects across the
University and the region. Research projects of faculty members in Molecular
Biology and Biology at Utah State University would be minor users of a new EPR
spectrometer. In addition, a faculty member in the Biochemistry Department at
Brigham Young University and a faculty member in the Biochemistry Department at
Oregon State University would be periodic users. Seven major users and three
minor users of an EPR spectrometer have been identified in the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Utah State University. In each of these research
projects, graduate students and postdoctoral research associates will be trained
to record and process their data. The specific re search projects described
within the proposal are listed below: a. Elucidating the Mechanism of Coupling
MgATP Hydrolysis to Electron Transfer in the Metalloenzyme Nitrogenase. b.
Characterization of the Nickel-Iron Sulfur Center of Carbon Monoxide
Dehydrogenase from Rhodospirillum rubrum. c. EPR Investigations into the
Function of the Dinuclear Hydrolytic Aminopeptidase from Aeromonas proteolytica.
d. Mechanisms of the Light-Induced Inhibition of Photosynthesis and its Relation
to Photoassembly of the Mn- Containing Water-Oxidizing Complex. e. Elucidation
of the Coordination Symmetry and Location of the Binding Sites for Iron on
Erionite. f. Free Radical Mediated Oxidative and Reductive Reactions Catalyzed
by Fungal Peroxidases. g. Hydrogen Atom Transfer Reactions of Radical Cations.