* 9413352
* U.S.-Mexico Research: Pretreatment of Industrial Wastewater Streams for the Removal of Suspended Fine Particles and     Dispersed Oil Droplets by Air-Sparged Hydrocyclone Flotation
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1994,11/30/1996
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1996
* USD 17,900.00

9413352 Miller This U.S.-Mexico award will support a collaborative research
project between Dr. Jan Miller, University of Utah, and Professor Jose Parga,
Instituto Tecnologico de Saltillo, Mexico. The project's main objective is to
demonstrate the technical performance of the air-sparged hydrocyclone (ASH)
flotation technology for the recovery and separation of suspended fine particles
and dispersed oil droplets from industrial waste water streams along the
U.S.-Mexico border region. The research will involve surveying and sampling
various industrial waste water streams that contribute to the contamination of
the border region, characterization of the samples, comparative flotation tests,
and pilot station studies for ASH optimization. The discharge of untreated
industrial waste water into transboundary waters has contributed to ecological
and esthetic degradation, economic losses, and threats to human health along the
U.S.-Mexico border for many years. Untreated industrial waste water can
seriously degrade the ability of conventional treatment facilities to treat
sewage effectively. The ASH flotation technology, developed by the University of
Utah during the past decade, combines the advantages from both conventional
hydrocyclone and froth flotation technologies into a single piece of equipment.
If successful, the project will provide the opportunity to significantly reduce
pollution from industrial waste water streams in the U.S.-Mexico border area,
and provide, therefore, significant environmental and health benefits to both
countries. ***