* 9413896
* Enhancing and Linking Spatial Analysis and Modeling         Facilities for Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Dietmar Rose, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 09/30/1996
* USD 315,000.00

ABSTRACT Enhancing and Linking Spatial Analysis and Modeling Facilities for
Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Research Over the past decade there
has been growing recognition of the importance of quantitatively understanding
natural resources, ecosystems, and environment at landscape to regional,
continental, and global levels. Geographic information systems (GIS), with their
capabilities for spatial analysis and modeling of diverse datasets, provide a
means of understanding and dealing with issues such as biodiversity, habitat
fragmentation, effects of climate change, soil erosion, water quality, and
impacts of urbanization, to name only a few of many resource and environmental
issues that have a spatial dimension. GIS provides a means to organize and
analyze the myriad of spatial data associated with these problems. GIS has
become an important tool for scientific research, as well as resource
management, and it has become an essential research tool for many faculty and
graduate students on the St. Paul Campus of the University of Minnesota.
Presently, there is GIS activity and varying degrees of capability in six
departments in the Colleges of Agriculture, Biological Sciences, and Natural
Resources. A growing number of faculty and graduate students are making
increased use of our current facilities for GIS and image processing. The
present facilities, which reside in individual and departmental laboratories,
range from beginning level to advanced; but all need access to more and better
facilities than are now available or affordable from individual departments and
research grants. The technologies of GIS and related areas are advancing very
rapidly. Equipment that was state-of-the-art several years ago is rapidly
becoming obsolete. At the same time the scale of the problems being addressed,
and therefore the volume of needed data, is rapidly growing and overwhelming the
capacity of our present computer systems. This proposal is to develop and link
state-of-the-art facilities for spatial analysis and modeling of natural
resources and environment in six departments on the St. Paul campus. A
distributed system linked by network among the various departments is
recommended. We would maintain facilities within our individual departments, but
centrally manage the operating system, major software and databases, and
selected peripherals. Concurrently we would add expanded and enhanced hardware-
software to our campus capability. The equipment requested in this grant
proposal would improve the productivity of our faculty and graduate students by:
(a) expanding the range and depth of analysis and modeling capabilities
available for research applications, (b) increasing access to GIs capability for
faculty and student researchers, as well as advanced graduate-level courses
which incorporate spatial analysis approaches, by providing additional
workstation terminals, (c) enabling us to work on landscape to regional scale
issues and problems that require the analysis of large volumes of soil, terrain,
and vegetation data, (d) consolidating GIS hardware and software costs and
management tasks that are currently being replicated by several research groups
on the St. Paul campus will enable us to devote more resources to analysis, (e)
alleviating current data storage and access problems by providing additional
magnetic disk and read/write optical devices, and (f) providing capability for
high quality output that is currently not available. Additionally, we believe
this project will bring together researchers from several disciplines to use
spatial analysis techniques and that it will foster interdisciplinary approaches
to research problems by standardizing certain aspects of our GIS operations and
facilitating sharing of data and analytical techniques. Preparation of this
proposal has already served to bring together the various researchers from
several discip lines with both existing and potential capability to use GIS
technology in their research 4