* 9413977
* Acquisition of Scanning Electron Microscope for Introductory/Advanced Course Work and Faculty/Undergraduate Research:   Biology, Geological Sciences, Anthropology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Harold Hoops, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 08/31/1996
* USD 59,080.00

Acquisition of scanning electron microscope for introductory/advanced course
work and faculty/undergraduate research: Biology, Geological Sciences,
Anthropology. Instrumentation: The scanning electron microscope (SEM) housed in
the Department of Biology has been in service for fifteen years. Recent
breakdown (cracked scanning/objective coils) and unavailability of replacement
parts or possibility of repair has made the microscope inoperable. The major
users in Biology and Geological Sciences propose to replace the inoperable
instrument and incorporate an Energy Dispersive X-Ray (EDX) analysis system in a
new instrument. Research and Training Geneseo is a primarily undergraduate
institution with a strong commitment to faculty and student research. The
proposed SEM would be utilized in several courses, as a primary instrument in
directed studies, undergraduate theses, and as a research instrument for faculty
and undergraduate research projects. Courses that utilize the SEM included:
General Biology Laboratory (Biol 118; laboratory demonstration), Microscope
Techniques (Biol 378), Biological Techniques: Electron Microscopy (Biol 390),
and Invertebrate Paleontology (GSci 361). In these courses 25-75 students are
introduced annually and or trained in operation of the instrument. Directed
studies (Biol 382, 399, Gsci 399, Anth 399) and other student research projects
will comprise a significant portion of student use and training. In these
investigations students under an appropriate level of supervision use the SEM to
pursue individual or project research goals. (In the last year since the SEM
breakdown twelve students in geology course or projects have had reason to use
an SEM for microfossil and sedimentary particle or fabric studies.) Faculty
research at Geneseo encompasses several fields that utilize electron microscopy;
procurement of a new instrument is required for attainment of external funds and
continued research. Faculty teaching and rese arch include: Paleogene primate
evolution (Anemone), parasitology (Bandoni), Zebra mussel larva morphology
(Bosch), flagellar apparatus of green algae (Hoops), micropaleontology and black
shale studies (Over), plant-bacteria relations (Simon), and palynology (Spear).
An EDX system will be applied in research involving magnetic sensing in birds
(Beason), paleomagnetic fabric in sediments (Brennan), bentonite and burrow
lining characterization (Over), and bacterial ecosystems (Simon). In addition
the research potential of the SEM-EDX will be increased to incorporate a broader
range of studies. Funding for a new SEM will lead to continued study of
organisms and environments where high resolution, high contrast microscopy is
essential. The instrument will be an integral part of student and faculty
research and serve as a tool for encouraging under-represented groups to pursue
careers in science and engineering. Six of the major users currently have
research funding, four projects are directly related to studies that utilize the
SEM; all major users have proposals under review or in preparation that will
utilize the SEM an/or EDX system.