* 9413273
* Investigation of Long-Period Ground Motion in the NorthridgeEarthquake of January 17, 1994.
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1994,02/28/1995
* Wilfred Iwan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 02/28/1995
* USD 22,689.00

9413273 Iwan The Northridge earthquake of January 17, 1994 yielded what may
prove to be the most valuable set of strong motion data ever obtained from an
earthquake. These data include the largest horizontal ground motion ever
recorded. The damage associated with these large ground motions is well
documented. In some of the near-field accelerograms, particularly the Sylmar
station, there is evidence of a significant long period displacement pulse in
the ground motion. The existence of such motion has recently been the subject of
great concern as it relates to the design of base isolated and high-rise
structures. These structures are particularly susceptible to large input
displacements. There is a recognized need to better understand the nature of
this long period motion and, ultimately, to be able to model and predict is
occurrence. Present routine techniques for the processing of strong motion data
tend to remove or distort the long-period information from recorded
accelerograms. However, under a recent NSF exploratory grant, techniques have
been developed to recover much of the long-period information in accelerograms.
This is accomplished by nontraditional baseline correction and signal processing
that is based on an improved understanding of the physics of the ground motion
and the nature of the recording instruments. The techniques have been verified
for ground motions from the Landers earthquake. The goal of this research
program is to apply the recently developed data processing techniques to a suite
of earthquake records from the Northridge earthquake. The ultimate goal is to
provide a basis for guidelines that may be used to characterize the long-period
content of earthquake motion for structural design. This exploratory
investigation addresses the following questions: 1. What is the nature of the
long period (displacement) content of ground motion from this type of thrust
earthquake? 2. How does this vary with distance from th e epicenter and
orientation with respect to the fault plain. 3. How is the long-period content
(peak displacement) related to the short-period content (peak acceleration)? 4.
What generalizations can be made to future events of this, or another, type? 5.
Is there a correlation between the observed long-period ground motion and
structural damage? The research is based on digital data obtained from the
California Division of Mines and Geology and the U.S. Geological Survey. ***