* 9414105
* U.S.-E.C. Cooperative Research:  Collaborative Research on  Analysis and Implementation of Concurrent Constraint        Programming
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Saumya Debray, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 05/31/1998
* USD 45,000.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-E.C. cooperative research in concurrent
programming, logic programming, compilation, and implementation. It involves
cooperation between Saumya Debray of the University of Arizona on the U.S. side,
and on the European side, Manuel Hermenegildo of the Polytechnic University of
Madrid, Spain; Moreno Falaschi of the University of Padua, Italy; and Giorgio
Levi of the University of Pisa, Italy. They propose collaboration on three main
topics: task granularity analysis for parallel and distributed implementations
of logic programs, development of portable parallel implementations of such
languages, and compile-time analysis of concurrent constraint languages. The
U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration experience and capability in the
target system, &amp;-PROLOG, the underlying parallel implementation. The Spanish
investigator contributes a prototype implementation, using the Caslog complexity
analysis system, for task granularity analysis. The Spanish side has also been
investigating compile-time analysis techniques for Prolog programs with delay
primitives. The Italian researchers offer extensive experience with the topics
of semantics and of static analyses of concurrent logic and constraint
programming languages to the U.S. researcher's use of the &amp;-Prolog system as
an implementation and compiler for parallel logic programming languages. The
results of the research will contribute to building efficient parallel
implementations of high-level, declarative programming languages, in particular,
logic and constraint programming languages.