* 9414040
* Gordon Research Conference on Temperature Stress in Plant,  Oxnard, California, January 29 - February 3, 1995
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Michael Thomashow, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 08/31/1995
* USD 7,000.00

9414040 Thomashow This award provides partial financial support for the 1995
Gordon Research Conference on Temperature Stress in Plants. The meeting will be
held at the Casa Sirena Marina Hotel, Oxnard, California, January 29 - February
3, 1995. Funds will be used to defray the expenses of junior scientists
(graduate students and postdoctoral researchers), and invited speakers. The 1995
Gordon Research Conference on Temperature Stress in Plants will be the sixth
meeting of the conference; it was first held in 1984, and since 1989, has met on
a biennial basis. The overall goal of the conference is to foster the exchange
of ideas and research findings among a diverse group of scientists studying
plant temperature stress from a wide variety of perspectives. Scientists who
attend this meeting include agronomists, horticulturists, plant breeders,
ecologists, plant physiologists, biochemists, biophysicists and molecular
biologists who are affiliated with universities, private and governmental
research laboratories, and commercial companies from both North America and
overseas. As in the past, the 1995 Gordon Conference will include sessions
covering the latest developments in fundamental aspects of plant temperature
stress (e.g., temperature stress proteins, temperature signal transduction,
whole plant responses to temperature stress, breeding for increased temperature
stress tolerance). In addition, the 1995 conference will have two novel
features. One will be the development of a particular theme over the course of
the meeting: the role of membranes in temperature stress tolerance. The
objective is to explore the current state of knowledge of the regulation and
function of plant phospholipids and potential strategies to modify phospholipid
composition to improve the temperature stress tolerance of plants. The other
novel aspect will be the inclusion of a "cross-over" session examining the
similarities and differences in mechanisms of temperature and drought tolerance.
This session will involve presentations by investigators working on tolerance to
drought and desiccation and provide a bridge to plant scientists working in
related areas of environmental stress, but outside of temperature per se. ***