* 9414975
* Renovation of Research Facilities in the Biology and Biotechnology Department at Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Pamela Weathers, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1997
* USD 1,009,463.00

Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) is the recipient of ARI funds for the
renovation of the Salisbury Laboratories. Home to the Department of Biology and
Biotechnology, the labs are over 100 years old and were last renovated in 1974.
Research spaces throughout the building share common deficiencies that consist
of: warped, rusted and broken benches and cabinetry, poor heating and cooling
utilities, the absence or limited electric, gas, and plumbing services, and
deteriorated flooring. In spite of the deplorable conditions, the department has
grown significantly in undergraduate and graduate majors who are actively
involved in the research enterprise. It is mandatory that seniors complete a
Major Qualifying Project, a research or design project at a level appropriate
for graduate study preparation. In conjunction to this institutionally driven
research imperative, the department encourages outstanding undergraduates to
continue their work in a combined bachelor and master's degree program. ARI
funds will be used to support renovations including: reconfiguration of
inefficient space, replacement of HVAC, electrical, plumbing and gas systems,
installation of new casework and benches, provision for deionized water, and the
replacement of a greenhouse. The renovations will primarily impact research in
the areas of molecular and neurobiology of invertebrates, and the biochemistry
and kinetics of heavy metal uptake by fungi. Other research that will be
impacted includes: the physiology and biochemistry of secondary metabolites of
cultured plants, the development and modeling of the growth of transformed root
systems in bioreactors, the physiology of immobilized bacteria, and the
molecular biology of memory and invertebrate genetics. This project will not
only enhance the faculty research programs, but will provide the state-of-the-
art facilities needed in order to prepare students for research careers.