* 9414160
* Physics of Normal Metal-Superconductor Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1995,02/29/2000
* Gang Xiao, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 260,000.00

9414160 Xiao The program will investigate electronic transport in mesoscopic
structures composed of a normal metal (N) and a supercpnductor (S), two states
with sharply contrasted electronic states. The objective is to develop
scientific understanding of the new phase- coherent electronic transport
expected to occur in such N-S structures, and to test, for the first time,
recently developed theories which explain quantum transport in such structures.
The PI will carry innovative design, fabrication, and transport measurements of
three N-S structures: microjunctions, composite wires, and multiply connected
structures. Important issues such as interplay between the two types of phase
coherence in N and S, and its effects on the quantum transport will be invested.
The research will either lead to novel quantum transport mechanism or will
modify that in mono-component structures. % % % Mesoscopic structures are
obtained when the size of metallic samples is reduced to submicron range. In
such systems, the particle wave duality of the electrons plays an important role
in the transport of electrical current, and a new less understood electronic
mechanism emerges. This research will investigate the electronic transport in
mesoscopic structures composed of a normal metal and a superconductor, which are
two states with sharply contrasted electronic structures. The PI will
investigate the new quantum electronic transport and provide test for new
theories. The research includes innovative design and fabrication of
microstructures, composites wire, and multiply connected normal- superconductor
structures, and transport measurements. Research in this area will benefit the
continuing process of device miniaturization and integration. ***