* 9414240
* New Methods in Free Radical Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Eric Enholm, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 11/30/1997
* USD 219,200.00

The focus of this research is the development of new synthetic methodology
based on radical anion intermediates, specifically samarium or tin associated
ketyls which have a distinct free radical component as well as an accompanying
anionic behavior. The ketylmediated opening of oxygen and nitrogen heterocycles
and carbocyclic rings with samarium iodide and tin hydride will be studied. In
each case, one or two new bonds will be formed at the expense of either a
carbon-oxygen, carbon-nitrogen, or carbon-carbon bond. Mechanistic studies will
determine the nature of the tethered atom in terms of its ionic or free radical
nature as well as the influence of ring size on the fragmentation process.
Subsequent reactions of intermediates will allow tandem processes to occur such
as "moving the ring down the chain." Applications of this methodology will be
used on optically active carbohydrate templates and to synthesize portions of
two natural products, capsimycin and X-206. With this award, the Synthetic
Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr. Eric J. Enholm of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Florida. Professor Enholm will
focus his work on the development of new synthetic methodology. The emphasis of
the research will be on the use of radical anion intermediates to initiate
fragmentation reactions of cyclic systems, the products of which in turn can
undergo further reactions. In this way, one or two new bonds will be formed at
the expense of either a carbon-oxygen, carbon-nitrogen or carbon- carbon bond.