* 9414760
* Large Scale Magnetotail Dynamics and Auroral Precipitation
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Maha Ashour-Abdalla, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 06/30/1998
* USD 215,598.00

This proposal outlines a study of the formation of auroral arcs caused by the
large scale dynamics of ions and electrons in the magnetotail. The first step is
to construct ion distribution functions moments (density, temperature, pressure,
etc.) in a three-dimensional large scale magnetospheric model. This will be done
using the technique of large scale kinetics, whereby thousands of ion
trajectories are launched from a variety of sources into a magnetic and electric
field model of the magnetosphere. The 3D auroral precipitation profile (with
local time dependence) will be determined and compared with observations. The
second step will be to perform a similar large scale kinetic study using
electrons, after which the ion and electron results will be compared and in
regions where there are charge imbalances, parallel electric fields will be
imposed. The precipitated electron flux will then be calculated and theoretical
auroral images will be produced. The third step is to introduce time dependence
into the large scale kinetic model. This will be done by using different field
model "snapshots" which represent different states (i.e., growth phase,
recovery, etc.) of the magnetosphere and calculating the ion and electron
precipitation profiles. Once a general understanding using these snapshots has
been achieved, an attempt will be made to model the growth phase by temporally
evolving the quiet time field model to a more disturbed time. The last step is
to bring all of these results together to delineate the formation of auroral
arcs. The physical mechanisms in the magnetotail that result in the large
longitudinal extent of auroral arcs will be identified and the results will be
compared to observations.