* 9414131
* A Comprehensive Approach to Study Static and Dynamic Aspectsof Voltage Stability
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Venkataramana Ajjarapu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 157,172.00

9414131 Ajjarapu The objective of this project is to develop a unified frame
work, which can be used to study voltage stability in the structure preserving
power system model. This project will develop a systematic sensitivity analysis
that identifies the areas, components and the parameters which are responsible
for possible voltage collapse. The salient features of this project are: o
Includes all the key dynamic devices are recommended by the recent CIGRE task
force, o Continuation power flow with small signal dynamic formulation
systematically traces the entire PV curve with dynamic stability information, o
Realistic load increase and generation sharing scheme with relevant limits (in
particular, it replaces the constant generator field and armature current
limits), o Derivation of parametric sensitivity of algebraic variables in terms
of parametric sensitivity of state variables. This basically gives the
contributions of any parameter to a particular critical point, o Derivation of
dynamic index that indirectly identifies the approaching critical point, o
Classification of angle or voltage related problems, o Application of recent
results of differential-geometric methods to reduce DAE's into ODE's to obtain
efficient time domain simulations, o Practical significance of Node-Focus and
1:1 resonance. ***