* 9414840
* US-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Correlated           Electron Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Laszlo Mihaly, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 09/30/1998
* USD 15,206.00

9414840 Mihaly This award supports Professor Laszlo Mihaly and a graduate
student of the State University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook, joined by Dr.
Gwyn Williams of Brookhaven National Laboratory, to collaborate in solid state
physics with Professor Laszlo Forro of the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de
Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland. They will explore electron states in selected
superconducting materials by measuring the optical conductivity from the far
infrared to the visible range. The participants bring to the collaboration a
unique combination of facilities and expertise for the study of the infrared
transmission properties of thin crystalline films. In particular, Dr. Forro at
EPFL has developed a special sample preparation method for extremely thin single
crystals which permits optical analyses of a variety of anisotropic materials.
He will investigate the magnetic and electronic transport properties of the
samples. Most of the optical spectroscopy work will be carried out at Stony
Brook, while low frequency infrared measurements will be made at the National
Synchrotron Light source at Brookhaven National Laboratory. Superconductivity,
spin density waves and charge density waves are all manifestations of electron
correlations. While the interaction between the electrons and the nature of the
electronic ground state are profoundly different for these three phenomena,
there are also important similarities among them. This U.S.-Swiss collaborative
research will experimentally analyze three model materials each of which
exhibits one of these phenomena, in order to improve understanding of the
electron correlations which cause these interesting and potentially useful
phenomena. The results should be of particular interest to condensed matter
physicists working in the area of high temperature superconductivity. ***