* 9414962
* Publication of Antarctic Research Series
* O/D,OPP
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* A. F. Spilhaus, Jr., American Geophysical Union
* Continuing Grant
* Guy  G. Guthridge
* 08/31/1998
* USD 198,774.00

The Antarctic Research Series, begun by AGU in 1963 with the aid of a grant from
the National Science Foundation, publishes the results of all aspects of
Antarctic research. Volumes have provided extensive and authoritative reports of
research results in marine and terrestrial biology, marine geology and
geophysics, solid Earth geophysics, geochemistry, oceanic and atmospheric
studies, glaciology, and geology and paleontology. These volumes are designed to
serve working scientists, students, and laymen interested in biological or
physical research endeavors in Antarctica and on the occasion, the lay public
interest in the Antarctic environment. The primary purpose is to provide an
effective and authoritative outlet for research conducted in Antarctica. Much of
the research is conducted under the U.S. Antarctic Program. Thematic volumes are
devoted to a single topic or occasionally a particular geographic area. In
soliciting, reviewing, and selecting papers for publication, particular
attention is paid to ensuring the quality of the series. To date, over 15,000
pages have been published in 62 volumes and a special collection of papers in
Reviews of Geophysics. An additional ~ 1000 pages are in press. The series is
recognized the scientific and library communities, who look to it to provide
continuing access to south polar results. The AGU Board of Associates Editors
for the Antarctic Research Series has expanded the modes of publication and
continues to monitor the needs of the research community. The Board also
recognizes NSF's growing desire to disseminate results from Antarctic research
to the educated public and has agreed to investigate the possibility of
publishing a volume that describes the Antarctic environment, integrates the
various dynamic systems, and assesses interactions and influences on the global
environment.