* 9414271
* Structure and Reactivity of Organic Radical Cations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Heinz Roth, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1997
* USD 235,000.00

9414271 Roth Rutgers University New knowledge about the structures and reactions
of organic radical cations will be provided as well as new insights into light-
induced electron transfer reactions. A variety of radical cations will be
generated in a range of media, including fluid solutions, frozen glasses, and
solid supports (e.g., zeolites) by methods that include photo-induced electron
transfer, chemical oxidation, and radiolysis. Their structures will be
characterized by spectroscopic methods which include optical spectroscopy, ESR,
and CIDNP. The experiments will supplemented by ab initio molecular orbital
calculations. This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the
continuing work of Professor Heinz D. Roth at Rutgers University. Radical
cations that will be studied by Professor Roth are reactive molecules that carry
one unit of positive charge and one electron that is not paired with another
electron. Radical cations may under go reaction either at the unpaired electron
site or at the site of positive charge. These reactions as well as others will
be addressed in this research. In addition, the structures of radical cations
will be determined by modern spectroscopic techniques in various environments.
Theoretical calculations will supplement the experiments.