* 9414537
* Residual Stress in Thermal Spray Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Linda Schadler, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 12/31/1997
* USD 140,153.00

9414537 Schadler Thermal spray coatings, an important "enabling" technology, are
widely used to enhance the performance of materials in a diverse range of
applications, including space vehicles, gas turbines, chemical reactors, mills
and rolls, bridges and medical prostheses. Metal, cermet, and ceramic coatings
provide protection against wear, corrosion and thermal degradation. A major
limitation in thermal spray processing is the residual stresses which develop in
coatings during processing due to rapid solidification and coefficient of
thermal expansion mismatches. Residual stresses generally increase as a function
of coating thickness. When the magnitude of these stresses exceeds the adhesive
or cohesive strength of the coatings, the latter fails, either by debonding from
the substrate, spalling or cracking. There is, however, an incomplete
understanding of how to control and minimize these residual stresses. In order
to deposit thicker coatings and improve their corrosion and wear resistance,
therefore, a fundamental understanding of the effect of key processing
parameters and constituent phases on the residual stresses must be obtained. The
project has three goals, all of which will result in increased knowledge and
understanding of the processing science in thermal spray technology: 1) To
calibrate a nondestructive, but relatively simple, "Almen" bend test to known
absolute values of stress using x-ray stress analysis and x-ray tensile testing
techniques. 2) To determile the effect of key process parameters (such as
particle velocity) on residual stresses in coatings. 3) To understand the role
of material system and reinforcing phases, including their composition and
volume fraction, on residual stresses. Both High Velocity Oxy-Fuel (HVOF)
combustion spray and plasma spray coatings will be analyzed; analysis methods
will include x-ray stress analysis for residual stress measurements; optical
microscopy, microhardness and x-ra y diffraction for coating characterization;
and sliding wear testing of the final coatings to attempt to relate residual
stress to coating performance. The work promises to develop a non-destructive
means for directly measuring residual stresses in thermal spray coatings which
will be an effective tool for evaluating coating quality and performance. The
work will also expand the thermal spray processing science base by providing a
better understanding of the roles which processing parameters and second phase
particles play in generating and/or retaining residual stresses in coatings.
Optimizing these conditions will eventually allow thicker coatings, with
improved properties, to be deposited, thus overcoming a major barrier to
expansion of thermal spray coatings to many more potential applications.