* 9414026
* Acquisition of High Performance Computing for Undergraduate Chemical Research and Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Laura MacGinitie, Pacific Lutheran University
* Continuing Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 102,122.00

The funding of this proposal will significantly enhance ongoing research,
undergraduate research training, and will provide an Internet service to the
national undergraduate chemical research community by providing high performance
computing and information infrastructure equipment. The requested equipment will
substantially upgrade our ability to analyze NMR data and add a completely new
computational and modeling ability for direct use in our research projects and
research training activities. Use of this equipment for current research at PLU
will focus on the following projects. Biotechnology: Hypothetical enzyme
inhibitors will be modeled and evaluated for their potential effectiveness
before synthetic work is undertaken. New inhibitors and mechanistic probes will
be designed. Enzyme active sites and other aspects of tertiary structure will be
modeled using the requested software. Polymers: Model phase diagrams for polymer
blends will be generated for use in studies of phase separation kinetics and
local segmental dynamics. Potential blends will be screened to focus on the
systems with the greatest potential. Polymer characterization by NMR and
modeling of pertinent thermodynamic, solution, and conformational data will be
needed in the phase diagram calculations. Bioengineering: Studies on the
generation of electrokinetic fields in bone will be enhanced by extension of the
current studies to three dimensions. Prediction of field effects in whole bone
will thus become possible. In terms of research training, we will target two
communities: local and national. First, we will utilize this equipment in our
existing undergraduate research training courses. Second, an Internet accessible
resource will be established for undergraduate students doing chemical research
both in our program and around the country. In this on-line "community,"
students can exchange research ideas, find useful information, and take part in
Internet based undergraduate research poster sessions. The console for our QE-
PLUS 300 MHz FT-NMR will be upgraded allowing access to stored data through an
ethernet connection. For the molecular modeling and NMR data analysis, a Silicon
Graphics and an IBM RS6000 workstation will be acquired. The Silicon Graphics
workstation will be primarily for graphical modeling software, and the RS6000
will be used for the computationally intense programs as well as a host for the
Internet service. Biosym's Modeling packages, Spartan Modeling software, and NMR
software (Felix) will be the core analysis tools for the research components.
List/mail and gopher servers will be used for the Internet service for
undergraduate chemical research.