* 9414002
* Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry    System (LC-MS) at Lehman College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1997
* Barbara Meurer-Grimes, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1997
* USD 167,158.00

This ARI (Academic Research Infrastructure) Application requests a high
pressure liquid chromatography-mass spectrometer (HPLC-MS) system for the
Chemistry and Biology departments at Lehman College. This system will facilitate
the research of three faculty members, as well as the research of a new faculty
member in the Biology Department. Lehman College qualifies as a Minority
Institution. HPLC-MS is a new and powerful technique for the analysis of natural
products. In one step, it allows researchers to detect, separate, and perform a
preliminary structural characterization of substances in a mixture. Since the
mixtures under study can have hundreds of components, it allows easy analysis of
hundreds of compounds in one experiment. The high pressure liquid chromatography
(HPLC) component of the system is the most powerful method known to separate
small and large organic molecules. Natural materials have thousands of such
molecules in each cell. In each HPLC run, hundreds of peaks can be seen.
However, these peaks cannot easily be identified in a simple HPLC apparatus.
Compound identification in a simple HPLC apparatus depends typically on the
availability of a reference compound from other sources and demonstrating that
the reference compound has the same mobility and UV spectrum in several solvent
systems as does the HPLC peak in question. Most HPLC peaks seen in natural
mixtures remain unidentified since it is not easy to find, by intuition and
chance, the appropriate reference compounds. The Mass Spectrometer (MS)
component of the instrument takes each effluent peak from the HPLC, fragments it
into ions, and determines the mass of each resulting ion. A tentative structural
identification for each HPLC effluent compound can usually be determined from
the masses and fragmentation patterns of each HPLC peak. With a tentative
identification in hand, determination of a positive identification by use of
reference compounds or by computer searching o f MS fragmentation pattern
libraries is much simpler.