* 9414388
* Dissertation Research:  The Effects of Diet and Activity    on ORANG Fecundity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Peter Ellison, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/1998
* USD 11,979.00

The reproduction of any species can be best understood by placing it within its
ecological context. This research project is designed to test the hypothesis
that reproduction, specifically female ovarian function, is effected by
environmental conditions. The study will investigate whether food intake and
activity levels affect ovarian hormonal levels (and hence the biological
capacity to bear offspring). Orangutans are and ideal species to examine the
effects of energy expenditure on fecundity for a variety of reasons. 1) Orangs
have the longest average inter birth interval of any primate - 8 years, with a
great deal of variability surrounding it; 2) this implies a long period after
lactation, called the waiting time to conception, in which females are not yet
fecund for a variety of reasons including local ecological conditions and
maternal condition; 3) the slow movement of orangutans facilitates collection of
detailed data on nutritional intake and energetic expenditure; 4) they inhabit
an area of large fluctuations in fruit availability, so that if ovarian function
responds to fluctuating fruiting patterns, this is a habitat where such a
relationship is likely to be expressed. The research in West Kalimantan,
Indonesia will focus on females who have finished lactating for one offspring
and have not yet conceived again. The data will consist of relative hormonal
indices reflecting ovarian function during each cycle that will be compared to
data gathered simultaneously on estimates of nutritional intake, energetic
expenditure, energy balance and food availability, testing the responsiveness of
ovarian function to these variables. To accomplish this, techniques of measuring
urinary hormones will be used to evaluate ovarian function. Additionally,
monitoring cyclical fluctuations in hormonal patterns will make it possible to
address whether aspects of orangutan socio-sexual behavior, such as the
surprisingly regular occurrence of forced copulations, are influenced by
ovulatory status. Knowing when ovulation occurs will provide a powerful tool to
investigate the role of female choice and its impact on sexual selection in
orangs.