* 9414410
* Modification, Functionalization, and Characterization of    Carbon-Fiber Electrodes by Scanning Electrochemical         Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1994,05/31/1998
* David Wipf, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 05/31/1998
* USD 330,000.00

This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
focusses on the application of scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) and
optical imaging to characterizing the heterogeneity of carbon fiber surfaces and
the SECM-controlled modification of these surfaces to produce regions which have
been functionalized. These microfabricated surfaces will then be used to make
unusual redox enzyme-based sensors which will be broadly evaluated. Professor
David Wipf and his students at Mississippi State University, working in
collaboration with Professor Werner Kuhr and his students at the University of
California at Riverside, will pursue these goals during the tenure of this
thirty-four month continuing grant. Chemical modification of the surface of
electrodes can enable unique applications of these devices as molecularly
selective sensors of target analytes. Carbon electrodes, particularly carbon
fiber microelectrodes, offer a rich synthetic platform on which to build a wide
variety of molecularly specific electrochemical sensors. This research is aimed
at understanding the heterogeneity of surfaces of carbon fibers to be used in
these applications and the development of protocols for the spatially resolved
attachment of redox enzymes to these surfaces. This research should lead to the
development of new analytical probes of broad biotechnological importance.