* 9414606
* Continuous Czochralski Growth of Silicon Single Crystals
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Vishwanath Prasad, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 01/31/1999
* USD 242,572.00

9414606 Prasad High yield, high performance microelectronic devices require
large diameter silicon (Si) wafers with a high degree of crystallographic
perfection, uniform and low axial and radial resistivity gradients, low oxygen
impurity and highly uniform electrical and mechanical properties. Many of the
inhomogenities in crystals grown by the Czochralski (CZ) method (which is used
to manufacture almost all Si crystals for microelectronics applications) can be
attributed to the non-steady nature of the growth kinetics due primarily to the
continuous change in melt height from start to finish. As the CZ process is
scaled up to grow large diameter crystals, the forces which produce flow
instabilities and oscillations become much stronger. To overcome many of the
shortcomings of the conventional CZ process, a polysilicon pellets-feed
continuous Czochralski (CCZ) growth process will be investigated. By reducing
the melt height and keeping it fixed, this novel process can suppress many kinds
of unsteady kinetics and inhomogenities. A comprehensive program of modeling,
simulation, design and experiments will be performed to develop a commercially
viable CCZ process. To simulate three- dimensional (3D) transport processes in
an irregular domain with free and/or moving boundaries and interfaces, a high
resolution computer model based on multizone adaptive grid generation and
curvilinear finite volume discretization will be developed. It will then be
possible to examine accurately the effects of melt flow recirculation and
oscillations, heat transfer from the melt and crystal, crystal/melt interface
shape and its dynamics, impurity transport, and pellets melting in a range of
parameters suitable for industrial processes. Non-invasive visualization of
temperature (using liquid crystals) and flow fields, digital image processing
and heat transfer experiments in an apparatus simulating the CZ system to obtain
basic information on the physics of the process will be investigated. Computer
reconstruction of 3D images from two-dimensional horizontal and vertical
pictures will be attempted. The results from numerical computations and
laboratory experiments will help in designing the CCZ growth experiments which
will be conduced in a commercial puller at an industrial research facility to
determine the optimal process conditions. This project builds on prior research
demonstrating the feasibility of continuous Czochralski growth of silicon single
crystals using small pellets instead of melting a large block of silicon.
Anticipated high probability of success is further demonstrated by the
industrial partner's commitment to allocate a researcher to this project.
Successful completion of this project will break down the current technological
barrier limiting the size of silicon single crystal that can be manufactured and
lays the foundation for converting the current batch process to truly continuous
process with the potential to increase the yield as well as quality. Successful
commercialization of this technology will enable the U.S. to maintain its
competitive edge in this important electronics market.