* 9414149
* Mathematical Sciences: Isoperimetric and Symmetrization     Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Richard Laugesen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1997
* USD 38,337.00

9414149 Laugesen This work concerns methods for estimating physical constants
related to domains in space. For most domains, the constants, such as
electrostatic capacity, are impossible to compute. However, symmetry methods
such as those employed in this research seek to determine the shape of domains
where the extremal values must occur. The problem then shifts to one of
computing the constant for the extremal domain - which often can be done
explicitly. Work on this project focuses on three groups of problems. The first
is to show that for a set in n-dimensional space with a fixed moment of inertia,
the Newtonian capacity is minimal when the set is a ball. The analogous results
for logarithmic capacity and for the moment of inertia in dimension equal to two
has been established. The second isoperimetric problem considered is that of
minimizing the ratio of logarithmic to hyperbolic capacity for a continuum in a
disc which lies in a fixed concentric subdisc. A solution to this problem would
give an upper estimate for hyperbolic capacity in terms of easier-to-compute
logarithmic capacity. The third group of problems concerns harmonic mappings of
a disc to itself. It is believed that, when suitably normalized, the
coefficients of power series expansions of components of such mappings have
sharp bounds. Though the first unnormalized coefficient is believed to be less
than 5/2, the only estimate know so far is greater than 55. Classical function
theory has introduced geometric techniques which have proved to have far wider
applicability than first imagined. In this project, the methods of
symmetrization, variational techniques and geometric reasoning lead to results
of valuable physical significance. ***