* 9414699
* Static and Dynamic Self-Consistent Field Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1995,09/30/1998
* Mark Ratner, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 09/30/1998
* USD 375,000.00

Professor Mark A. Ratner at the Department of Chemistry, Northwestern
University, is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to study a number of systems with coupled modes through the
use of static and time dependent mean field methods. These methods are being
extended, especially to provide the theoretical capability to study large
systems of practical interest. The static mean field techniques are being
improved using perturbation theory, while the dynamic, or time dependent,
techniques are being extended to include mixed quantum mechanical and classical
mechanical treatments. A wide range of systems and properties, which include the
low energy excitations of porphyrins and peptides, proton transfer reactions,
and cluster melting, are to be studied with these mean field methods. The
principal concern of Prof. Ratner's work is the study of complex systems which
are directly connected to real problems in Materials Science and Biology. Mean
field methods, Prof. Ratner's primary theoretical tools, involve using averages
of various kinds of interactions and provide the essential simplification needed
to treat these real systems. It has been shown that they have the capability to
treat the statics and the dynamics of coupled mode quantum mechanical systems.
Static methods are being used to study systems of biological interest while
time-dependent methods are being used to study dynamic behavior in solids, in
clusters, and in solutions.