* 9414398
* A Job-based Analysis of Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Edward Lazear, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1996
* USD 85,247.00

9414398 Lazear For almost thirty years now, human capital theory has been the
main theoretical model behind most empirical work in labor economics. But human
capital theory is primarily a supply-side approach that focuses on the
characteristics and skills of the individual workers. It pays far less attention
to the environment in which workers work. The entire notion of a "job" which
seems central to the thinking of businesspersons and administrators, is
virtually absent from most labor market analyses. The project addresses this
deficiency in human capital theory. The work is conducted at the theoretical and
empirical level. Tournament theory will be extended to determine how firms set
up their hierarchical structures. The investigator has already lined up firms
that will supply the type of detailed personnel and payroll records needed to
provide answers to questions about the positions in which labor is used. They
include firms from the financial services industry, an energy producer, and a
durable goods manufacturer. The empirical part of the study will be devoted to
collecting and examining these data. This project focuses on questions that rely
on the importance of jobs as the unit of analysis. The general questions are,
"Do jobs matter?" and "Do firms behave as if they have some reasonably well-
defined idea of slots in mind when they make decisions?" Some of the specific
questions are: 1. Jobs and Wages: Do jobs determine wages or do individual's
characteristics determine wages? It has been argued that once occupation and
industry is held constant, there is little male-female wage differential. Is the
same true for all human capital variables like education and prior experience?
2. Jobs and Turnover: It is well-known that workers have different turnover
rates as a function of demographic characteristics and tenure with the firm. But
jobs may have different turnover rates, independent of the incumbents. How
important are demographic effects in sorting individuals into jobs with
different turnover rates? 3. Careers: Is there a real distinction between "line"
jobs, which are supposed stepping stones to the higher echelons of the firm, and
"staff" jobs, which are technical, sometimes highly compensated, but generally
dead-end positions? How do background variables such as race and sex affect
initial job assignments? 4. Promotion: What determines promotion decisions? Are
workers who remain in a job for long periods of time the most productive because
long tenure is evidence of a good match between jobs and skills or the least
productive since the best workers get promoted out early?