* 9414719
* Democratization, Secessions, and Fiscal Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1994,02/29/1996
* Alberto Alesina, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/1996
* USD 102,710.00

9414719 Alesina The last decade has witnessed an unprecedented process of
democratization, not only in Eastern Europe but also in large parts of the
developing world. At the same time, and partly as a result of this institutional
change, the borders of nations have been redrawn to an extent which is quite
exceptional for modern peacetime history. Fiscal issues are crucial determinants
of decisions concerning borders of political jurisdictions. In fact, the
definition of borders and the political mechanisms which lead to fiscal
decisions greatly influence the final distribution of costs and benefits of
taxation and spending. For example, much of the difficulty in ratifying the
Maastricht agreement lies in the fear that richer and/or more fiscally
"responsible" countries and regions will bear some of the fiscal burden of
poorer and/or less responsible regions. This research project studies the
interaction between fiscal policy decisions and the definition of boundaries of
political jurisdictions. In particular, it examines how democratization leads to
changes in social choice decisions concerning both political boundaries and
fiscal (de)centralization. Models with social planners have suggested various
arguments in favor of centralized fiscal decisions in relatively large political
jurisdictions, particularly when the redistributive aspects of fiscal policy are
important. This implication appears inconsistent with the recent tendency toward
secessionism and the renewed difficulties of moving toward a political union in
the European community. We emphasize how diversity and heterogeneity among
individuals and regions influence, through the voting process, the decision
about (de)centralization and the definition of boundaries. Heterogeneity with
voting gives rise to a much richer and more realistic set of results, relative
to social planner models. The project considers several aspects of this general
problem by focusing on different types o f fiscal policy, i.e., public good
provision, insurance, redistribution, on different types of institutions, i.e.,
dictatorial regimes versus democratic ones, different voting rules, and other
institutional differences.