* 9414334
* Experimental and Modeling Studies of Impurities at Metal/   Organic Vapor Phase Epitaxy-Grown Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1999
* Thomas Kuech, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 01/31/1999
* USD 466,608.00

9414334 Kuech Research will be carried out to obtain a fundamental
understanding of the influence of impurities on the properties, and atomic level
structure of metallo-organic vapor phase epitaxy(MOVPE) grown interfaces. The
role of impurities on the detailed structure and properties of interfaces has
been largely unexplored in the MOVPE technique, despite the importance of this
area to the development of nanostructure and heterostructure devices, due to the
lack of combined experimental studies and the related modeling of the observed
interactions. Through a tightly coupled experimental and modeling effort, the
interplay between the interface or surface structure and impurity incorporation
and behavior will be identified in this research project. We will use a
comprehensive approach which includes changes in the chemical nature of the
impurity containing precursor as well as the surface structure. These
experimental studies will be complemented and supported by modeling efforts of
the chemistry and structure of the developing growth front. Several
complementary modeling techniques will be used including realistic continuum
descriptions of fluid flow, heat and mass transfer combined with detailed gas
phase and surface chemical kinetic mechanisms and phenomenological models of
impurity modified MOVPE growth. %%% The primary goal of this program is to
develop a fundamental understanding of the epitaxial growth, processing, and
properties of compound semiconductor materials so that they can be fully
exploited in the realization of a variety of advanced electronic and photonic
devices. The findings of these studies will lead to a better understanding of
the basic interface and growth processes relevant to a range of growth and
processing techniques for electronic/photonic materials. An important feature of
the program is the training of graduate and undergraduate students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area of materials and processing
research. This research will contribute to improving the general perform ance of
advanced devices and integrated circuits used in computing, information
processing, and tele communica tions. ***