* 9414397
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Control of Benthic         Community Structure and Bioturbation by Oxygen in the       Arabian Sea
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Lisa Levin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1998
* USD 19,500.00

9414397 Levin This three-year award supports U.S.-United Kingdom cooperative
research in biological oceanography on the role of oxygen as a forcing function
for benthic processes in the Arabian Sea. The U.S. investigators are Lisa Levin,
University of California at San Diego, Craig Smith, University of Hawaii, and
the U.K. investigators are John Gage, Scottish Association for Marine Sciences,
Tony Rice and others at the Institute of Oceanographic Sciences, and Paul Tyler
of the University of South Hampton. The research will commence with field
studies aboard the British ship RRS Discovery to be followed by analytic work in
the U.S. and the United Kingdom. The U.S. investigators will examine changes in
the macrofaunal community structure and associated shifts in bioturbation that
occur in response to bottom-water oxygen gradients. Bioturbation will be
evaluated using a naturally-occurring, particle- associated radiotracer, pigment
tracers, seafloor photography and x-radiography. The British investigators will
examine hydrography, benthic community metabolism and community structure of all
faunal size categories. Resulting data will be used to test and improve existing
models of benthic processes. The project takes advantage of British expertise
and experience in different oceans. It also affords the U.S. investigators with
an unparalleled opportunity to extend their previous studies of oxygen minimum
zones and bioturbation to the Arabian Sea. This study on benthic processes and
oxygen depletion in seafloors will advance knowledge and understanding of the
effects of global warming on marine ecosystems. ***