* 9414017
* Acquisition of JEM-2010 Analytical Electron Microscope
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Ralph Yang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 08/31/1995
* USD 350,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9414017 David T. Shaw A general purpose analytical electron
microscope (AEM) Model JEM-2010 with energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) analysis
capability will be purchased. The instrument is manufactured by JEOL, Ltd. The
AEM will replace the outdated Amray 1000A electron microscope with EDX
capability purchased thirteen years ago through NSF grant. The 200kV AEM system
with a spatial resolution of 2.3 nm will provide both structural and chemical
information at near-atomic-level. Data and image processing software included
with the package will provide better visualization and understanding of the
microstructure of materials under investigation. The AEM/EDX equipped with a TV
monitoring system is controlled by user friendly software, which is ideally
suited for the large number of users anticipated for this instrument. The AEM
will be maintained and operated by a research associate who has extensive
experience in electron microscopy and sample preparation. He will be responsible
for training graduate students and post-doctoral fellows in the proper use of
the instrument and data interpretation. The on-going sponsored programs will
utilize the instrument in the following areas: phase identification in
nanocomposite superparamagneric materials; phase identification and evolution in
oxide superconductors; growth kinetics of sputtered and laser deposited
semiconductor/superconductor thin films; grain boundary and substrate/film
interface studies of semiconductor and superconducting thin films; and high
temperature refractories and catalysts. The analytical electron microscop will
generate the following activity: it will (a) enhance the quality of on-going
research in materials related sciences at the State University of New York; (b)
provide a hands-on experience to graduate students and post doctoral fellows on
the state-of-the-art instrument; (c) provide the necessary data for future
research programs addressing new technologies; and (d) increase university
-industrial collaboration through materials characterization and technology
transfer.