* 9414759
* Reactions in Supercritical Fluids:  Experimental and        Simulation Studies of Microscopic Phenomena
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1998
* Theodore Randolph, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 10/31/1998
* USD 223,575.00

The microscopic phenomena which underlie experimental observations for
reactivity of solutes dissolved in supercritical fluid solvents are not well
understood. There is a wide variety of phenomena which may be implicated
including solvent bulk properties, solvent accretion around solute molecules,
and preferential clustering of solute molecules around one another. Reaction
rates in general depend on both the solute collision frequency and the lifetime
of each collision; the microscopic behavior may affect either or both. The
engineering design of custom supercritical solvents for a given reaction will
not be feasible without a detailed picture of how these effects combine to
determine the reaction rate. The PI's plan to attack this problem on two fronts.
First, a set of physical experimental studies will be undertaken, investigating
both the macroscopic and the microscopic behavior as a function of bulk solvent
properties, and utilizing several independent experimental techniques (local
dielectric measurement, Heisenberg spin exchange). In concert with the physical
measurements, computational experimental studies will be carried out with a view
to supplying the experimentally inaccessible portions of the overall molecular
picture, again using complementary techniques (Brownian dynamics, molecular
dynamics). Each of the approaches will feed the development of the other,
leading to an understanding of these systems using the applicable theory.