* 9414969
* Renovation and Consolidation of Space for the               Communications, Telemetry and Electro-Optics Research       Program
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1995,06/30/2001
* Thomas Shay, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/2001
* USD 1,300,000.00

The goal of this project is to renovate and consolidate engineering research
laboratories and related facilities in Goddard Hall, a 81 year old facility, on
the campus of New Mexico State University. The modernized space will be used to
consolidate the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department s strong
communications, telemetry and electro-optics research program, currently
dispersed throughout three different buildings. Present conditions of
laboratories, dedicated to research activities, are poorly configured and
inappropriate to support the rapid growth of research and research training
activities that are occurring in the discipline. In addition to modernizing
research space, ARI funds will be used to upgrade infrastructural utilities
including: power, communication, security and HVAC systems. Improved upgrades
will provide adequate cooling capacity for computer equipment throughout the
year and computer linkages within the research space. Research currently not
feasible will be enabled upon completion of the project. Benefits will include:
synergy among research faculty and students, ability to share equipment among
users, and improved network capabilities, providing more effective student
training on computing hardware. Due to the large population of minorities in the
state, it is anticipated that the project will have an impact on engaging more
minority students in engineering. Coupled with the coordinated efforts through
the NSF s Alliance for Minority Participation and the Research Improvement in
Minority Institutions Programs, the number of underrepresented minorities
entering science based professions will increase.