* 9414637
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research in Computational      Linguistics
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1998
* James Pustejovsky, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 02/28/1998
* USD 24,524.00

This award supports Professor James Pustejovsky of Brandeis University and a
graduate student to collaborate in computational linguistics research with Susan
Armstrong and others at the Institute of Semantic and Cognitive Studies (ISSCO)
of the University of Geneva, Switzerland. The goal of their research is to
account for the way in which words combine, taking advantage of the different
perspectives from which this issue has been approached, namely, lexicographic,
linguistic and statistical. The problem is to establish a connection between
computational semantic theories and practical systems dealing directly with
modeling language use through `usage-based` criteria. The Brandeis group brings
substantial theoretical experience on lexical semantics and natural language
generation, while the Swiss group contributes the computational platform and the
multilingual environment for analyzing text, as well as experience in machine
translation systems. Collaboration between the U.S. and Swiss research teams
will introduce a cross- linguistic perspective by taking advantage of
information derived from the analyses of multilingual corpora provided by the
Swiss participants. Specifically, the Swiss group is involved in a project to
produce automatic multilingual generation of the weather forecasts produced by
the Swiss Institute of Meteorology. This collaborative research contributes to
the empirical grounding of a theory of semantic selection. Fundamentally, it
looks at how word meaning in natural language might be characterized formally,
in order to account for both the subtle use of words in different sentences, and
the `creative` use of words in novel contexts. The integration of rule-based
technique and data driven technique is a major area of interest in natural
language processing research. On a practical level, this research will
contribute to the development of a multilingual generator and the enhancement of
machine translation systems.