* 9414833
* Renovation of the Science Building Research Space at Indiana State University
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Charles Amlaner, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/1998
* USD 2,000,000.00

This ARI award will provide funding for the renovation of the environmental
infrastructure and mechanical facilities supporting the research and research
training spaces for the science building on the campus of Indiana State
University. The 36 year old facility houses four science departments; Life
Sciences, Geography and Geology, Chemistry and Physics. Currently, most of the
laboratories are antiquated, unsafe and in desperate need of repair. In spite of
the science building's infrastructure deterioration, the university has
established nationally recognized and funded research programs throughout the
science departments. The renovations for all research laboratories will consist
of the following: 1) new walls, ceilings and floors; 2) installation of new
fixed laboratory equipment; 3) new mechanical services, including supply and
exhaust systems; 4) improved electrical services; and 5) new plumbing and fire
protection systems. Numerous state a federal and safety codes will be met once
renovations are completed. The renovation project will give research faculty the
opportunity to expand competitive interdisciplinary research programs, offering
quality research training to high school students, college undergraduates,
master's and doctoral students. The modernization of this facility will increase
the quality of the research programs and allow for the initiation of new
programs in the sciences.