* 9414413
* Renovation of Vacated Space for, and Creation of, a Consolidated and Upgraded Anthropology Research Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Susan Parman, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1998
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Department of Anthropology at California State University, Fullerton (CSUF)
and NSF will jointly support the renovation of vacated chemistry research space
for new laboratories in archaeology, biological anthropology (osteology and
primatology), ethnographic cultural analysis, museology, and visual
anthropology. The NSF award is a critical first step in a five-year plan to
improve laboratory space essential to research and research training efforts for
students at the B.A. and M.A. levels. The impacted laboratories are currently
located at diverse locations on the campus. With the move of the Chemistry
department to new research space, the Anthropology department will be able to
consolidate and upgrade its facilities. Renovation activities will involve space
conversion including the removal of asbestos and out-dated laboratory benches
and the installation of new plumbing, electrical, HVAC and hazard waste disposal
systems. The newly renovated space will include audioroom facilities, a
darkroom, and computer-ready workstations to support research in ethnographic
cultural analysis, museology, biological anthropology, and visual anthropology.
These enhanced facilities will support long-term archaeological research
projects to understand the impact of historical cultural factors in an
increasingly complex society.