* 9414767
* SGER: Experimental Flooding at Bosque del Apache National   Wildlife Refuge, Rio Grande, New Mexico
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Michael Campana, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1996
* USD 44,995.00

9414767 Valett Flow regulation for the purposes of power generation, recreation
and navigation has resulted in the engineered separation of rivers, floodplains
and associated alluvial aquifers. the result has been a marked decrease in
native riparian vegetation and increased accumulations of organic material on
the forest floor. there is considerable evidence that overland flooding and
associated scouring of floodplain sediments are necessary components for the
successful recruitment of native riparian vegetation, but less is known about
the effects of floods on the ground water of riparian zones and the types of
interactions and processes that occur in the interstitial environment during
floods. This proposal will assess the use of "manipulative flooding" as a
restoration tool aimed at reestablishing historical conditions and processes in
the riparian forest, or bosque, along the Rio Grande at the Bosque del Apache
National Wildlife refuge, New Mexico. %%% Controlled flooding of 20 has plots of
the bosque will provide opportunities to investigate groundwater responses and
the rates of respiration and nitrogen transformation in the temporarily
saturated rooting zone and on the forest floor. Additionally, we will
investigate the effects of flooding of the carbon and nitrogen content of
riparian vegetation. Funds requested in this proposal will support metabolic and
biogeochemical studies of the initial flooding of the riparian zone following 30
years of flow regulation.