* 9414108
* RUI: The Chemistry of Atmospheric Peroxides
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Judith Weinstein-Lloyd, SUNY College at Old Westbury
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/1999
* USD 171,919.00

Inorganic and organic peroxides are detected in the atmosphere and in rain,
snow and fog, and there is evidence that their concentration has been
increasing. Peroxides interfere with normal plant growth, and play an important
role in the conversion of sulfur dioxide to sulfuric acid in cloud water.
Photochemical air pollution involves a complex set of chemical reactions
initiated by sunlight-generated free radicals. These reactions both consume and
generate peroxides, and are the subject of active research aimed at developing
effective pollution control strategies. Hydrogen peroxide concentration
increases with solar intensity, but diurnal profiles of organic peroxides
suggest an alternative source, possibly involving ozone and biogenic
hydrocarbons. This research will involve laboratory and field studies aimed at a
better understanding of peroxide occurrence and chemistry. The project
scientists will develop the ability to detect trace concentrations of individual
peroxides using high performance liquid chromatography with fluorescence
detection, and study the rate at which individual peroxides deposit to
grasslands and forest canopies. Undergraduate chemistry majors at a small four-
year college will participate in all aspects of this Research in Undergraduate
Institutions (RUI) project.