* 9414585
* Integrated Structure/Control Design of Mechatronic Systems  Using a Recursive Structure Reinforcement Method
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Haruhiko Asada, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1997
* USD 225,000.00

9414585 Asada In the design of high speed mechatronic systems, such as disk
drives, chip placement machines and three-dimensional coordinate measurement
machines, an integrated approach to the optimization of mechanical structures,
actuators and sensors together with controllers is increasingly important. There
are significant interplays and trade-offs between mechanical design and control
design, which must be considered carefully to optimize the total system
performance. This research will establish a novel method for the integrated
design of high speed mechatronic systems. To overcome the difficulty of
obtaining exact analytic models, this project incorporates prototyping and
experimentation into the design process. Based on a model verified through
experiments, the design is modified, and its performance improvement is examined
through prototyping and experimentation. This project forms a closed-loop
recursive process comprising design modification, prototyping, and
experimentation. In each recursion, a prototype control system is tested
experimentally, the system model is corrected and refined based on the data,
design trade-offs are made to determine an optimal design change, and the
prototype is physically modified in accordance with the determined design
change.