* 9414302
* The Relationship Between Structure and Properties in        Manganese-Aluminum-Base Permanent Magnet Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* William Soffa, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 12/31/1997
* USD 383,800.00

9414302 Soffa An aim of this research program is to clarify the effects of
processing variables that control microstructure and defect structure in
manganese/aluminum (MnAl) permanent magnet materials. A further aim is to
understand the mechanisms of magnetization and magnetization reversal, which
account for the hysteresis behavior and magnetic properties of these
ferromagnets. A comprehensive electron transmission microscopy study is planned
to examine the complex diffusional/displacive transformation occurring in this
material. Deformation under compression loading is examined under a broad
temperature range to determine ways of creating desired textures. Magnetic
hysteresis is measured for different structural states to determine magnetic
properties. This information should provide a sound basis for designing
thermomechanical processing schemes for optimum manufacturing of MnAl-base
permanent magnets. %%% For more than two decades permanent magnet materials
based on the manganese/aluminum system have loomed on the horizon as important
magnetic materials for a wide variety of applications not requiring the
extraordinary properties of the more expensive rare earth permanent magnets.
Application has been limited by the economics related to processing. Research
results of this investigation should lead to more innovative and efficient
processing strategies for manufacturing permanent magnets that are based on the
MnAl (L1) intermetallic phase. ***