* 9414822
* Inherent Design Limitations for Periodic and Sampled-Data   Feedback Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1999
* James Freudenberg, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/1999
* USD 157,431.00

Fruedenberg 9414822 The objectives of this proposal are to advance the current
state of sampled-data and periodic control systems. Contributions will be made
to theory, applications, and pedagogy. A theory of inherent design limitations
for sampled-data and periodic feedback systems will be developed to describe
robustness and performance tradeoffs due to nonminimum phase zeros, unstable
poles, and time delays in the analog plant. Various methodologies have been
proposed for circumventing design limitations present in linear time invariant
systems by purposely introducing sampling or other forms of periodic control.
The theory to be developed will be used to critique these methodologies. The
theory of design limitations takes intersample behavior into account, and shows
that some of the purported advantages of sampling for overcoming design
limitations are illusory because they only consider behavior at sampling
instants. The techniques to be used in developing the results are the Bode and
Poisson integrals from complex variable theory in conjunction with methods
developed in the early 1950's for computing the response of an analog signal in
a sampled-data system to a sinusoidal input. Particular emphasis is placed upon
the fact that the discrete frequency response depends on aliased high frequency
components of the analog response. This dependence is responsible for
sensitivity and robustness difficulties due to high frequency model error. The
theoretical portion of the proposed research will be carried out in
collaboration with Rick Middleton of the University of Newcastle, Australia.
Contributions to applications will be made in two areas. First, analysis
techniques will be developed for assessing the quality of a sampled-data control
design using frequency response plots instead of simulations. Second, models of
inherently hybrid will be constructed for the purpose of assessing their
bandwidth limitations and degree of design difficulty. Such systems are found in
automotive applications, where the engine firing event is inherently discrete,
and in sensing devices such as CCD cameras and Optical Multichannel Analyzers
which are used in plasma processing. This work supports ongoing applications
projects at the University of Michigan in the areas of automotive emission
control and semiconductor manufacturing. Contributions to pedagogy arise from
the used of techniques taught in standard textbooks to analyze inherent
limitations and intersample behavior. The theory to be developed fills a gap in
pedagogy that currently exists between the theory of analog and of sampled-data
feedback systems. ***