* 9414932
* James S. Thomas Science Center Repair/Renovation Project
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Shingara Sandhu, Claflin University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 07/31/1997
* USD 353,706.00

Since 1869, Claflin College, a historically black liberal arts college, in
Orangeburg, South Carolina, has been educating minority students for
professional attainment in all academic areas, including the sciences. The James
S. Thomas Science Center is home to the Division of Natural Sciences and
Mathematics, which includes the departments of biology chemistry, mathematics
and computer Science. Originally designed to meet undergraduate teaching needs,
all research and research training is conducted in the building. Therefore it is
critical that the college renovate space conducive for conducting research
activities. With support from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program,
rooms presently assigned for student research will be consolidated, providing an
efficient and interactive arrangement. Several infrastructural utilities will be
upgraded and distilled water units will be installed to support experiments
performed in research laboratories and the greenhouse. The chemical storage
facility will be upgraded to met safety requirements. The availability of
sufficient research space will allow students and faculty to undertake research
in molecular biology, environmental chemistry and computer science. The
implementation of the renovation project will have a positive influence on
increasing the enrollment in the sciences, and improving the performance of
science graduates. Preparing graduates to successfully compete in graduate
school will increase the pool of minority scientists and role models,
immediately and for the future.