* 9414494
* Artificial Intelligence Based Process Synthesis Methodology for In-Plant Waste Minimization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/1998
* USD 151,881.00

Huang - Abstract - 9414494 Rapidly changing industrial technologies are often
accompanied by the generation of hazardous or toxic wastes. One way to reduce
the quantity and toxicity of these wastes is to incorporate waste minimization
strategies into process design. This study will focus on the development of a
novel and systematic process synthesis methodology for designing/modifying
processes that satisfy environmental objectives. The methodology assesses cost
and waste minimization simultaneously, and utilizes knowledge representing
operation protocols, environmental regulations, and designers' experience of
process design and implementation of waste minimization strategies. Because a
large amount of extractable knowledge can only be represented in a symbolic
form, and because the available process information and data are often
imprecise, incomplete, and uncertain, conventional optimization techniques may
not be applicable to solving waste minimization problems. Instead, the principle
investigator (PI) uses artificial intelligence techniques (AI) in the
development of this methodology. The adoption of these techniques will help the
identification of economically desirable and operationally stable processes with
minimum waste generation. The goal of this research is to develop an intelligent
process design system based on AI methodology. This system consists of two
subsystems: a decision support subsystem and a process synthesis subsystem. The
first subsystem performs preconceptual synthesis. It is capable of identifying
waste minimization problems in a process by means of an index of waste
minimization, selecting the most efficient technology, determining the necessary
unit operations and the interrelationships among processing units, and
performing an overall economic evaluation. The second subsystem utilizes the
selected technology to synthesize or modify a process which will not only be
cost-effective but also environmentally clean. This design tool is not meant to
replac e commercial process simulators, but could be used in conjunction with
them. The tool will be applied to a variety of processes in the chemical and
petrochemical industries which are traditionally major waste generators. The PI
will work cooperatively with three companies, M. W. Kellogg, BASF, and Marathon
Refining, in order to ensure that the design tool is effective for in-plant
waste minimization.