* 9414060
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Genetic Regulation of      Nervous System Development
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Monte Westerfield, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 06/30/1998
* USD 22,950.00

9410460 Westerfield This three-year award supports U.S.-U.K. cooperative
research in neurobiology between two research groups at the University of Oregon
and University of London. The U.S. investigators are Monte Westerfield and
Judith Eisen and the British investigators are Nigel Holder and Stephen Wilson.
The cooperative effort extends recent research by both groups in anterior
central nervous system of zebra fish embryos. Newly discovered genes, have been
identified either by cloning or mutation, as candidates for regulating
developmental processes in the central nervous system of zebra fish embryos. The
objective of this new effort is to study the potential roles of these genes in
the anterior central nervous system and brain segments of zebra fish. Zebra fish
are ideal vertebrates for studying embryonic and genetic analyses since a large
number of their regulatory genes have already been identified. The results from
this project, when compared with complementary studies in mammals, will advance
our knowledge about the evolution of the anterior regions of the vertebrate
central nervous system in general, the genetic mechanisms that regulate
patterning, and gene expression that demarcate brain subdivisions. The project
takes advantage of complementary expertise of the U.S. and British investigators
and provides access to mutant zebra fish and genetic sequencing techniques
developed by both groups.