* 9414309
* CISE Educational Infrastructure:  Integrating Research      Results from Parallel and Distributed Computing into the    Undergraduate Computer Science Curriculum
* CSE,EIA
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/1998
* USD 238,339.00

9414309 Kurtz Louisiana Tech University will develop an entirely new sophomore-
level course on parallel and distributed computing and five knowledge units
designed to be added to existing courses in the upper division curriculum. The
early introduction of concurrency will allow the transfer of current research
results into upper division courses. Instructional support materials including
sample lecture notes, laboratory manuals, software, and multimedia aids will be
produced. In particular, an extensive software environment for the new
sophomore-level course where students will be able to experiment with the
various methods of concurrency and different connection topologies will be
developed. A CD-ROM disk for instructors that will introduce them to the various
public domain software packages already available over the Internet will be
provided as well as advice on using these packages in their courses, and sample
problems and solutions. Louisiana Tech has also solicited the participation of
Grambling State University (GSU). Faculty from GSU will participate in the
development of course materials. These materials will be designed so that they
can be used in Computer Science programs at a wide variety of schools. There
will be no dependency on having a massively parallel computer; rather,
simulations of parallel architectures will be used. Distributed processing over
local area networks will also be stressed. Course materials will be tested at
both Louisiana Tech and Grambling. Collaboration with the University of Central
Florida has also been arranged. ***