* 9414948
* Replacement and Renovation of Computer Science Research and Research Training Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/1995,01/31/2001
* Albert Hoffman, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/2001
* USD 145,204.00

Millersville University, located in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, is one of
the 14 state owned institutions of higher education that comprise the
Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education. The mission of the institution,
inclusive of the sciences, is to provide excellent programs conforming to the
higher standards of a traditional liberal arts education. To emphasize its
commitment to science, the University and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are
providing the resources required to construct a new science building, the
centerpiece of a science complex that includes the existing science facility,
Roddy Hall. Obsolete space vacated by the Chemistry Department in Roddy will be
available for the Computer Science Department, currently residing in Wickersham
Hall. Relocating Computer Science to the 30 year old building, will allow all
the science departments to be in close proximity physically, as well as
establishing collaborative efforts between scientific disciplines. It is for
this purpose, that funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program have
been awarded to Millersville University. A former chemistry laboratory and
support space will be renovated and remodeled to accommodate the needs of the
research and research training program of the Computer Science Department .
Space will be reconfigured by the removal of existing walls and equipment such
as workbenches and fume hoods. The improved space will provide modern research
facilities for faculty engaged in Robotics, Computer Vision, Artificial
Intelligence, Software Engineering, Scientific Visualization, and Real-Time
Systems Engineering. Scientific Visualization research will focus on high-
performance 3D computer graphics for scientific modeling, vitural world
modeling, and virtual reality simulations for research training and
experimentation in the natural and physical sciences. All science students will
benefit from this project, giving them opportunities to engage in research and
learn high performance computer visualization techniques at the undergraduate
level. With the improved facility there will be increased student involvement in
collaborative, scientific investigations with faculty, generating quality senior
research projects that may facilitate student interest in pursuing additional
scholarly activities, as well as attracting prospective students and new
research faculty.