* 9414933
* Renovation of a Chemistry Laboratory for Research
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Dorothy Johansen, Mayville State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/29/1996
* USD 126,069.00

Johansen Mayville State University, located in North Dakota, serves a small
community in the agrarian Red River Valley region of the State. Built in 1957,
the Science Building, housing the Chemistry Department, remains as initially
constructed without any modifications. Currently dedicated research and research
training facilities are unavailable for faculty and students to pursue their
research interests. ARI funds, in combination with State funding, will be used
to convert a small laboratory, a dark room and a chemical storage area, to
dedicated research and research training space. Electrical and plumbing systems
will be upgraded and the ventilation system improved to maintain the level of
research activity. In order to support experiments conducted in the areas of
organometallic, analytical, and physical chemistry, fume hoods and a bench,
measuring the length of the room, will be installed. This renovation project is
integral to the Department s efforts in delivering a quality undergraduate
research program. With 62% of the student population from small rural areas in
eastern North Dakota and western Minnesota, and approximately half of the
students majoring in chemistry are women, this project will have a significant
impact on the undergraduate research experience at Mayville State.