* 9414805
* Engineering School Facilities Renovation
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/1995,06/30/1998
* David Kerns, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1998
* USD 1,104,916.00

Vanderbilt University has a long tradition of excellence in its environmental
and materials engineering programs, and by upgrading the facilities dedicated to
these programs, the School of Engineering will strengthen its ability to
educated engineers who will be able to compete in the next century. Engineering
laboratories are currently dispersed in four separate buildings, and the
opportunity for consolidation and enhancement of space is available. Support
from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will assist Vanderbilt in
providing modernized space for research programs in environmental engineering
and advanced materials science. Environmental engineering activities are housed
in a 1952 structure that was last renovated in 1962. The facility is antiquated
with respect to plumbing; electrical, HVAC and fire safety systems required for
operations. During the period since 1962, the focus of the program has evolved
from traditional sanitary engineering to examination of priority toxic,
carcinogenic and radioactive wastes. Existing laboratories were not originally
designed to handle such materials, thus research and research training are being
conducted in unsuitable facilities. In addition to two separate buildings, most
materials engineering programs occupy a structure that was built for
metallurgical engineering in 1974. Since that time, research is increasingly
diverse and includes diamond films, radiation effects in glasses, ion beam
diagnostics, ion implantation in glasses, sensor development, microstructures
and containerless processing. Facilities devoted to advanced materials
processing have numerous problems including worn casework, deficient plumbing,
inadequate HVAC and no clean room processing capability. The renovations will
create a safe and conducive atmosphere that will facilitate environmental and
materials engineering research that cannot be presently undertaken. Relocation
of research activities in physical proximity to the physics, chemistry and
geology programs with which significant collaborations with the materials
program already exists should further enhance productivity, and encourage
interdisciplinary research.