* 9414287
* Development of An Advanced Analysis Tool for                Characterization, Simulation and Remedy of Molding Induced  Defects in Liquid Composite Molding
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Ly James Lee, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 01/31/1999
* USD 497,289.00

9414287 Lee Liquid composite molding processes such as resin transfer molding
(RTM) and structural reaction injection molding (SRIM) are one of the fastest
growing new manufacturing technologies in aerospace and automotive industries.
They have been recognized by many researchers and engineers as the most feasible
approach to mass produce light weight, high strength and low cost structural
components. The major manufacturing technique in today's aerospace industry for
light weight components is prepreg/autoclave process. This process is expensive,
slow and labor intensive. It can not compete well in the cost driven business
such as the civil aero- transportation industry. This is why many companies,
particularly in Europe, are developing RTM processes. The major manufacturing
techniques in today's automotive industry for light weight components are
thermoplastic injection molding and SMC compression molding. These processes can
only handle low volume short fiber reinforcement, therefore, they can not
produce high strength products which are needed for structural applications.
SRIM and RTM, on the other hand, are based on high volume fractions of
continuous fiber reinforcement. They can potentially produce parts stronger than
steel made parts. The new experimental techniques for flow analysis include
measurements of capillary forces and fiber wetting for fabric reinforcements
with different fiber architecture and the three- dimensional microscopic flow
visualization and image analysis. The experimental techniques for curing
analysis include rheological and kinetic analyses and reactive dilatometry of
matrix resins. Computer modelling will be carried out at two levels; a model
simple enough to be combined with existing computer codes for quick and easy
introduction to the manufacturing sector and a sophisticated model addressing
the full range of mold filling to final product property prediction will be
developing using supercomputing capabilit ies.