* 9414290
* Twilight and the Naked-Eye Observer:  Models and High-      Resolution Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Alistair Fraser, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/1998
* USD 245,298.00

Fraser/Abstract This proposal requests research support for optical remote
sensing of twilight. Like many other researchers, we are interested in using
twilight's optical structure to evaluate the verisimilitude of atmospheric
scattering models. However, unlike others, we propose to do our testing with a
remote sensing system that combines: a) multiple spectral channels with broad
bandwidths, and b) very high spatial and temporal resolutions. This remote
sensing system is human trichromatic color vision, which has the obvious
disadvantage that it is essentially subjective. However, trichromatic analogues
of color vision, such as color film and digital imaging systems, let us map
their objective and reproducible responses into those of a typical naked- eye
observer. Other advantages gained by using photography and digital imaging
include the ability to easily analyze: a) spectra from large portions (or all)
of the twilight at once, b) the temporal evolution of twilight spectra at very
high resolutions, and c) the spatial details of twilight polarization.
Specifically, we plan to use digital image analysis of color slides,
occasionally corroborated by spectroradiometry, to explore the photometric,
polarimetric, and colorimetric structure of twilight. With a variety of data
inversion techniques, we will then assess how well various atmospheric
scattering models account for twilight as seen by the naked-eye observer (we
include here observers equipped with simple linear polarizers). In the past,
twilight's ephemeral nature has restricted researchers to gathering only limited
amounts of photometric and polarimetric data, and then usually only as a means
of constructing atmospheric soundings. Colorimetric studies of twilight are even
rarer. As worthwhile as twilight-derived atmospheric soundings are, here we
propose a quite different goal: measuring and modeling twilight's largely
unquantified visual structure.