* 9414850
* Renovation of Research Building at the University of Guam   Marine Laboratory
* O/D,OIA
* 12/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Valerie Paul, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 05/31/1997
* USD 263,360.00

The University of Guam Marine Laboratory (UOGML), the only U.S. marine
laboratory in the tropical western Pacific, is a research unit of the University
of Guam that serves the U.S.-affiliated islands of Micronesia, including the
Territory of Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the
Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Belau, and the Marshall Islands.
Established in 1970, the UOGML is uniquely situated near a variety of thriving
coral reef habitats that have allowed the laboratory to become an important
center for the study of tropical marine biology. Previously, research conducted
at the facility focused on the structure and function of coral reef communities
with applied research programs on tropical fisheries and aquaculture. However,
over the past six years, research programs have been diversified to include
chemical ecology, marine microbiology, biogeochemistry, larval biology, genetics
of reef fishes, and paleobiology. The Laboratory has acquired an international
reputation in coral reef research in which the faculty have collaborated with
coral reef scientist from all over the world. Minority research programs are
available, that currently involve twelve faculty members and over twenty
students. In order to maintain this treasured research base, the Academic
Research Infrastructure Program will provide funds to enable the UOGML to
modernize its research facility. Funds will be used to renovate and improve the
electrical and plumbing systems in individual faculty laboratories and multi-
user laboratories. Laboratory furniture will be replaced and configured to
provide more efficient work space. The availability of a modern facility is
vital to research as well as to studies of the development, conservation, and
utilization of the region's substantial marine resources, which are of paramount
importance to the people of the western Pacific.