* 9414902
* Facilities Modernization for Biology and Neuroscience Research and Research Training
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Paul Ewald, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1996
* USD 1,780,000.00

Renovation and replacement of approximately 20,000 square feet of biology,
neuroscience and psychology laboratory space is the goal of this NSF award to
Amherst College. Existing laboratories are housed in the 139-yr. old Appleton
and 83-yr. old Webster Halls. Partially renovated in the 1960s, these buildings
still suffer from outdated and ineffective HVAC, plumbing and electrical
systems. Ongoing facility issues include the limitation of modern science,
periodic systems crises which interrupt and setback experimentation, and
programmatic limitations due to the separation of disciplines. NSF funds will be
utilized to renovate the first floor of Webster Hall for dry laboratory
activities associated with the Psychology department, and for the replacement of
wet laboratory facilities for Neuroscience and Biology in an addition to Merrill
Science Center. The resulting enhancement to research facilities will advance
the interdisciplinary connections (biology, chemistry, psychology, and
neuroscience) that will characterize science research and teaching during the
next half-century. The upgraded facilities will also form an important focus for
Amherst's successful efforts to involve a high number of their undergraduates --
40% of whom are women and 25% of whom are students of color -- in research
activity The research emphasis gained at Amherst has motivated more than half of
their honors students to pursue Ph.D. programs, or M.D. programs with research
as a substantial component of their medical school education.