* 9414911
* Renovation of Neurobiology Laboratories for Research and    Training in Arkansas
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Phillip Rayford, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 07/31/1997
* USD 701,266.00

Lindley The University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences shares with its sister
campus, the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville, a major responsibility for
life sciences and university-based biotechnology research and development
performed for the state of Arkansas. Built in 1957, the Shorey Building, a nine
story structure, recently housed all the basic science departments and most of
the research laboratories and support facilities. The research space is sub-
standard for many aspects of modern cellular and molecular neurobiology, in
spite of the fact that they represent essentially the only significant
university-based capacity in the state for neurobiology research. Certain core
facilities requisite to modern cellular molecular neurobiology, such as adequate
darkrooms, tissue culture capabilities and space to house large equipment, are
not available. Inadequate infrastructure is a hindrance for the application of
contemporary cellular and molecular biology and biophysics to neurobiological
problems. The laboratories are a critical success factor for continued
development of Arkansas efforts in biotechnology. They also provide research
training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high school students. ARI
funds will be used to support various renovations including: asbestos abatement,
upgrading HVAC and electrical power systems, installing new benches and lab
islands, modernizing cell and tissue culture and darkroom facilities, and
providing a central autoclave and glassware washing facility. Provisions for
computer network access and data analysis space will also be included. Once
completed, the basic biological research conducted in the renovated facilities
will build on and be synergistic with the research program launched by the NSF
EPSCoR Arkansas Neurobiology Center. Modernized facilities will enhance the
research programs of investigators who contribute to biotechnology linkages and
improved scientific training for undergraduates in partn ership with Arkansas
institutions, including the historically black colleges, Philander Smith College
and the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff.