* 9414924
* Renovation of Facilities for a Program in Biological        Chemistry and Engineering
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/1994,02/28/1998
* Paul Bartlett, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1998
* USD 1,750,000.00

The University of California Berkeley will receive ARI Facilities support to
create modern facilities for researchers working in a unique, integrated Program
in Biological Chemistry and Engineering within the College of Chemistry. The
renovated facilities will promote a strong interaction among bioinorganic
chemists, biochemical engineers, and bioorganic chemists working in the areas of
biotechnology and environmental research. The renovations activity funded by
this award will be directed at the improvement of 1,305 square meters in 30-year
old Latimer Hall and will consolidate researchers. Program activity will be
enhanced as researchers are currently located in geographically distributed
campus laboratories that are between 32 and 77 years old. A 7 month- long space
assessment precedes the project which will involve gutting much of the interior
space, installation of modular laboratory units and new fume hoods and upgrades
to the mechanical, electrical and plumbing services for increased safety and
improved efficiency. Provision of adequate facilities will enable the basic
discovery processes to be linked more closely with the development process.
Biochemical engineers will study separation techniques for the recovery of
biological products, biomimetic adsorbents for metal removal and recovery and
new approaches to bioremediation. Bioinorganic chemists will study metal ion
transport that is essential to life processes, the use of chelating agents in
the sequestration of heavy metals, and lanthanide complexes for possible use in
enhancing MRI. A total of 8 professors and 117 graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows will benefit from these improvements.