* 9414852
* The Elvey Project:  Replacement of Atmospheric Science and  Remote Sensing Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/1995,12/31/1998
* David Dobberpuhl, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1998
* USD 1,291,703.00

NSF and the University of Alaska, Fairbanks are jointly funding a replacement
structure, Elvey II, for the Geophysical Institute. NSF participation is focused
on approximately 15% of the construction effort and will support facilities
specifically for the Atmospheric Sciences and Remote Sensing Groups. The
existing facilities are extremely limited and fail to meet the technical
requirements of today's complex research demands. The Geophysical Institute was
created in 1946 by Congress to conduct geophysical research concerning the
Arctic, and it has evolved into one of a few institutions within the U.S. where
scientific expertise covers the entire spectrum of geophysical disciplines --
from outer space to the earth's inner core. It is the only high-latitude
research and academic center in the country. Research conducted at the Institute
is important in this era of growing concern about the health and welfare of the
planet, and research training is a significant component of the Institute's
program. Approximately one half of the funded effort will replace seven wet
laboratories including facilities for study of Trace Gases, Climate, Solar Data,
Aerosol, Atmospheric Chemistry and Optics. The other half of the support will
provide enhanced user services in the Geo Data Center. Currently these labs and
facilities are located in several buildings throughout the campus, and space for
the Atmospheric Sciences group is severely limited and lacks chemistry
laboratories and specialized facilities. It lacks adequate electrical and
plumbing services, and a fume exhaust system for storage of hazardous chemicals.
There is asbestos in the fire retardant systems, and the HVAC system is
inadequate for heating, cooling and ventilation. Fifteen faculty will be the
direct beneficiaries of the replacement facilities, and approximately 65
graduate students enrolled in M.S. or Ph.D. programs will work in the new space.
One-third of the graduate students are women and minorities. The Institute has a
number of outreach activities including programs designed to interest elementary
school students and Alaskan natives in the geosciences.