* 9414241
* NSF/CBNS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - Approximation Dynamics with Application to Numerical        Analysis - June 12-16, 1995
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Carmen Chicone, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 12/31/1995
* USD 20,000.00

9414241 Chicone The purpose of the conference is to provide a forum for an
important series of lectures to be presented by Professor George Sell,
University of Minnesota. He is a leading expert in the theory and application of
dynamical systems, especially that part of the theory related to the dynamic
processes of natural phenomena. Advances in the mathematical modeling, analysis
and application of these processes are fundamental to our understanding of such
diverse physical phenomena as weather, pollution of groundwater and rivers,
aircraft flight, or the motion of blood through the human heart. The topic of
the conference is central to current research in the area of dynamical systems
and its practical applications. Professor Sell's lectures will range over the
basis for a specific approach to understanding the long time behavior of
dynamical systems (the approach being approximation by nearby systems that are
amenable to analysis). He will also discuss the use of this approach for the
design and implementation of computer software to solve some important physical
problems. In accordance with the program description for the regional NSF/CBMS
conferences, the organizers will invite participants primarily from the Mid-
West. The funded participants will be chosen from the ranks of professional
mathematicians and graduate students. The research programs of the professional
participants should benefit in several ways from the conference. They will be
able to learn an important new approach to solving problems that they may
already be studying. Also, they will enhance the teaching mission of their home
institutions by incorporating the subject matter of the conference into their
graduate courses. Graduate students will be presented with cutting edge tool
that will be a very useful component of their graduate education. In addition,
some of them may well be influenced to enter an important area of research where
many problems of enormous import remain unsolved.