* 9414716
* Role of Microorganisms in the Formation of Biogenic         Varnishes on Ancient Artifacts
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1995
* Stephen Mattingly, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 05/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

Mattingly 9414716 Bioplastic (biofilm) coatings or biogenic varnishs are natural
accretions present on ancient, stable surfaces. These biofilms are from one to
500 micrometers thick and are produced by an apparent symbiotic activity between
Lichnothelia fungi and bacteria resembling the Rhodococcus-Actinomycetes group.
It requires hundreds of years for this symbiosis to create a continuous coating
over a stable surface. Four different types of Lichenothelia- associated
varnishs have been identified based on chemical differences and include (1)
desert varnish, (2) soil varnish, (3) temple varnish, and (4) tomb varnish. No
less than twenty different species of Lichenothelia have been described
associated with biofilm formation. However, neither the role of the fungus nor
associated bacteria is understood in forming the bioplastic coatings. Therefore,
the goal of this NSF-SGER proposal is to: (1) establish the identity of the
genus and species of fungi and bacteria involved in biofilm deposition on
selected ancient artifacts by using molecular biological techniques, (2)
determine the nature of the fungal/bacterial symbiotic association and (3)
determine the biochemistry of bioplastic coat formation. %%% Many ancient
artifacts are covered by plastic coats, or films. These plastic coatings are
very thin and can take thousands of years to form. They are apparently produced
biologically by the concerted action of certain types of fungi and bacteria
which are able to colonize and grow together on stable, solid surfaces. It is
believed that the cellular biofilm-forming center is comprised of a fungus
called Lichenothelia and a bacterium, that may be a Rhodococcus or Actinomyces
type cell. The goal of the present NSF-SGER proposal is therefore to: (1) find
out what types of fungal and/or bacterial cells are involved in biofilm
formation, (2) to determine if the different cell types have to live together to
form the biofilm, and (3) learn about the chemistry of bio film forming pathway.
***