* 9414973
* Renovation of Chemistry Research Facilities at the College  of the Holy Cross:  Fostering Cooperative Investigations
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/1995,10/31/1995
* Richard Herrick, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/1995
* USD 900,000.00

The Department of Chemistry at the College of the Holy Cross has a long
tradition of excellence in instruction, curriculum innovation, research training
and research. In 1990, the College ranked 13th out of 925 private, undergraduate
institutions, in the number of graduates earning doctorates in chemistry from
1979 to 1988. At Holy Cross, research training begins at the student's first
year through a research-oriented curriculum called Discovery Chemistry. Students
learn through active participation with other students and faculty. This joint
effort fosters cooperation instead of competition, and illustrates to students
the dependence each scientist has on the entire scientific community. In
addition to the department's commitment to research training, eight of nine
faculty members maintain active chemical research programs in organometallics,
analytical chemistry, photochemistry and medicinal chemistry. Research is
conducted in Haberlin Hall, a 1959 structure that is home to the department. The
present configuration and antiquated condition of the building impedes research
by isolating laboratories from departmental activities that limits contact
opportunities students or other faculty have with the research facilities on a
regular basis. To improve this situation, the College, with assistance from the
Academic Research Infrastructure Program, will consolidate and renovate research
space to establish a research complex. The HVAC system, interior surfaces, fume
hoods, benches and storage areas will also be upgraded. These renovations will
foster collegial interactions, promote collaborative investigations and better
support the modern research methods of the Department. The project is in harmony
with the Department's overall emphasis on cooperative learning, and it will
continue to enhance the strong record of research and research training at Holy
Cross.