* 9414497
* Americas Program Dissertation Enhancement Award:            A Conceptual and Working Framework for Optimal Improvement  of Environmental Protection:  The Case of Mexico City Air
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1995
* Maria Fernandez-Kelly, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/1995
* USD 12,688.00

9414497 Boland This Americas Program award funds dissertation enhancement
research by Mr. John C. Marchelya, under the supervision of Dr. John J. Boland
and Dr. M. Patricia Fernandez-Kelly of Johns Hopkins University. The project
intends to develop a decision framework for improving environmental protection
in an economically optimal manner. Their study will investigate the practice of
regulatory enforcement of industrial air pollution in Mexico City and determine
the informational, political and social context. The framework is based on
decision variables of the two agents considered most responsible for retarding
or advancing environmental protection: a profit-maximizing polluter and an
environmental enforcement agency. Insight on their interaction, their decision
variables and the context in which such interaction is embedded is gained from
theory addressing: (1) investment, (2) law enforcement, (3) game theory and (4)
economic sociology. This research will provide insights and conclusions
important to improved environmental quality in Mexico, which is pertinent to the
economic security of the U.S. The differences in environmental standards between
the two countries provide a competitive advantage to those industries located in
areas that have weak enforcement. Regulatory enforcement thus becomes an
important issue that affects the competitive balance between the two countries.
***