* 9414509
* Fractional Statics and Topological Defects in Quantum Field Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Vivian Incera, SUNY College at Fredonia
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia R. Brown
* 01/31/1997
* USD 76,500.00

9414509 Incera Since 1911, it has been known that certain materials, like, for
instance, mercury, lose all their resistance at some low critical temperature.
The state with zero resistance persists at temperatures below the critical one.
This property is called superconductivity. Until 1986, the highest critical
temperature ever observed was of the order of -418 F. In that year a new class
of superconducting materials were discovered. For them the superconducting state
appears at critical temperatures around - 244 F. This discovery has great
technological implications. If scientists obtain a enough high superconducting
temperature, the superconductors could be used for many energy saving
applications. However, the theoretical model known as the Bardeen Cooper
Schrieffer (BCS) theory, which in 1957 explained the phenomenon of
supersonductivity at low temperatures, is unable to give a satisfactory
explanation for the behavior of the modern high- temperature superconductors.
Without a thorough understanding of the physical mechanism that produces this
impressive phenomenon, its practical implementation will be very limited. It has
been shown that a zero temperature a system formed by particles with fractional
statistics, known as anyons, is superconductor. This property has encouraged the
idea that the anyons could serve to modeling the high-Temperature
superconductivity. However, it is still unclear if an anyon system superconducts
at finite temperature. This proposal intends to address this problem by
investigating the effects of topological defects in models of anyons at finite
temperature and density. ***