* 9414013
* Development of an In Situ Growth and Analysis Chamber for   X-Ray Scattering Experiments at the Advanced Photon Source
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1995,04/30/2001
* Haskell Taub, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Robert J. Reynik
* 04/30/2001
* USD 287,300.00

9503708 Zaslavsky The addition of this processing extension equipment will
enable new research in nanostructure fabrication by regrowth and in the
transport, optical properties, and device physics of novel nanostructures. This
processing extension will permit regrowth of modulation-doping, contacting and
isolating layers on patterned heterostructures prepared with in-situ etched and
clearned regrowth surfaces. The processing extension will have the following
capabilities: low-damage electron-cyclotron resonance (ECR) plasma reactive ion
etching of III-V semiconductors; ECR hydrogen plasma cleaning of etched
substrates; surface cleanliness monitoring by Auger spectroscopy; and in-vacuum
transfer of patterned substrates into the MBE growth chamber. The properties of
strained and unstrained uniform quantum wires fabricated by etching through
quantum wells and regrowth with modulation-doping layers on the sidewalls will
be studied. A heavily-doped gate electrode layer in the regrowth sequence will
permit carrier density modulation in these wires independent of the confining
potentials determined by the original heterostructure. Analogously, by
pregrowing the appropriate barrier potentials, gated 2- dimensional tunneling
structures and superlattices in III-V heterostructures will be fabricated and
their transport and optical properties will be investigated down to the quantum
dot limit. % This equipment will be used by a group of investigators having
complimentary expertise ranging from semiconductor epitaxial growth to
nanofabrication and from transport and optical characterization to device
physics and engineering. It represents fundamental materials research important
for understanding processing of semiconductor materials, and is ultimately
relevant for manufacturing.