* 9414258
* Atoms and Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1998
* R. Stephen Berry, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 12/31/1998
* USD 508,700.00

Professor R. Stephen Berry at the Department of Chemistry, University of
Chicago, is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program at NSF for theoretical studies of atomic and molecular
clusters. The work supported by this grant falls into four groups of related
topics: (1) The dynamical properties of atomic and molecular clusters with
emphasis on structural phases. (2) The chaotic and ergotic behavior of clusters.
(3) The relationship between the topography of cluster potential energy surfaces
and the formation of special cluster structures. Of special significance is the
study of cluster sintering. Finally, (4) electron correlation in atoms and
molecules, specifically including the study of 3 and 4 valence electron atoms.
An omnipresent theme is that the theoretical studies are directly related to
experimental studies. Clusters are special and unique forms of matter which lie
between isolated atoms and molecules at one extreme and the solid state at the
other extreme. While the properties of clusters are important for their own
sake, they are also important because they bridge these two extremes. A long
term objective of the cluster work which this grant supports is to understand
how cluster properties determine, and ultimately merge with, bulk properties.
The supported work integrates analytic theory, computation, and computer
simulation into an approach with three primary goals: (1) deepening the
understanding of commonplace properties of matter; (2) identifying new
properties specific to matter at the scale of clusters and nanoscale particles;
and (3) stimulating new experiments.