* 9414667
* Renovation of Old Power Plant Building (Engineering Research Building 43)
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Magne Kristiansen, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1998
* USD 580,000.00

NSF funding of $580,000 will be equally matched by monies from Texas Tech
University for the renovation of research facilities for the interdisciplinary
Plasma and Pulsed Power Research Program. The building is important to affected
researchers, because it provides separate and unique facilities for experiments
in physics and electrical engineering. Isolation of the space from classroom and
administrative uses is important for experiments which involve high levels of
noise and electrical interference and which sometimes continue for 24 hours/day
over several days. The 60-year old building will be completely renovated for
removal of all contaminating asbestos, repair of leaking windows and roof,
installation of new flooring, a partial second floor, a new HVAC system, an
overhead crane and a large access (loading) door. The renovated building will
provide a dedicated facility for conduct of research that is seldom undertaken
at universities, because of the interference with other normal university
functions. The program receives approximately $2M per year and is the largest
research program on campus. Support comes from a variety of federal agencies as
well as industry. The research is directed primarily at high power activities,
including industrial and military applications and NASA lunar and planetary
missions. The facility will be used for the interdisiplinary work required for
studies in power generation, conditioning, and applications for space and
terrestrial missions in the next 10-30 years and will benefit 12 faculty
members, 3 post docs, and 30 graduate and 10 undergraduate students. ***