* 9414153
* Mathematical Sciences:  Randomly Perturbed Infinite         Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1995,12/31/2000
* Peter Kotelenez, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 12/31/2000
* USD 39,769.00

9414153: Kotelenez Abstract. The research described in this proposal is an
attempt to capitalize on the different approaches and strengths in stochastic
analysis and related areas at two institutions: Case Western Reserve University
and the Institute of Mathematics of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences in Kiev.
The subject of stochastic analysis is motivated by the work of Einstein and
Smoluchowski, and later Ornstein and Uhlenbeck, on the (heavy) "Brownian"
particle in a medium of light particles. In North America much emphasis has been
on stochastic modeling in particle systems: in particular, interacting particles
and so-called "superprocesses". In the latter area, attempts have been made to
develop physically meaningful stochastic equations for the distribution of
diffusing and branching particles. So far, rigorous stochastic partial
differential equations (SPDE's) for the mass distribution have been obtained
only in very special cases (space dimension one), due to the very singular
character of the noise (a result of the independence assumptions on the level of
particles). The P.I. on the American side (P. Kotelenez) recently developed a
new approach to SPDE's which leads to physically meaningful and mathematically
solvable SPDE's in any space dimension. Since this approach starts with
stochastic ordinary differential equations for the positions and momenta of the
particles and then derives the SPDE's as mezoscopic equations from the
microscopic equations, the applicability of these equations in the physical
sciences is immediate. Rigorous results have been obtained for the case of long
range interaction and mass conservation. Together with the Ukrainian
investigators, who have expertise in both finite and infinite dimensions, we wil
l attempt to extend this approach to a large class of physically meaningful
equations for interacting and diffusing particle systems with short range
interaction and annihilation. Another focus of the proposed research is on so-
called anticipating integration, arising in elliptic equations and certain
integral equations. Anticipating integration actually originated in Kiev and has
been given much attention in Western Europe (where it is called the "Skorokhod
integral") in recent years but much less has been done in North America. The
research described in this proposal is an attempt to capitalize on the different
approaches and strengths in stochastic analysis and related areas at two
institutions: Case Western Reserve University and the Institute of Mathematics
of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences in Kiev. The subject of stochastic analysis
is motivated by the work of Einstein and Smoluchowski, and later Ornstein and
Uhlenbeck, on processes like Brownian motion. In North America much emphasis has
been on stochastic modeling in particle systems: in particular, interacting
particles and so-called "superprocesses". In the latter area, attempts have been
made to develop physically meaningful stochastic equations for the distribution
of diffusing and branching particles. So far, rigorous stochastic partial
differential equations (SPDE's) have been obtained only in very special cases .
The P.I. on the American side (P. Kotelenez) recently developed a new approach
to SPDE's which leads to physically meaningful and mathematically solvable
SPDE's in any space dimension. This approach has immediate applicability in the
physical sciences. Together with the Ukrainian investigators, who have expertise
in both finite and infinite dimensions, we will attempt to extend the approach
still further. Another focus of the proposed research is on so-called
anticipating integration, arising in elliptic equations and certain integral
equations. Anticipating integration actually originated in Kiev and has been
given much attention in Western Europe (where it is called the "Skorokhod
integral") in recent years but much less has been done in North America.