* 9414636
* Consolidation of Research Laboratories to Create a Cell     Biology/Biochemistry Laboratory Complex
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Thomas Sluss, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1997
* USD 1,555,242.00

Fort Lewis College (FLC) is an undergraduate, state-supported liberal arts
institution educates students from the culturally diverse, four-corner's region
of the Southwest, as well as other parts of the U.S. Originally an Indian High
School in 1892, the college has a tradition and mandates from the State of
Colorado to provide education opportunities to all Native Americans. As a part
of the broad liberal arts mission, the biology and chemistry departments have
developed nationally recognized undergraduate research programs. The college
administration has supported these research programs by giving priority status
in its Academic Master Plan to the training of future scientists in a
collaborative environment. Subsequently, the college has made a commitment to
the science program by supporting the renovation of outdated research and
research training space that is inadequate to sustain research activities. This
renovation project is a component of a much larger planned science building
addition that will create additional teaching and research space for all the FLC
sciences. The college, with ARI funds, will consolidate interdisciplinary
biology and chemistry research laboratories that are currently dispersed
throughout the science facility. Renovations will consist of: upgrading HVAC,
electrical, and plumbing systems; improving the fire protection system,
providing a laboratory workstation specifically designed for the physically
challenged, and installing fixed equipment such as fume hoods, a glass washer,
and a cold room. Once renovations are completed, faculty and students will have
all the necessary equipment and lab space in one physical location, facilitating
ongoing curricular development at FLC that emphasizes a community of faculty and
student collaborative research and training. An atmosphere where research at the
interface of biology and chemistry will be created, attracting and training
future scientists in biotechnology and environmental assessment and remediation.