* 9414210
* CISE Educational Infrastructure:  Multimedia Computer-Based Computer Literacy Courseware and ID Expert/CS - An Authoring System
* CSE,EIA
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Donald Cooley, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/1998
* USD 344,204.00

9414210 Zhang The objective of this project is to develop effective multimedia
computer-based courseware to teach and evaluate skills in computer literacy and
to build an intelligent instructional design/authoring system: ID Expert/CS for
efficiently developing and delivering multimedia computer-based
instruction/training for computer technologies. The courseware will include a
set of modules: Computer Basics; Electronic Mail; Operating Systems; Library
Information Systems; Internet, Bulletin Boards, and Networking; Word Processing;
Data Visualization and Spreadsheets. With this courseware, students can learn
from instructions, get help from on-line tutors, discuss learning experiences
with fellow students, raise questions. Students will be able to practice on both
simulated as well as real computer systems and receive feedback on their
performance. The course content and instructional strategies will be adaptive to
individual students. With ID Expert/CS, instructors will be able to customize
the existing courseware to meet the needs of their students, to integrate new
material into existing courseware, and to develop new courseware for computer
technologies. Successfully completion of this project will provide a means to
significantly improve the quality of education and training for high school and
college students as well as adults in the area of computers. ***