* 9414170
* CISE Educational Infrastructure:  Can We Unify the          Programming Curriculum?
* CSE,EIA
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Robert Cartwright, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/1998
* USD 503,055.00

9414170 Cartwright Programming is founded on two complementary models of
computation: as algebraic model rooted in mathematical logic and a physical
model grounded in electrical engineering. Introductory computing courses
typically teach only one of these two models and an associated language. Courses
devoted to the algebraic model teach Scheme and courses devoted to the physical
model usually teach C, C++, or Pascal. There are strong arguments for both
approaches. The algebraic model is better for teaching a taxonomy of programming
concepts and problem solving methods because it is simpler and more general. On
the other hand, the physical model provides better preparation for the software
marketplace and it exposes the structure of the underlying machine, which is
important in some applications. The competition between these two models has
split the programming curriculum -- diminishing course standardization and
undermining the interfaces between courses. To exploit the strengths of both
models and unify the programming curriculum, the Computer Science faculty at
Rice University proposes to develop the curricular materials and software tools
required to support the synergistic combination of the two models throughout the
programming curriculum. These curricular materials and software tools will
support: 1) a new introductory computing course that teaches both models of
computation, their interrelationship, and languages that support them (Scheme
and C); and 2) the integration of the algebraic model into upper level software
systems courses that have traditionally focused on the physical model. ***