* 9414808
* The Physical and Radiative Properties of Aerosols Over the  North Atlantic:  Intensive Field Campaigns
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2000
* Joseph Prospero, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2000
* USD 537,740.00

9414808 Maring The overall objectives of AEROCE Theme 2 are: a) to characterize
the physical and chemical properties of aerosols that are important to the
radiative properties of the atmosphere and to climate; b) to investigate the
processes that affect these properties; and c) to assess the relative importance
of natural and human sources. To this end an intensive aerosol measurement
program that focuses on the chemical, physical, and radiative properties of
aerosols will be carried out over the NAO and their impact on the radiative
balance in the marine atmosphere. The component of the program covered by this
project will focus on measurements of: 1) aerosol concentrations and size
distribution from 3nm to 15um; 2) aerosol light scattering, both total and
backscatter at three wavelengths using an integration nephelometer; 3)aerosol
optical absorption using an aethalometer (measured as part of a separate AEROCE
Theme 2 Proposal, Savoie et al.) Both the aerosol size and optical scattering
measurements will be made at various relative humidities to investigate the
importance of atmospheric water vapor on the physical and optical properties of
aerosols. The program will be carried out in a series of intensive field
experiments at Barbados, Bermuda and in the Canary Islands. Measurements of the
physical and optical properties of aerosols will be used to develop a
climatology of these properties. In addition, we will use our measurements of
these properties in conjunction with chemical and meteorological data produced
by other AEROCE investigators to identify and quantify the contributions of
various source regions and types. Our data, coupled with concurrent measurements
of column radiation parameters will allow closure for the direct forcing terms
in the radiative energy balance equations. The ultimate objective is to
calculate the radiative forcing caused by the major aerosol components over the
mid- and lo w- latitude North Atlantic and assess the relevance to climate.
These measurements, when coupled to radiation models, will allow estimates of
the climatic consequences of future emissions scenarios for major pollutant
species.