* 9414440
* Renovation and Consolidation of Research Facilities of      Department of Geology and Geophysics and the                Seismographic Stations
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/1995,09/30/1999
* George Brimhall, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/1999
* USD 1,500,000.00

McCone Hall, the Earth Sciences Building, located on the campus of the
University of California, Berkeley, was designed to house three departments:
Geography, Geology and Geophysics, and Paleontology. Sharing the facility with
the departments are the Earth Sciences Library, the Seismographic Stations and
the Museum of Paleontology, an organized research unit. With the explosive
growth in the scale and sophistication of experimental and analytical research
in the Earth sciences, the adaptive capacity of the allotted space has become
inadequate. There were no facilities initially designed for isotope work that
require vital clean rooms for sample preparation, or dedicated space for
experimental work involving apparatus operating at high temperatures and
pressures designed to replicate the conditions within the Earth. Analytical
facilities necessary to determine the composition of rocks, minerals and fluids
lack sufficient space. Rock crushing and pulverizing rooms are inadequate and
contribute to a major dust problem making it difficult to reduce contamination.
Nevertheless, the faculty continues to be productive in an unfavorable
environment. Funding from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will
assist the University in its efforts to renovate and consolidate research
facilities for the Department of Geology and Geophysics, and the seismographic
stations. The facilities' modernization project is an integral step in a larger
plan of enhancing academic excellence in Earth Sciences at Berkeley. While
supporting Earth scientists taking an active role in addressing urgent societal
needs, the department is in the process of establishing an improved background
base for rigorously gauging the effect of human occupation of the planet through
its environmental research program. Research laboratories where work on mineral
physics and advance materials, seismic and geological hazards, global changing
spanning a broad range of geological causes, effects and time scales, and
interrogation of the record of Earth processes retained in rocks using a wide
range of micro-analytical techniques will be renovated. The department has been
a leading force in these domains, as exemplified by pioneering research on the
catastrophic efforts of comet impacts, effects of mountain uplift, landscape
response, the development of non-renewable resources, and acid rain generation.
The renovation project will benefit 17 faculty, 20 post doctoral fellows, 46
graduate students, and 38 undergraduates, providing them with a modernized
facility to continue their pursuit of academic excellence in Earth science.