* 9414657
* UV Laser-Stimulated Etching and Epitaxial Deposition of     Compound Semiconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* James Shealy, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 08/31/1998
* USD 330,000.00

9414657 Shealy The ability to combine lithography, etching and epitaxial
deposition of advanced semi-conductor material systems will have a significant
impact on the realization of complex integrated electronic and optoelectronic
circuits. The selective synthesis of III-V compound semiconductors using UV
laser radiation in a low pressure Organometallic Vapor Phase Epitaxial (OMPVE)
deposition environment will be investigated. The availability of coherent
tunable UV laser sources with sufficient power allows localized activation of
the semiconductor surface in both etching and epitaxial growth modes of
operation. The apparatus used to support these studies is equipped with HCl gas
which allows photo-simulated selective etching to be combined with selective
growth. Several mechanisms are responsible for photo-simulated selective etching
and epitaxial growth depending on the type of laser source used and the
reactants present on the substrate surface. Among these mechanisms, one must
consider thermal processes, photo-induced decomposition of reactants, and photo-
generated carriers near the growth surface which alter the reaction kinetics.
The tunable deep UV laser source will allow various forms of excitations which
will help identify the important processes resulting in high quality selectively
grown materials. Several lithographic techniques will be pursued to realize fine
line geometries including focused laser scanning, projection through masks and
interference holography. Emphasis will be placed on synthesis techniques
resulting in high quality semiconductor structures with sub-micron resolution in
order to support the broadest range of applications in devices and circuits. ***