* 9414695
* Stabilization of Mechanical Pulp Against Color Reversion
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Arthur Ragauskas, Institute of Paper Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 08/31/1997
* USD 165,000.00

ABSTRACT Arthur J. Ragauskas CTS-9414695 This is a study of the chemical
pathways by which mercapto-derived antioxidants photostabilize mechanical pulps.
The principal factor limiting use of mechanical pulp is its tendency to undergo
color reversion. All types of mechanical pulp suffer from surface discoloration
induced thermally or photonically. The processes causing surface discoloration
also cause oxidative degradation of the carbohydrate and lignin components of
wood fibers. The accepted mechanism for this process involves photoexcitation of
extended conjugated structures in lignin; this initiates a free-radical process
either by intramolecular bond cleavage, by intermolecular abstraction of
phenolic hydrogen, or by generation of singlet oxygen. Although the mechanisms
of photoyellowing have received substantial attention, the ways in which
antioxidants could retard this process are not well understood. In this work,
the mechanisms by which thiol groups can inhibit these processes are examined.
Mechanical pulp for papermaking is a more efficient intermediate than chemical
pulp. Generally, chemical pulp uses only the cellulose in wood, while mechanical
pulp contains 85% of the original wood mass including cellulose hemicellulose,
and lignin. However, mechanical pulp is more difficult to stabilize chemically,
and this limits its use for most paper products. This is the issue addressed in
this project. This award is part of the Special Initiative in Environmentally
Benign Chemical Synthesis and Processing.