* 9414672
* Oil-Water Interfacial Synthesis as a Benign and Safer       Alternative to Conventional Liquid-Phase Syntheses
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1994,09/30/1994
* Phooi Lim, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/1994
* USD 500.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: CTS-9414672 P.I.: P.K. Lim The principle investigator
is presenting the research findings of an NSF-sponsored project at the "Mr.
Clean" Conference that is to be held at Spartanburg, SC on April 27-29. The goal
is to effect the commercial adoption of a new synthesis technique that is
environmentally benign. The new synthesis technique is based on research,
entitled "Oil-Water Interfacial Synthesis as a Benign and Safer Alternative to
Conventional Liquid-Phase Syntheses," that has been funded by the NSF. The
interfacial reaction technique avoids the need for toxic or hazardous solvents
by using an innocuous oil-water mixture in conjunction with a surface-active
catalyst complex. A surface-active ligand is used to draw the catalyst to the
oil-water interface, where the catalyst effects the reaction and where it can
also be recovered. The new technique differs from conventional phase-transfer
reaction technique in that the reaction occurs at the interface, rather than in
one of the bulk phases. Aside from being environmentally benign, the interfacial
synthesis technique also offers the advantages of easy catalyst recovery, high
reactivity and selectivity that is normally associated with homogenous
catalysis, and ease of operation. The new technique has been successfully
demonstrated on the coupling polymerization of 2, 6-dimethylphenol. high
molecular-weight poly (phenylene oxide) has been obtained in a high yield (>85%)
under mild reaction conditions. Detailed kinetic results will be presented at
the conference.