* 9414630
* Computation Probability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Colm O'Cinneide, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 08/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

9414630 O'Cinneide Computational probability is an area of study that focuses on
the application of non-randomized algorithms for analyzing systems that are
subject to randomness. Computational probability is a manifestation of the
incorporation of computers into society at large, and into science and
engineering in particular. This research is concerned with the problems of
computational probability, including the methods of phases, decomposition
methods, and asymptotic methods. Some fundamental questions regarding the scope
of the method of phases will be investigated. Decomposition method will be
combined with the method of phases in an attempt to devise a method-of-phases
approach to a large systems. A central theme of the research is to bring
numerical analysis to bear on computational probability. In particular, the
relationship between non-negative arithmetic and the accuracy of certain
algorithms in computational probability will be explored. The theoretical aspect
of this research will have some impact on applications through the
identification of good algorithms and methodologies for solving problems that
have some inherent attributes of randomness. On the application side, the work
undertaken in this research can be viewed as part of the process of
incorporating the use of computers into the design of complex systems.