* 9414381
* High-Resolution Paleoclimatic Record of a Closed-Basin      Lake in the Northern Great Plains
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Kathleen Laird, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 09/30/1996
* USD 40,121.00

Abstract ATM-9414381 Fritz, Sherilyn C. University of Minnesota This award
supports the study of fossil diatom assemblages as
paleohydrological/paleoclimatic indicators in Moon Lake,a closed- basin lake in
the northern Great Plains. This study will attempt to reconstruct changes
ineffective moisture (precipitation minus evapotranspiration. The historical
relationship between diatom- inferred salinity and climate will be used to
calculate a transfer function for effective moisture and hydrological drought
(Palmer Hydrological Drought Index) which will then be extended to the entire
post-glacial record. Climatic conditions will be assessed at century-scale
resolution through the entire Holocene and at decadal-scale resolution during
three periods: the last glaciation- deglaciation period, the early-Holocene
forest/prairie transition, and past 2000 years. Paleoclimatic records from
climatically sensitive agricultural regions such as the Great Plains, where
little is known of past climate, and what is known is of a coarse resolution,
will provide a valuable contribution to the understanding of climatic
variability on local, regional, and global scales. Understanding drought
characteristics through the analysis of long-term trends in the paleoclimatic
record will provide valuable information for planning and managing water
shortages that may accompany future drought events.