* 9414072
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Dynamic Processes on     Femto-Second Time Scales
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2001
* James Dufty, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 07/31/2001
* USD 35,480.00

9414072 Dufty This award provides funds to permit Drs. James W. Dufty and
Christopher J. Stanton, Department of Physics, University of Florida, to pursue
with Dr. Chang Sub Kim, Department of Physics, Chonnam University, Korea, for 36
months, a program of cooperative research on dynamic processes on femto-second
time scales. The objective of this research is to provide a secure theoretical
framework for a wide class of spectroscopic studies, a generalization of
existing theory to short times, and practical models for comparisons with
experiments. Prototype systems of interest include compound semiconductors of
practical importance such as GaAs an InP. Examples of phenomena to be studied
are charge carrier dynamics at short times as observed by femptosecond pump-
probe experiments. The proposed combination of experimental and theoretical
approaches will be used to provide fundamental information about the physics of
excited carriers in semiconductors and how they impact electronic and
optoelectronic device performance. The collaborators have acquired considerable
complementary experience in research related to the field of their proposed
project. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project is supported
by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). ***