* 9414404
* Atomic-Scale Mechanism of Metal Etching Reactions Determined by High-Speed Variable-Temperature Scanning Tunneling      Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Eric Altman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/1998
* USD 240,005.00

94114404 Altman The mechanism of metal etching reactions will be studied using
high speed variable temperature STM along with macroscopic surface analysis
techniques. The project will focus on halogen etching of copper because of
interest in using copper as an interconnect material in integrated circuits. The
study will concentrate on the two major reaction steps in halogen etching of
copper: 1)copper halide formation and 2)halide removal by sublimation and/or
reaction. The factors that limit etching rates will be directly determined
through STM "movies" monitoring the surface under etching conditions. A
mechanistic kinetic model based on the elementary reaction steps observed with
STM will be developed. The results will guide development of new etching
processes and new etching schemes to directly pattern fine metal lines. %%% This
research is anticipated to provide an atomic-level understanding of etching
reactions that are an important step in integrated circuit fabrication. This
understanding will aid development of new etching processes to allow new
materials to be used in integrated circuits. The use of new materials will be
required to continue the trend of increased device speed and decreased device
size into the next century. The results of this research will have an impact on
the fabrication and general perform ance of advanced devices and integrated
circuits used in computing, information processing, and tele communica tions.
***