* 9414856
* Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the  Mathematical Sciences - Numerical Linear Algebra on ParallelProcessors - June 12 - 16, 1995
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Peter Pacheco, University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 12/31/1995
* USD 23,037.00

Pacheco ABSTRACT: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference #9414856 "Numerical Linear
Algebra on Parallel Processors" In most branches of science and engineering,
numerical linear algebra plays a central role in the solution of problems by
computer. The reason for this is that scientists and engineers usually solve
nonlinear problems by reducing them to a sequence of linear problems. Thus
considerable attention has been devoted to the development of efficient methods
for solving problems in linear algebra on computers. Within the last ten years,
the advent of parallel processing has resulted in enormous additional growth in
research into numerical linear algebra, since many of the methods used on
conventional computers are inefficient when used on parallel machines. As a
consequence of this growth in research, it is extremely difficult for
researchers and students to keep abreast of the state of the art. Thus there is
a great need for someone to provide a comprehensive view of the current state of
the art and anticipated future developments. This comprehensive view is
especially important now because there is a fairly clear consensus about
architectures for parallel machines and an emerging consensus about many issues
related to software. In order to provide such a comprehensive view of parallel
numerical linear algebra and to stimulate further research into the field, an
NSF/CBMS Regional Conference will be held at the University of San Francisco
during the week of June 12, 1995, with Professor James W. Demmel as the
principal lecturer. Professor Demmel will begin by discussing parallel
architectures and parallel software. He will continue with a discussion of
parallel algorithms for dense matrices. This will include a discussion of
parallel algorithms for matrix multiplication, Gaussian elimination, the
solution of least squares problems and the calculation of eigenvalues and
eigenvectors. He will also lecture on parallel algorithms for sparse ma trices.
These lectures will cover direct and iterative methods; they will discuss
algorithms for partitioning sparse matrices, Cholesky factorization, GMRES, QMR,
and the Lanczos and Arnoldi methods. Professor Demmel's lectures will be
supplemented by lectures by several other specialists in the field. These
supplementary lectures will cover multifrontal methods for matrix factorization,
domain decomposition methods, parallel finite elements, graph partitioning, and
applications.