* 9414480
* Mathematical Sciences:  Entropy-Controlled Adaptive Finite  Element Simulations of Compressible Gas Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Leszek Demkowicz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

The principal idea of the proposed work consists in using a discrete form of the
entropy balance equation as a rationale for controlling the optimal amount of
artificial dissipation in Finite Element (FE) compressible gas simulations. The
entropy control can be reinterpreted as a nonlinear stability estimate in terms
of the so-called modified entropy function. Preliminary results include a
practical verification of the proposed ideas, using the Taylor-Galerkin
discretization in time method combined with an artificial viscosity model
proposed by Hughes and Johnson, all in the context of h-adaptive linear finite
elements. The obtained numerical results confirm that the entropy control indeed
may provide a basis for the careful balance between stability and higher-order
resolution in FE discretizations. The proposed investigations include: a study
of a local entropy control (in the results obtained so far, only a global
stability was ensured), a study of other time discretization methods and
artificial dissipation models, and extensions to higher order spatial approxima
tions. The proposed work deals with the supersonic viscous and inviscid flows,
modeled by compressible Navier-Stokes and Euler equations. Possible applications
include modeling of flows around a complete aircraft or part of it, and internal
flows related mostly to combustion problems (engines). The described research
should contribute to a better understanding of the fundamental role of the
entropy function in global and local stability of compressible gas simulations.
Based on the entropy control, an internal mechanism for controlling stability
should be built into the existing FE codes, resulting in a new, reliable and
powerful class of approximations.