* 9414820
* Mathematical Sciences: Index Theory, Coarse Geometry and    Topology of Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Jeffrey Fox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 01/31/1996
* USD 25,000.00

Fox NSF/CBMS Regional Research Conference Proposal #9414820 ABSTRACT: A
fundamental goal of mathematics is to find the RinvariantsS of objects studied
---the characteristic signatures that distinguish these objects from others. For
example, a ball is distinguished from a donut by the fact that a donut has one
hole while the ball has none. The NSF CBMS program, RIndex Theory, Coarse
Geometry, and Topology of Manifolds, S will give an overview of current work in
finding invariants for a class of geometric objects. The type of invariants
studied in this research are similar in spirit to those in the donut/ball
example, though vastly more complicated and useful. There is already a hint that
this research could have profound applications in the exploding field of
biotechnology. For example, index theory gives biochemists the tools to describe
and classify the various ways that the macro-molecules of life twist and turn in
space, a difficult and extremely important problem. John Roe of Oxford
University will give ten lectures on this multifaceted area of mathematics. The
lectures will serve several purposes. They will present new and difficult ideas
that blend several areas of mathematics, including topology, geometry and
analysis. They will also introduce graduate students to ground-breaking and
fundamental mathematical research. Additionally, John Roe, a gifted writer on
mathematics, will produce a monograph on these lectures, which will prove a
valuable resource for those attending, and for the mathematics community at
large.