* 9414416
* Genome Reorganization in Hypotrichous Ciliated Protozoa
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Lawrence Klobutcher, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1997
* USD 410,000.00

9414416 Klobutcher The molecular mechanisms involved in DNA rearrangement
processes of eukaryotic organisms are, in many instances, poorly understood.
This laboratory has been studying the extensive genome reorganization that
occurs in hypotrichous ciliated protozoan Euplotes crassus. During its life
cycle, this organism transforms a copy of its chromosomal micronucleus into a
macronucleus that contains only short linear, gene-sized DNA molecules. On the
order of 100,000 interstitial segments of DNA are deleted during this process,
including short elements(internal eliminated sequences; IESs) and highly
repetitive, transposon-like elements. Differential screening approaches will be
used to isolate genes and proteins that are expressed specifically during
macronuclear development. The developmental cDNA library will also be expressed
and screened using segments of DNA that undergo rearrangement as probes in an
attempt to directly identify clones that encode proteins that interact with
rearrangement sites. The isolated genes will be analyzed in regard to time of
developmental expression and studies will be done to determine if their gene
products localize to the developing macronucleus. Such genes, if found, will be
completely sequenced to gain further insight into their function. %%% DNA
rearrangement is used as a means of constructing functional protein coding
regions and thus can be viewed as a means of developmentally regulating gene
expression. To learn about such processes in a eukaryotic organism, this
laboratory has been, and will continue, to study the extensive genome
reorganization that occurs in the hypotrichous ciliated protozoan, Euplotes
crassus. Studies in this area will include determining which of the multiple
nuclei in a cell undergoing macronulear development is responsible for producing
developmentally regulated transcripts and examining developmental-specific genes
for shared sequence elements that are potentially involved in their coordinate
regulation. ***