* 9414243
* Measurement of Fracture Toughness of Conrete Using the      Short-Rod Procedure
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,05/31/1999
* Anthony Ingraffea, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 05/31/1999
* USD 213,854.00

9414243 Ingraffea The objective of this research is to evaluate the short-rod
(SR) specimen configuration for use in the standardized measurement of fracture
toughness of concrete. Key issues addressed are: 1)Applicability of Linear
Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) testing procedures to ASTM C39 standard
cylinder size for low, medium,and high strength concrete; 2)Applicability of
cohesive fracture mechanics-based testing procedures for low, medium, and high
strength concrete; and 3)The applicability of simplified size-effect adjustment
procedures to estimate valid fracture toughness (Klc) The project consists of
two principal tasks, testing and simulation. Two levels of SR testing will be
performed on three sizes of specimens, and three strengths of concrete. Level 1
will assume LEFM behavior. Level II will account for large scale inelasticity,
and could also measure Klc from sub-size specimens. The SR results will be
compared to those obtained from testing using the European standard. Computer
simulation will be used to: test the validity of the inelasticity correction
factor used in Level II testing; assess the consistency and accuracy of this
approach for all sizes and strengths tested; and recalibrate the current
standard SR geometries for optimal testing of concrete. The results of this
project could lead to a reliable, simple, and inexpensive standard test
procedure for a concrete property whose measurement is of increasing importance.
***