* 9414097
* U.S.-Polish Cooperative Research on Activation of Small     Molecules on Polyoxometalate Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Michael Pope, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 03/31/1997
* USD 43,688.00

9414097 Pope This U.S.-Polish Joint Cooperative Research on "Activation of Small
Molecules on Polyoxometalate Surfaces" is between Dr. Michael T. Pope of
Georgetown University and Dr. Krzysztof Filipek of the University of Silesia.
The proposed collaboration is related to Dr. Pope's current NSF grant, CHE-
9215228, "Modulation of Surface Reactivity of Large Polyoxometalate Anions."
Specifically, the principal investigators intend to explore and/or develop the
activation of small molecules (e.g., NO, NO2, CO2, SO2, O2) by appropriately
modified polyoxometalate anions in aqueous and non-aqueous solvents. The binding
of NO, O2, SO2, and CO2 to polyoxometalates has already been demonstrated in
earlier work from Georgetown and elsewhere. The focus of Dr. Filipek's recent
research has been on the binding and multi-electron reduction of dinitrogen and
nitrogen oxides with ruthenium-containing polyoxometalates. this ties in closely
with the experience developed at Georgetown regarding the redox chemistry of
polyoxometalates, and the characterization of tungstoruthenates. The ability of
polyoxometalates reversibly to accept two, four, or more electrons suggests that
pathways could exist for channelling reduction equivalents to the bound
"substrates.: It is clear because of the strong overlap in interests, both
research programs will benefit from the collaboration. This proposed research in
polyoxometalate chemistry fulfills the program objectives of advancing science
by enabling leading experts in the U.S. and Poland to combine complementary
talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence. ***