* 9414289
* Conformation and Kinetics in Polyelectrolyte Adsorption
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1994,05/30/1998
* Joseph Schlenoff, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/30/1998
* USD 232,500.00

9414289 Schlenoff Kinetics and isotherms of the adsorption of polyelectrolytes
to solid/liquid and liquid/liquid interfaces will be investigated. Metal
surfaces derivatized with surface-attached redox groups will be employed to
control the surface charge precisely in an effort to relate polymer conformation
and coverage to surface charge density. These "smart" redox-active surfaces will
be used to ascertain whether adsorption falls under thermodynamic or kinetic
control. Radiolabelled hydrophilic/hydrophobic copolymers, such as styrene
sulfonate/butyl styrene, will be synthesized and their adsorption at the
interface between two immiscible liquids will be studied. For adsorbed
polyelectrolytes, the dependence of average coil radius on salt concentration
will be measured and compared with the well-known dependence of solution
polyelectrolyte dimensions on screening length. Diblock copolymers yielding
brush-type morphologies will be adsorbed at the solid/liquid and liquid/liquid
interfaces and their surface coverages at these two interfaces will be compared
and related to the mobility of the hydrophobic surface-anchoring block.
Absorption of a polyelectrolyte into an oppositely- charged gel will be measured
to determine the extent and kinetics of penetration of a charged macromolecule
into a charged matrix under conditions of zero applied electric field. %%%
Adsorption of polyelectrolytes is the critical step in the treatment of water
for environmental purposes (drinking water, municipal and industrial effluents,
etc.). This research will provide important experiments that can be correlated
with various adsorption theories.