* 9414417
* Renovation of Organic/Bioorganic Laboratories for the       Department of Chemistry
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/1995,06/30/1998
* David Lynn, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1998
* USD 850,000.00

Lynn, David Recent advances at the interface between physical, inorganic, and
organic chemistry and the biological sciences have been dramatic. Stimulated by
the exciting scientific possibilities for the future, the Chemistry Department
at the University of Chicago plans to increase its strength in this interfacial
area. In order to do so, the department has coordinated plans for stronger
intellectual ties with both the Biological Sciences and Physical Sciences
Divisions. Crucial to the fulfillment of these plans is the renovation of the
fourth floor of George Herbert Jones Chemical Laboratory which served as the
principal chemical research building on campus from its construction in 1928
until the completion of adjacent Searle Chemistry Building in 1968. The $1.7
million project to renovate the fourth floor of Jones Hall and a cold room in
Searle Hall will be supported equally by NSF and the University of Chicago with
an investment of $850,000 each. Renovation activities will correct current space
deficiencies which include the lack of air conditioning and adequate heating,
and old and unsafe electrical and plumbing systems. These problems create
research facilities which are poorly controlled and unreliable in air/humidity
regulation and cause the loss of important research organisms. Fume hoods which
are far below the minimum safety requirements will also be replaced. The
renovated space is key to chemists, bio-physical chemists, and organic chemists.
Beneficiaries include 6 faculty directly and another 12 indirectly. In addition,
46 graduate students and 19 postdoctoral students will be working in the
renovated space. The program emphasizes participation by women and minorities
and is proactive in the recruitment of new faculty and students in further
development of the new interdisciplinary biological chemistry program.