* 9414161
* Conference on Metal and Oxygen Regulation of Gene Expression to be held March 18-24, 1995, Park City, UT
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Anne Summers, Keystone Center
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/29/1996
* USD 5,000.00

9414161 Summers The 1995 Keystone Symposium METAL AND OXYGEN REGULATION OF GENE
EXPRESSION will be held March 18 - March 24 at Park City, Utah. Although the
sub-discipline of biochemistry called "metallo-enzymology" has recognized since
early in this century a role for metals in certain biological catalyses, it is
only in the last 12 - 14 years that the pervasive role of metals in every aspect
of cellular function has come more widely to light. This new appreciation of
metallo-biochemistry or bio-organic chemistry is largely a result of advances in
biophysics and chemical spectroscopy which allow sophisticated assessment of the
behavior of metals with a variety of biological ligands, from proteins or their
prosthetic groups to nucleic acids and carbohydrates. The information gathered
through this new observational and analytic power suggests that all significant
biological processes are influenced by metals at some stage. Moreover, this
information understanding is not simply of academic interest, as certain metals
have already proven to be potent anti-tumor agents and powerful tools for
analysis and manipulation of biomolecules. Similarly, we are at a watershed in
our appreciation of the role of oxygen compounds and intermediates in biology.
While always seen as essential for higher forms of life, oxygen and its
metabolites have been more recently recognized as key players in development,
host defense mechanisms, neoplasia, and aging. Since the discovery of the
mechanism of hemoglobin, oxygen metabolism has been clearly associated with
metal chemistry. In intervening decades much more of the enzymology of oxygen
metabolism (as well as that of other biologically important gases including
nitrogen, nitric oxide, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide) has been shown to
involve metals at key steps. This conference is unique in including both metals
and oxygen and in focusing on the subject of regulation of gene expression by
them. %%% Metals and oxygen play a role in virtually every aspect of ce llular
function. Increasingly, these roles are being recognized and studied. The 1995
Keystone Symposium on metal and oxygen regulation of gene expression will bring
together researchers in this important and developing field. Genetic regulation
by metal and oxygen has significant impact on the environment, agriculture, and
health. ***