* 9414112
* Dynamic Relation Between Stock Returns and Trading Volume
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1997
* Jiang Wang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1997
* USD 143,324.00

9414112 Wang Economic analysis of markets relies on the examination of two key
variables, price and quantity. In the study of financial markets, however, the
focus has been mainly on the behavior of security prices while little attention
has been paid to quantities like trading volume. This is because trading volume
provides no additional information about prices in conventional representative-
agent models. But these models perform poorly in explaining the historic
security returns. This has led researchers to develop models with incomplete
security markets and heterogeneous investors. In these models, the dynamic
relation between volume and returns of individual stocks depends on differences
in information among investors (e.g. some investors have better information
about future payoffs) and other differences among heterogeneous investors. This
project develops an equilibrium model of stock trading and pricing in an
intertemporal multi-asset setting. The model involves dynamically optimizing
investors who trade competitively in the market for both informational and non-
informational reasons. Their trading drives the equilibrium prices of stocks as
well as the volume of trade. Testable implications will be derived concerning
the time series as well as cross-sectional behavior of the joint price-volume
series of individual stocks. The second part involves the empirical analysis of
the data on the price- volume series of individual stocks and the direct tests
of the theoretical implications.