* 9414909
* Modernization and Renovation of Space for the Campus-wide   Electron Optics Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Hamish Fraser, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 07/31/1997
* USD 144,857.00

This award will provide support for the renovation and modernization of the
Campuswide Electron Optics Facility (CEOF) at the Ohio State University. As a
part of the Center for Materials Research, the CEOF is an open facility
consisting of equipment used for the characterization of materials at a variety
of levels. In an attempt to increase the capabilities for materials
characterization, new transmission electron microscopes have been purchased, and
equipment for scanning electron microscopy and x-ray diffraction has been added
to the facility. Presently, equipment is located in a central location due to
the poor condition of the physical infrastructure of the facility. Although the
natural surroundings are suitable for the instrumentation, there has been no
provision made for sound absorption, climate control, and a dust-free
environment. In order to study the microstructural characteristics of advanced
materials, it is imperative that the detrimental effects that inhibit
performance of the equipment be corrected. NSF funds will be used to support the
following renovations: replacement of ceiling and floor coverings, infusion of
sound absorbing materials in the walls of laboratories containing sensitive
equipment, improvement of air conditioning systems within the research and
research training areas, and the provision of a room designated for off-line
analysis of data. The renovations will permit the instrumentation to be operated
at the highest level of performance, and provide for enhanced efficiency of use
and research training. Apart from the Ohio State community, the CEOF will be
available as part of the Ohio Materials Network, in which scientists and
students across the State of Ohio have guaranteed access to the equipment
required to conduct research in material science.