* 9414535
* Mathematical Sciences: CBMS Regional Conference in Mathema-tical Sciences on Topological and Probablistic Aspects of Single Orbit Orbit Dynamics: Bakersfield, CA 06/18-22/95
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Kamel Haddad, California State University Bakersfield Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/1995
* USD 20,000.00

9414535 Haddad Dynamical Systems as a mathematical subject deals with the study
of a group(or more generally a semigroup)G acting on a set X, and is subdivided
into 3 distinct but interacting components: topological dynamics, when X is a
topological space and G acts continuously on X; ergodic theory or measurable
dynamic, when X is a measure space and G acts measurably on X; and smooth
dynamics, when X is a manifold and G acts differentiably on X This CBMS
conference, to be held from June 18 to June 23, 1995 in Bakersfield, California,
on the campus of The California State University, entitled "TOPOLOGICAL AND
PROBABILISTIC ASPECTS OF SINGLE ORBIT DYNAMICS," with main speaker Professor
Benjamin Weiss of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem. The last CBMS conference
dealing with the same general subject was given by Professor Hillel Furstenberg
in Fargo North Dakota in 1990. Needless to say, new developments in dynamical
systems have evolved since then, making the timing for a new conference
appropriate. The goal of the conference is to introduce the speaker's new
approach to "single orbit dynamics" to the study of dynamical systems and to
explain how it relates to the various integral notions in ergodic theory and
topological dynamics developed in the literature, thus leading the way to new
approaches and results in the area.