* 9415834
* Inspection with  Holographic Optical Elements
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Yeshaiahu Fainman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 09/30/1998
* USD 299,304.00

9415834 Fainman A hybrid optical/electronic system that uses holographic optical
elements for the inspection of machined parts is proposed. With this approach, a
holographic optical element corresponding to the part is generated using the
database that exists in the computer- aided design system. The holographic
optical element stores information on the geometry of the ideal designed part,
which is later compared with the real, machined part. The comparison is done by
an optical system interfaced with a microcomputer to obtain digital output. With
this strategy, instead of measuring the absolute values of the shape, the PI
measures only the deviations of the actual part surface from the designed part.
Measuring deviations instead of absolute values may increase the measurement
resolution and accuracy by orders of magnitude. The proposed research on the
development of a CAI system will have a significant impact on manufacturing
technologies because it will provide tools that will allow different subsystems
in the manufacturing processes to be integrated in real time. The proposed
studies will also advance the areas of optical signal processing and optical
computing. For example, new approaches to encoding problems for computer
holography will be introduced, and a new method based on the optical utilization
of a priori knowledge will be developed for image processing, pattern
recognition and machine vision. The Technology Reinvestment Project of ARPA has
recently established a Manufacturing Engineering program at UCSD; thereby the
proposed work will also have a unique impact on the education of students at the
graduate and undergraduate levels in manufacturing engineering. They will gain
extensive first-hand experience in the growing field of optics in general and in
optical sensing and optical signal processing in particular. The students
background will be further enhanced through special courses and seminars related
to this subject. The PI expects that the unique background of the students
(i.e., optical technology and manufacturing systems, including CAD, CAM, and
robotics) will be an important factor in the introduction and efficient
integration of advances in optical technology into different areas of U.S.
manufacturing industry. ***