* 9415393
* Fourth Karachi Symposium on Protein Structure-Function,     Karachi, Pakistan, January 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1995
* David Smith, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9415393 Smith Description: This regional project provides support for the
participation of five U.S. scientists in the fourth international Symposium and
Workshop on Protein Structure-Function, planned for January 1995, Karachi,
Pakistan. The U.S. team will be headed by David Smith, professor of medicinal
chemistry at Purdue University. The Pakistani organizer is Zafar Zaidi of the
HEJ Postgraduate Institute of Chemistry at the University of Karachi. Past
symposia have achieved high levels of success. They have attracted leading
international protein chemists including Nobel Laureates and have been effective
in developing contacts that often lead to collaborations among scientists from
over a dozen countries. Proceedings from all the symposia have been published.
The six day symposium will be followed by a one week workshop on protein
structure elucidation and will provide substantial training for research
fellows, members of the teaching faculty, and students from Pakistan and
neighboring countries. Scope: This is a significant meeting on an important
topic in basic science that has many direct applications in health and
agriculture. These gatherings do much to catalyze the development of
biochemistry in Pakistan and South Asia, and they provide a unique training
opportunity for budding young scientists in the region. The host institute has
excellent facilities for research in this area of analytical biochemistry. The
Karachi area is well suited due to the concentration there of the pharmaceutical
and natural medicines industries. NSF funds will be used to support the U.S.
participants and partial support for a few young scientists from neighboring
countries in South Asia. ***