* 9415590
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research:  Catalytic Activation  of Lower Alkanes: Dehydrogenation and Alkylation Reactions
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Gustavo Larsen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 03/31/1999
* USD 23,820.00

This U. S.-Argentina Cooperative Science Award supports travel expenses and
some expendable research supplies related to the visits of Drs. D. Resasco,
Univ. of Oklahoma, Norman, OK and G. Larsen, U. of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE to
Argentina. The purpose of the visits is to perform research on the activation of
lower alkanes to produce olefins, oxygenates and higher hydrocarbons. The
Argentine co-P.I. is Dr. J. Parera, of INCAPE, Universidad Nacional del Litoral
. Dr. A. J. Rouco, Universidad del Sur, Bahia Blanca, will also be involved in
the research. The project consists of two parts. The first will deal with the
dehydrogenation of lower alkanes over Pt- based catalysts. The research will
attempt to demonstrate that the addition of promoters alters the surface
concentration of H under certain reaction conditions. The effect of the
alteration on the activation and stability of alkane dehydrogenation catalysts
will be investigated, and the catalytic materials will be fully characterized.
The second part of the project will examine the activation of alkanes over solid
superacid catalysts. Several reactions, such as methane-olefin alkylation
isobutene-isobutylene alkylation and n-butane isomerization will be studied. The
effects of Mn and Fe as promoters for the catalytic activity of sulfated
zirconia will be investigated. The research will attempt to determine whether
such promotion results in highly active acid materials able to convert methane
at low temperatures. The effects of Pt and Sn as promoters for improving the
life of the catalyst will also be investigated. The research will focus on
elucidating deactivation mechanisms, and on determining whether the presence of
Pt and Sn modifies the nature and rate of coke formation. Such promotion may
result in a catalyst with a very high activity and, in consequence, able to
operate at relatively low temperatures at which equilibrium conversions are
high.