* 9415702
* Studies of Many-Body Dynamics in Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1996
* William Steele, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lesser Blum
* 10/31/1996
* USD 95,000.00

William Steele from Pennsylvania State University is supported by a grant from
the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to continue his computer
simulation studies of many body dynamics in liquids. The goal of the proposed
research is to gain an improved understanding of the relation between molecular
interaction laws and the time-dependent correlations that determine these
macroscopic properties. Steele hopes to develop predictive techniques for the
calculation of these observables for dense fluids from molecular properties.
Steel will use computer simulation to calculate time correlation functions which
he then proposes to analyze for 2, 3 and 4 body correlations. Much of the
successful research in the theory of liquids has been concerned with
calculations of equilibrium thermodynamic properties that are dependent upon the
interaction energies and distributions of pairs of molecules in the fluid. It is
now generally believed that the combination of computer simulation and theory
has produced a satisfactory solution to this problem, so that current research
in this particular area is devoted more to improvements in quantitative accuracy
rather than development of new theoretical approaches. The dynamical properties
of dense fluids and their associated time correlation functions are much less
well understood. A great deal remains to be learned about the molecular basis
for the behavior of time correlation functions in dense fluids. Steele's
research addresses the calculation of the transport and spectral characteristics
of molecules from first principles based on interaction potentials. This
research could have a significant impact on furthering our understanding of the
physical properties of dense fluids