* 9415160
* Renovation and Modernization of Facilities for GIS and      Remote Sensing Research at Oklahoma State University
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Stephen Stadler, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/1998
* USD 160,000.00

As a recipient of ARI funds, Oklahoma State University (OSU) will renovate and
modernize its research facilities used for geographic information systems (GIS)
and remote sensing research located in the Geography Building on the Stillwater
campus. The multi-use facility has a growing reputation in the region as a
center for geographic research. Examples of research conducted in the Department
include: investigations of the diffusion of language innovations, modeling
spatial correlation between landscape and atmospheric conditions, and
integrating remote sensing and geographic information system technologies for
optimizing crop yields. Geography faculty collaborate with faculty in other
departments on campus as well as professionals affiliated with academe and
industry in institutions throughout the country. In addition to performing high
quality research, the GIS remote sensing faculty at OSU has made a major
commitment to increasing the number and quality of students who are involved
with geographic research in Oklahoma, especially among populations that are
traditionally under-represented in the field. This project will provide the
critical research infrastructure that will allow the program to continue to
perform cutting edge geographical research into the twenty-first century.
Deficiencies that require immediate attention are the following: inadequate
electrical power and grounding, safety problems associated with exposed gas and
electrical conduits, inadequate heating and air conditioning and wall
alterations to improve the efficiency of space used for research and research
training. Once completed, the project will support critical investigations in
the areas of global change and environmental research.