* 9415653
* Fundamental Properties of Eclipsing Binary Stars
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Daniel Popper, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Terry D. Oswalt
* 01/31/1999
* USD 48,873.00

Popper 9415653 As our theoretical understanding of the structure and evolution
of stars advances, greater and greater demands are made on the reliability and
accuracy of the fundamental properties of stars -- their masses, radii, and
temperatures. This proposal will advance our empirical knowledge of these
properties into the relatively unexplored realm (because of strong selection
effects) of stars less massive than the Sun down to about 0.6 solar masses. The
only source of information on fundamental properties of normal stars accurate
enough to test modern theories of stellar structure and evolution is detached
eclipsing binaries. Several factors provide the wherewithal to overcome the
difficulties posed by the selection effects, which result from the low
luminosities and small sizes of the less massive stars. First is the
availability of the Hamilton eschelle-CCD spectrometer at the Lick Observatory,
which is unsurpassed for the effective observation of spectra of double-lined
eclipsing binaries down to about the 12th magnitude. Second is the availability
of efficient computer programs (IRAF programs in this case) for obtaining
reliable radial velocities of both components in the spectrum. Even though the
lines in the crowded spectra are washed out by axial rotation and badly blended,
cross-correlation of the binary star spectrum with one from a star of known
velocity does the trick. Third is the availability of computing equipment (now
routine) for rapid application of the programs. The resulting masses in the new
realm, obtained from analysis of the binary star orbits, will be essential in a
wide variety of problems in stellar astronomy. ***