* 9415143
* Replacement Biological Research Laboratory Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Ole Isacson, McLean Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/1998
* USD 711,137.00

In the last decade, McLean Hospital, affiliated with the Harvard Medical
School, has been one of the world's most productive sites for neuroscience
research. For the most part, laboratory research at McLean is done at the
Mailman Research Center (MRC). Constructed in 1945, the MRC currently provides
laboratory support and space for 24 investigators, 26 post-doctoral students, 7
graduate students and additional undergraduate and graduate students during the
summer. At present, neuroscience research is performed in the Biological
Research Laboratory facility. Researchers engage in programs of related projects
studying the cytostructural elements essential for normal neuronal growth and
development and signal transduction mechanisms mediating neuronal plasticity in
development and aging. However, due to its antiquated support facilities,
coupled with significant building code modifications and requirements, the
facility no longer provides adequate laboratory space. Infrastructure utilities,
including HVAC, electrical, plumbing, water filtration, and acid neutralization
systems are in desperate need of replacement. High technology instrumentation
and techniques required to conduct many of the extremely complex analytical
tasks cannot be sustained in the presently configured space. This award will
provide partial funding for the replacement of the Biological Research
Laboratory. Upon completion, modernized research space will be available to
support investigations in neurodevelopmental, molecular and structural
neuroscience. The research programs will benefit by an improved infrastructure
that will be capable of supporting advanced techniques and by furnishing a clean
environment required for operating the instrumentation utilizing these
techniques. This renovation project will provide the neuroscience program with a
laboratory environment designed to complement modern research procedures
required to meet high technology research protocols.