* 9415190
* Renovation of the Guggenheim Computing Research Facilities  at Georgia Tech
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/1995,03/31/1997
* James Craig, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 03/31/1997
* USD 615,000.00

With the support of NSF, the School of Aerospace Engineering at Georgia Tech
will develop a highly flexible, readily expandable, and low-cost Heterogeneous
Computer Environment for Parallel Processing (HCEPP) to provide the primary
computational resources for the majority of computational engineering research
within the School. The facility will be developed on three floors of the 62-year
old Guggenheim Building and is being undertaken in conjunction with building-
wide renovations financed by the institution. For over 60 years, the School of
Aerospace Engineering at Georgia Tech has been a national leader in engineering
research and research training including activities in fluid dynamics,
materials, diagnostics, turbulence, combustion, design optimization, concurrent
engineering, and multimedia and complex aerospace system simulation. For several
decades, this activity has relied on the use of powerful mainframe computers
located in central campus facilities. However, computing technology has provided
geometrically expanding computational capabilities in increasingly smaller
systems, and these developments have obsoleted the mainframe computer in favor
of networked high- performance workstations operating in tightly clustered
groups. NSF support will renovate research space within the Guggenheim Building
to create an environment for the integration of local computers and high-speed
network communications. Funds will be used to develop high-speed FDDI Hubs with
Ethernet Switching Hubs for the Ethernet-equipped workstations. Renovations
supported under this grant will also provide a pro-rata share of improvements to
the building infrastructure including installation of new HVAC capability, and
installation of appropriate electrical and fire protection systems. Increased,
and dedicated, HVAC capability will be added to meet the specific needs
associated with the HCEPP facilities which are in discipline-specific
computational labs distributed throughout the three floor environment. The
renovated facilities will offer opportunities for new research endeavors
including the integration of design, simulation, and large-scale computation
involved in multidisciplinary efforts such as the High Speed Civil Transport
(HSCT); the modeling and simulation of turbulence/chemistry interactions in
entire engines; airframe and engine integration and fluid-structure interactions
in new aerospace vehicles; and modeling of pollutant dispersion in the
atmosphere. Additional students will be able to participate in the research
activities through the reconfiguration and rehabilitation of existing space.
Currently 76 are enrolled in the program; it is anticipated that research and
research training capacity will increase to 158 students (a 107% increase) with
completion of the new facilities. Students, including program participants from
Clark-Atlanta University, will work with 8 faculty members to explore
capabilities in concurrent engineering -- integrating state-of-the-art
scientific computational tools interacting automatically with optimization
tools, geometrical engines, and tools for analyzing manufacturability and
maintainability of products.