* 9415562
* Determination of Thorium-230 and Protactinum-231 in Ocean   Waters by Isotope-Dilution Mass Spectrometry
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Michael Bacon, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/1998
* USD 476,611.00

9415562 BACON The primary objective of this project is to develop a new
procedure for the chemical analysis of seawater that will permit the naturally
occurring radionuclides thorium-230 (half-life 75,000 years) and
protactinium-231 (half-life 32,000 years) to be measured in the same sample. The
new procedure will employ mass- spectrometric techniques of measurement and is
intended to replace currently used procedures based on alpha-spectrometry. It is
expected that significant improvements in sensitivity, precision, and speed of
analysis will be realized. The reasons for the special focus on this particular
pair of radionuclides are that (1) they provide unique information about the
flux of particular matter in the oceans and the scavenging processes that
regulate the level of a number of chemical species, and (2) they can be
important tools for deciphering the sedimentary record of climate over the last
glacial cycle. Improved data on the distributions of the two radionuclides will
permit better testing and validation of their use as oceanographic tracers.
After the new procedures are perfected, a study of the distribution of
thorium-230 and protactinium-231 in the western North Atlantic Ocean will be
undertaken. This part of the project will provide a full-scale demonstration of
the new procedures and is expected to reveal features of the distribution that
cannot presently be resolved.