* 9415493
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Remote Characterization  of Buried Objects Using Scattered Acoustic or Electromag-   netic Waves and Related Problems
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1995,10/31/1999
* Ralph Kleinman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1999
* USD 18,120.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in applied
mathematics between the University of Delaware's Center for Waves, directed by
Ralph Kleinman, and Dominique Lesselier of the Division of Waves at the French
National Center for Scientific Research, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. The
participants include postdoctoral researchers and graduate students from both
countries. The objective of their research is to develop theoretical aspects and
practical numerical codes for the detection of the size, shape, location and
properties of objects embedded in inhomogeneous or layered materials. They will
apply mathematical techniques to the following problems: (1) nondestructive
detection of cracks or other faults in a known host medium; (2) location and
identification of objectives buried near the earth's surface (pipelines, land
mines, or cables); and (3) remote determination of the composition of the
structure of the earth's crust. The proposed collaboration takes advantage of
complementary mathematical techniques developed by the U.S. and French groups
and access to experimental data which will be supplied by the French group. The
project will advance theoretical understanding and may result in new
computational techniques for studying problems in remote sensing and electrical
engineering.