* 9415680
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Development of New Photo-refractive Polymers for Dynamic Holographic Storage         Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1995,12/31/1999
* Nasser Peyghambarian, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1999
* USD 16,384.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in optical
materials. The U.S. and French investigators are Nasser Peyghambarian of the
University of Arizona's Optical Science Center, Bernard Kippelen of the
Institute for Physics and Chemistry of Materials in Strasbourg, France, and
Francois Kajzar of the Center for Nuclear Studies in Saclay, France. Their
objective is to develop new photo refractive polymers. They also plan to study
the use these improved polymers in optical computing functions such as optical
correlation. Photo refractive polymers are important materials for dynamic
holographic storage and image processing. In contrast to existing inorganic
photo refractive crystals, the polymers can be processed easily in variable
forms (thin films, rods, fibers) and used in the fabrication of new photonic
devices for optical data processing. The U.S. investigator brings to this
collaboration expertise in optical sciences, specifically, in dynamic
holographic recording and photo refractive polymer fabrication. This is
complemented by the abilities of the French investigators in chemistry and
materials sciences and their expertise in the synthesis and characterization of
organic nonlinear materials. Their combined effort will result in improved,
efficient, speedy and sensitive optical materials.