* 9415388
* Stratospheric Infrared Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Frank Murcray, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/1999
* USD 449,944.00

9415388 Murcray Infrared remote sensing instruments have provided a wealth of
information about the atmosphere. Because nitrogen and oxygen are almost
completely transparent in the infrared, radiative transfer is dominated by minor
and trace gases. Many of these gases are chemically active, and infrared
techniques provide methods of measuring their concentrations. Changes in the
chemical balance in the atmosphere also affect the Earth's radiative budget.
Since most of the planet's cooling takes place in the mid infrared, accurate
measurements are needed both to detect changes, and to verify model
calculations. This project will continue infrared measurements of the
stratosphere and upper troposphere using balloon and ground-based instruments.
The very high resolution solar absorption spectrometer will make one flight per
year from the US. This instrument has been flown several times previously to
obtain solar absorption spectra. The spectra taken as the balloon ascends show
the change in atmospheric transmission with altitude. Once the balloon is at
float altitude (approx. 40 km), changing geometry as the sun sets provides very
long optical absorption paths entirely at high altitudes. These data allow
chemical concentrations of several species to be measured simultaneously as a
function of altitude, provide tests for models which calculate atmospheric
radiative transfer, and verify the molecular parameters database necessary for
the models. Data from a very high resolution ground based solar spectrometer
(operated by the DOE) will be used to recover information on chemical
concentrations in the stratosphere and upper troposphere. DOE is accumulating a
long term data set for the study of clouds and radiation, which will contain a
long record of stratospheric and upper tropospheric chemical compounds.