* 9415489
* VELACS -- Verification of Liquefaction Analysis using       Centrifuge Studies -- An Extension
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Kandiah Arulanandan, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 08/31/1997
* USD 294,173.00

9415489 Arulanandan This is an extension to the VELACS (Verification of
Liquefaction Analysis by Centrifuge Studies) project, the purpose of which was
to evaluate the relevance and effectiveness of the existing numerical and
constitutive models used in the analysis of soil liquefaction. The motivation is
to resolve the difficulties encountered in the Class A predictions of VELACS,
and to isolate the main cause of these difficulties. VELACS revealed that the
current procedures used for the analysis of geotechnical structures are not
suitable, in general, for predicting the consequences of soil liquefaction. Some
of the most promising procedures available for the analysis of soil liquefaction
and its consequences will be identified in this project. A series of carefully-
performed triaxial and torsional tests are to be conducted and carefully
examined, so as to provide a small but reliable data base. These data will be
used for the calibration of constitutive models, which in turn will be used for
a Class A prediction exercise of two centrifuge model experiments. The
predictions will be compared with the experimental results, and reasons for
potential discrepancies will be discussed. Multiple checks for reliability will
be conducted in an effort to isolate reasons for the lack of reliable
predictions of the experiments already considered in the VELACS project. ***