* 9415151
* Renovations to Research and Research Training Laboratories  Olin Hall of Science, Macalester College
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Daniel Hornbach, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1997
* USD 500,000.00

Hornbach NSF funding of $500,000 will be used to support the renovation, repair,
and reconfiguration of selected research and research training laboratories for
the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, Geology, Mathematics/Computer Science,
Physics and Psychology at Macalester College. This newly-designed space will
provide efficient and updated space in support of faculty research, faculty-
student research collaborations and independent upper-level student research and
research training. The renovated laboratories and research support space will be
located in Olin Hall of Science, part of the college s Olin-Rice science
complex. The NSF- sponsored renovations will occur within Macalester s major
renovation and construction project to improve Olin and Rice Halls which were
constructed in 1965 and 1971 respectively. The effort is designed to support the
increasingly laboratory- rich, research-based, interdisciplinary approach to
learning science. The entire project will bring the facility into compliance
with current safety and access codes and will reconfigure current space that is
highly compartmentalized inhibiting collaborative research and research training
among the scientific disciplines. Fifteen faculty members and approximately 45
students will be direct beneficiaries of the NSF project. Macalester plans to
make eight new appointments within the sciences by the year 2000, complementing
the twenty new research-active science faculty that have been hired since 1984.
***