* 9415336
* Atmospheric Trace Constituents and Global Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1999
* Wei-Chyung Wang, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 11/30/1999
* USD 284,398.00

Abstract ATM-9415336 Wang, Wei-Chyung SUNY Albany Title: Atmospheric Trace
Constituents and Global Climate Atmospheric ozone absorbs incoming solar
radiation, in particular, the UV-B radiation and acts as s greenhouse gas by
absorbing outgoing longwave radiation. Recent studies suggest that the observed
ozone changes in the stratosphere and troposphere can substantially perturb the
radiative forcing with important climate implications. However, large
uncertainties exist, mainly related to radiative transfer schemes and vertical
distributions of ozone and temperature. In addition, ozone is a secondary
constituent formed by chemical reactions in the atmosphere involving several
precursors (NOx, hydrocarbons and CO). The concentrations of these precursors
depend on the oxidation process in the atmosphere, which varies strongly with
time and space (and thus the climate state) and depends, in addition to the
precursors, on the hydrogen radicals like OH and HO2. There fore, it is
necessary to have a self-consistent chemistry-radiative-dynamical model to
stimulate the observed ozone changes and account for the feedbacks in computing
the radiative forcing. Concerns have also been raised in recent years about the
climatic efffect due to increasing tropospheric sulfate aerosols of
anthropogenic origin. The aerosols are expected to cool the surface by directly
backscattering the solar radiation and directly enhancing the cloud albedo due
to increased aerosol cloud condensation nuclei. However, large uncertainties
exist in the calculated radiative forcing, in particular the enhancement of the
cloud albedo, and its climatic effect. This project will continue modeling and
observational studies of "global climate and atmospheric trace constituents"
with focus on atmospheric ozone and sulfate aerosols. The PI will use an
improved radiation model to address several issues related to the radiative
forcing calculations associated with observed ozone changes. His ma in effort is
to use the NCAR/GENESIS (General ENvironmental and Ecological Simulation of
Interactive Systems) global model to study the direct climatic effects due to
observed ozone changes and increased sulfate aerosols. For the indirect climatic
effects, two exploratory tasks are initiated: the development of a coupled
climate-chemistry model through continued collaboration with Prof. Ivar Isaksen
at the University Oslo; and the study of increased cloud albedo associated with
enhanced number density of sulfate aerosols and its parameterization for use in
GENESIS through collaboration with Dr. Joyce Penner at the Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory. This research is important because it addresses questions
of primary importance to global change research.