* 9415417
* Selective Dispersion and Flocculation in Alumina Hematite   Mineral Suspensions using Polymeric Reagents, U.S.-India    Collaborative project, Award in U.S. and India Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 12/31/1998
* USD 95,126.00

9415417 Somasundaran Description: This project supports collaboration between
Dr. P. Somasundaran of the School of Mining at Columbia University and Dr.
Pradip of the Tata Research, Development &amp; Design Centre in Pune, India. An
integrated approach is proposed to develop an accurate understanding of the
mechanisms involved to alleviate the problems associated with separation of
fines and ultrafines from raw materials. It is planned to investigate selective
flocculation/dispersion of hematite- alumina system of fines and ultrafines in
the presence of polymeric reagents. Emphasis will be on the identification of
mechanisms by which interactions between reagents at the interface control
selectivity. A multi-pronged approach using diffuse reflectance infra-red
Fourier transform (DRIFT) spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, electron spin
resonance spectroscopy along with conventional techniques of electrokinetics,
adsorption, flocculation and wetting will be employed. Scope: The project brings
together two well regarded laboratories in India and the U.S. to conduct
research in an important area of mineral processing. The scientists have
complementary capabilities and resources and also have excellent track record of
research. Students from the two countries will be involved in the research. The
project meets INT objectives for enhancing U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas
of interest to both sides. ***