* 9415507
* Various Properties of Natural and Triggered                 Lightning Discharges
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Martin Uman, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/1998
* USD 506,676.00

9415507 Uman The objective of the proposed research is an improvement in the
presently existing knowledge of the physical processes comprising the lightning
discharge with emphasis on the least well understood processes of lightning
initiation in the cloud and lightning attachment to ground. The project includes
both experimental and theoretical studies of natural and artificially initiated
(rocket- triggered) lightning flashes. The latter part of 1994 will be primarily
devoted to the analysis of the presently in-hand unique triggered-lightning data
(currents, multiple-station electric and magnetic fields, and optical records)
acquired in 1993 in Florida and Alabama. During 1995 and 1996 the research will
be primarily concentrated on building two relatively large data bases: (1)
extremely close measurements of electric and magnetic fields (in conjunction
with simultaneous current and optical records obtained by cooperating research
groups) of the rocket-triggered lightning at Camp Blanding, Florida and Fort
McClellan, Alabama and (2) electric and magnetic field records of both cloud-to-
ground and in- cloud natural lightning acquired with a state-of-the-art
digitizing system. The year 1997 will be devoted primarily to the analysis of
the newly acquired data and associated theoretical studies concentrating on the
least understood processes that occur inside the cloud and during the lightning
attachment to ground. The development of a new theory of the lightning discharge
to ground taking into account the lightning attachment processes a will be
attempted.