* 9415986
* Access To A Competitive Networked Multimedia Research       Environment for Minorities
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Christopher Ward, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 08/31/1996
* USD 49,998.00

9415986 Ward The objective of the CISE II-MI grant which this planning grant
will develop is to provide the minority students enrolled in Hunter College of
the City University of New York with a Multimedia Instructional Facility for
Computer Science. In accomplishing this objective a number of specific
"strategic tasks" have been identified. These tasks include the acquisition of
resources, attainment of specific levels of recognition, and reorganization of
infrastructure. While different in nature, all are considered vital to
accomplish the primary goal. Specifically, the tasks are: i) effective
allocation of new office space; ii) accreditation to the Computing Sciences
Accreditation Board (CSAB); iii) establishment of properly equipped core
computer science laboratories; iv) establishment of a Machine Learning and
Cognition Center The II-MI award will be used to accommodate these plans as
follows: i) provision of two 30 workstation based laboratories and coordination
of this equipment with envisaged Software Design and Computer Architecture
laboratory sequences: ii) provision of additional computing resources for the
graduate research laboratory; iii) provision of a communications infrastructure
to link the undergraduate laboratories, research laboratories, faculty and
staff; and iv) provision of salary support for the first five years of a full
time network administrator position.