* 9415987
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Resource Partitioning    Among Woody Plants of a Species-Rich Cerrado
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1995,09/30/1998
* Guillermo Goldstein, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/1998
* USD 35,200.00

9415987 Goldstein This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program supports travel
expenses related to the visits of Drs. G. Goldstein, Univ. of Hawaii, F.
Meinzer, Hawaiian Sugar Planters Association, and P. Rundel and P. Jackson,
Univ. of California Los Angeles, to Brazil. They will be working with Dr. A.
Franco, of the Univ. of Brasilia and his students, on determining the extent of
temporal and spatial partitioning of soil water and nutrient resources among
representative woody plant species of a cerrado of central Brazil. They also
propose to examine related above ground processes, such as long term water use
efficiency, nitrogen use efficiency, and other ecophysiological parameters as
measures of resource use and competition. Stable hydrogen isotope techniques
will be used to address the question of soil water resource partitioning. Stable
nitrogen isotopes will be used to distinguish modes of nitrogen acquisition
among species (i.e. nitrogen fixers from non fixers). To integrate below ground
and above ground processes, stable carbon isotopes will be used to assess long-
term intrinsic water-use efficiency. Gas exchange measurements will be used to
determine the mechanisms by which variation in water use efficiency is achieved.
Representative woody plant species with different patterns of leaf production
and other characteristics will be selected for the study. ***