* 9415691
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Tolerance of Intentional Faults in Information Processing Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Algirdas Avizienis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1998
* USD 16,348.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in
information systems between Algirdas Avizienis of the University of California,
Los Angeles, and Jean-Claude Laprie of the Laboratory for the Automation and
Analysis of Systems in Toulouse, France. The objective of their research is to
specify, design, implement and evaluate experimentally a distributed fault-
tolerant system that incorporates tolerance of all classes of faults. Fault
tolerance is the attribute of information processing systems which makes in
possible for the system to continue delivering its services correctly regardless
of faults that cause errors in information processing. The investigators will
study computer fault tolerance with respect to security and privacy violations,
unauthorized access, execution of non-specified services, and loss of important
services. The U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration considerable
expertise in fault-tolerant computing. His group will focus on the tolerance of
malicious logic in a system. This is complemented by similar French expertise
and the availability of a large network of workstations in France devoted to
this effort. They will address the tolerance of intrusion into a system. The
project will advance fundamental understanding in fault tolerance and security
and could lead to improved, secure systems. These systems are needed and
important for the rapidly expanding multimedia and telecommunications markets.