* 9415532
* Enzymatic Synthesis of Esters from Fatty Acids              U.S.-Morocco Collaborative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1995,02/29/2000
* John Gainer, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/2000
* USD 43,992.00

9415532 Gainer Description: This project supports a cooperative project by two
U.S. scientist, Drs. John Gainer and Giorgio Carta, both in the Chemical
Engineering Department at the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, and Dr.
Ahmed Zaidi, Ecole Mohammadia d'Ingenieurs, Universite Mohammed V, in Rabat,
Morocco. Preliminary research results indicate that esters made from alcohols
and fatty acids can be synthesized using enzymes in organic medium. The planned
work aims at confirming these results, and extending the method to the synthesis
of other esters. These esters have significant applications in the food,
cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries because of their good biodegradability
and low toxicity properties. In the planned work, the first phase will focus on
the reactions of oleic acid with short-chain alcohols, using lipase enzymes. The
second phase will emphasize the reactions of oleic acid with long-chain alcohols
to produce high molecular weight esters which have uses as plasticizers and
lubricants. Scope: This project meets a number of important objectives of the
Division of International Programs. It allows cooperation of three active
scientists whose capabilities complement each others to do important scientific
work; it allows for a foreign scientist in a developing country to gain the
experience necessary to continue this useful research beyond this project, and
it provides the scientific basis for what may be new useful products in
important industries in the U.S. and in less industrialized countries. ***