* 9415685
* An Investigaton of the Interaction Between Codes and        Decoding Machines
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/1995,02/29/1996
* Oliver Collins, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Aubrey M. Bush
* 02/29/1996
* USD 75,945.00

ABSTRACT: NCR-9415685, Johns Hopkins University, "An Investigation of the
Interaction Between Codes and Decoding Machines", PI-Collins: The essential
concept of this research is to study decoding, itself, as a communications
problem. Electronics has advanced to the stage where many chips, each containing
tens or even hundreds of thousands of gates, can advantageously be exchanged for
a decrease in antenna aperture in a satellite terminal or for a lower
transmitter power in a remote buoy or cellular telephone. These latter
applications are well able to use extremely powerful coding because of the
asymmetry of cost in the two directions of communication. In the case of
cellular telephones, for example, power savings are much more important in the
link from the mobile unit than in the link to the mobile unit. A sophisticated
decoder in the base station drawing power from the AC mains can save battery
power in the mobile transmitter. Similarly, a large scale environmental data
collection network need incorporate only simple and cheap encoders in the
transmitters; a single decoder in a satellite or ground station can service all
of these encoders. Unfortunately, exploiting even a small fraction of the
processing power of a single piece of silicon is hard, let alone that of a
module containing many chips. The difficulty is providing sufficient internal
communication among the different parts of the decoding machine. Today, wiring
connectivity rather than gate count limits the sophistication of signal
processing. This research presents bounds on the amount of information which has
to flow in and out of the different sections of a decoding engine when it is
partitioned into separate parts. At the moment, these bounds are confined to the
Viterbi decoding of shift register based codes. This research will extend these
bounds to other codes and decoding algorithms and, more importantly, explore
codes (both convolutional and general finite state machine based) which allow
decoding with minimum information flow. The same techniques used in analyzing
decoder information flow will also be applied to other situations where
partitioning is important, e.g., very large circuit switches. Dissecting decoder
information flow may result in a new generation of codes of great practical use
and will certainly yield insights into the ultimate limits of the type of codes
in use today.&lt;br/&gt;********************************************************
*********************&lt;br/&gt;Aubrey M. Bush&lt;br/&gt;Program Director,
Acting Deputy Divison Director&lt;br/&gt;Division of Networking and
Communications Research and Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation