* 9415351
* Imminized Artificial Neural Systems - Extensions, Analysis, and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* K. KrishnaKumar, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/1998
* USD 203,471.00

7 # L L $ $ $ $ $ 2 D D D D N X X $ | x D 6 * ` $ 6 * 6 6 ` , 6 6 6 6 6 6
Krishnakumar 9415351 The science of immunology has many parallels to the robust
adaptive nature desired in aretificial adaptive systems. Some of these parallels
were investigated under an NSF researcch initiation grant and were demonstrated
on two problems: (a) on-line identification and adaptive control of an uncertain
system; and 9b) synthesis of complex controllers using man-in-the loop
simulations. Experimental vertification using radio controlled aircraft is
currentyly in progress. This project will extend the initial concept to include
(a) analysis if IANS' capabilities (completeness, robustness, and adaptiveness)
and limitations ( Computational speed, storage, etc.); (b) higher order building
blocks identification; (c) inclusion of several micro-features of the immune
system; and (d) explore its usefulness in adaptive critic functions. As part of
this project, a 'Completely autonomous remotely piloted aircraft closed-loop
control system will be developed and tested. Towards this goal, efforts are
already underway with the development of a dedicated laboratory facility at the
University of Alabama. Other applications will include uncertainty management
for spacecraft control and operations. Immunized artificial neural systems, when
fully developed and tested, could be used in a myriad of problems. Some of these
are: complex process modeling, high performance aircraft/missile control,
autonomous UAV mission control, autonomous scout aircraft/rotorcraft operations,
complex design ad manufacturing processes, and autonomous space explorations and
robot planning. u st adaptive nature desired in aretificial adaptive systems.
Some of these parallels were investigated under an NSF researcch initiation
grant and were demons trated on two prob L O @ b L ! ! ! ! L L L O L ! 9 :~ H H
( F G ( H H ( d ' @ = / R B H -:LaserWriter Times + + + J e J S , krish.abs
Alicia Harris Alicia Harris