* 9415614
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Charged Particle         Dynamics between the Adiabatic and Current Sheet Limits
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Richard Martin, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1997
* USD 8,888.00

This two-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in
atmospheric and space physics between Richard F. Martin of Illinois State
University and Dominique Delcourt of the French Center for the Study of Earth
and Planetary Environments. The project addresses the physics of the aurora
borealis (aurora substorms) in response to solar wind variations. The
magnetotail region behind the earth is where aurora substorms are triggered and
energized. The investigators propose three computational/theoretical projects
that address: (1) basic nonlinear dynamics of substorms; (2) applications of the
model to the near-Earth magnetotail; and (3) consequences of the model on ions
of ionosphere origin entering the magnetotail. These studies are relevant to
understanding of space storms, which cause commercial spacecraft anomalies and
failures, interruptions of power distribution and of communications. The U.S.
investigator brings to this collaboration background in basic nonlinear dynamics
and magnetotail dynamical modeling. This is complemented by the French
investigator's expertise in ionospheric and near-Earth particle dynamics. The
project will further understanding of space storms and extend the work on
predicting space weather.