* 9415095
* Renovation of Laboratories at the Center for Reproduction ofEndangered Species
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1994,11/30/1996
* John Phillips, Zoological Society of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 11/30/1996
* USD 373,760.00

The Center of Reproduction of Endangered Species (CRES) is located in a 900
square meter facility on the grounds of the San Diego Zoo. The Center is the
multidisciplinary research and conservation branch of the Zoological Society of
San Diego. The mission of CRES is to broadly examine, through bench and field
endeavors, the requirements for self-sustaining populations of animals,
especially those now critically threatened with extinction. Eight general
disciplines are represented at CRES: behavior, comparative physiology,
endocrinology, genetics, infectious diseases, pathology, reproductive
physiology, and virology and immunology. Research is conducted in the main CRES
building that was last renovated in 1964. Although structurally sound, the
current configuration of laboratory space impedes faculty from conducting modern
research. The existing cabinetry and work stations that were originally
installed are inefficient with respect to utilization of available space.
Because the laboratories were designed for initially designed for diagnostic
purposes, most of the laboratory areas use space poorly. ARI funds will be used
to renovate support facilities and reconfigurate space for three laboratories:
endocrinology, cytogenetics, and recombinant DNA studies. Each laboratory will
have new casework, and workstations that will dramatically increase the
productivity of research activities . The renovated facility will accommodate
more visiting scholars, and students at all academic levels, enhancing the
quality of the research and research training programs.