* 9415335
* The Preparation and Characterization of Well-Dispersed      Copper/Carbon Systems for Use as Selective Hydrogenation and Nitrous-Oxide Decomposition Catalyst
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1999
* R. Terry Baker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/1999
* USD 515,751.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9415335 M. Albert Vannice Copper crystallites dispersed on three
allotropic forms of carbon are prepared, characterized, and examined as
catalysts for selective hydrogenation of conjugated systems and decomposition of
nitrous oxide. Both very small and large copper particles are placed on high-
surface-area graphitized carbon fibers, diamond films, and activated amorphous
carbon. The influence of pretreatment on the size, morphology, and chemical
state of the copper particles is investigated. Characterization is accomplished
using controlled-atmosphere electron microscopy (CAEM), high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy, chemisorption, X-ray diffraction, diffuse-
reflectance Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (DRIFTS), electron spin
resonance (ESR), and copper-63 solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance. Microwave
techniques to measure the electron ability and conductivity of carbon are used
to guage the effect of pretreatment on the electrical properties of the three
forms of carbon and the influence of small adsorbed molecules. Test reactions
include hydrogenation of furfural to furfurol, hydrogenation of crontonaldehyde
to crotyl alcohol, and decomposition of nitrous oxide. A commercial copper-
chromite catalyst is studied for comparison. The effects of copper crystallite
size and type of carbon support on specific activity are determined. These new
copper/carbon catalyst have three potentially significant industrial
applications: replacement of commercial copper-chromite catalyst because spent
chromite catalysts are a hazardous waste and hen e a disposal problem;
development of new copper catalysts to reduce unwanted byproducts from selective
hydrogenations; and decomposition of nitrous oxide, a greenhouse gas, produced
as a byproduct in certain industrial processes such as production of adipic
acid, a precursor of nylon. This award is part of the Environmentally Benign
Chemical Synthesis and Processing Initiative. ***