* 9415748
* International Program Development In Undersea Robotics &amp;    Intelligent Controls: (A Joint U.S./Portugal Effort),       January, 1995, Lisbon, Portugal
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1995
* Kimon Valavanis, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Norman Caplan
* 11/30/1995
* USD 52,675.00

9415748 Valavanis This action is to develop an international cooperative
activities program between the U.S. and Portugal and thus, with close coupling
to other European Economic Community (EEC) countries and with additional
potential coupling to Latin America countries - in the area of Undersea Robotics
and Intelligent Controls. As a first step towards this major effort, it is
proposed to organize a two day Workshop in January, 1995, to be held in Lisbon,
Portugal, hosted by the Institute Superior Tecnico- DEEC, with title, "Undersea
Robotics and Intelligent Controls." The main objective of the proposed workshop
will be to allow the invited U.S. participants and their foreign colleagues to
identify specific topics of common interest for long-term research
collaboration. The benefits of the proposed international cooperative activities
program for the U.S. will be many. They Include: i) Coordination and integration
of research efforts in Undersea Robotics and Intelligent controls between the
U.S. and Portugal/EEC, ii) Unification and coordination of cutting edge research
in both U.S. and Portugal/EEC, iii) Developing the basis for future joint
seminars, workshops, visits, etc., which enhance the international perspectives
of U.S. scientists and engineers, and, iv) Enhancement of the U.S. role as a
research leader in the area of Undersea Robotics and Intelligent Controls.
Finally, it is proposed that all related travel expenses for the invited U.S.
participants, be covered by NSF funds. Expenses for all European participants
will be covered by Portugal and/or EEC educational funds.