* 9415927
* NSF-CGP Science and Engineering Fellowship Program:         Automated Building Construction
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1998
* Roozbeh Kangari, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 04/30/1998
* USD 68,200.00

9415927 Kangari This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. Roozbeh Kangari,
Department of Civil Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and Mr.
Junichiro Maeda of the Advanced Technology Division of Shimizu Corporation.
Project funding will enable Dr. Kangari and one of his graduate students to each
spend a total of six months in Japan, resident at the Shimizu Corporation, in
order to conduct cooperative research on the SMART project, a totally automated
system for high-rise building construction. The researchers will focus their
attention on: productivity improvement of the SMART project, statistical
analysis of quality enhancement by SMART, safety improvement of the construction
work environment, and comparison of the SMART project with similar systems in
the U. S. It is expected that the collaboration will lead to new findings and
recommendations that could assist the industry in the U. S. and Japan. This
proposal brings together research scientists from two countries working in the
area of robotics in the construction industry. The U. S. engineer and his
graduate student will have the opportunity to become familiar with research
techniques, data, equipment, and facilities at the Shimizu Corporation's
Advanced Technology Division while contributing to the overall research effort.
Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange
and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international collaboration. ***