* 9415483
* NSF Design and Manufacturing Grantees Conference,           January 4-6, 1995, La Jolla, CA
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Richard Skalak, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/1995
* USD 137,231.00

9415483 Skalak This award is to conduct the annual NSF Design and Manufacturing
Grantees Conference. The conference will involve researchers from the Division
of Design, Manufacture, and Industrial Innovation and the Division of
Engineering Education and Centers, both located within the Directorate for
Engineering, and the Division of Information, Robots and Intelligent Systems,
located within the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering. The conference ensures that the individual researchers are informed
about the ongoing activities of their colleagues. An elimination of duplication
of their efforts may be achieved and a degree of cooperation may result from
this activity. An overall improvement of efficiency of the research activity
could be expected. In addition, the conference program organization allows for
ample time to discuss manufacturing research in detail with the collective
research community at the meeting, with feedback to and input from the National
Science Foundation. Finally personal contacts between the grantees and program
directors in the Divisions should contribute to clarifying many current issues
in their work. The aims of the conference are to enhance communication between
researchers, encourage joint research, promote synergism, and develop networks
for technical interchange. Attendees to the conference gain an early access to
the information disseminated.