* 9415822
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Molecular Structure and  Mechanisms of Polyene Channels
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Scott Hartsel, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1998
* USD 15,000.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in
biophysics between Scott C. Hartsel of the University of Wisconsin, Eau Claire,
and Jacques Bolard of the Laboratory for Biomolecular Physics and Chemistry at
the Pierre and Marie Curie University in Paris. The objective of their research
is to study the mechanism(s) of action of model ion channels in a group of
antibiotics called polyene macrolides. This group includes the clinically
important Amphotericin B, a new and less well understood group of polyenes. The
project addresses the unknown structure-function relationship of transmembrane
ion channel in Amphotericin B and the role of cell membranes. The project will
advance understanding on the role of solubility, self association, cellular
response and length of the molecule in the mechanism of channel formation. The
U.S. investigator, who is located at an undergraduate institution, brings to
this collaboration expertise in biophysical studies. This is complemented by
French expertise in model membrane systems and special instruments for ion
measurements at the French laboratory. The international collaboration will
broaden the research experience of the investigator and his undergraduate
students who will benefit from the visits of a leading French researcher.