* 9415858
* CEDAR:  Modeling Metastable Helium Emissions in the         Terrestrial Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1994,05/31/1997
* James Bishop, Computational Physics Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 05/31/1997
* USD 79,992.00

This collaborative research, proposed by Computational Physics, Inc. and
Southwest Research Institute, will carry out modeling studies of the magnitude
of and spatial variation in the upper atmosphere's 1083 airglow emission. The
project will build upon the investigator's previous exploratory work in a two-
year effort. The investigators will include empirical and analytic descriptions
of the attenuation of photoelectron fluxes upon passage through the plasmasphere
in the iterative calculation for conjugate photoelectron fluxes. They will also
generate comprehensive maps (latitude vs. local time) of helium distributions
and resulting 1083 nm and 388.9 nm emission intensities under a variety of
geophysical conditions, both for revealing the sensitivities of the airglow
emissions to various inputs and for supporting the analysis and interpretation
of 1083 nm and 388.9 nm data obtained by others. In the second year, they will
assess line profile features for remote sensing of thermospheric temperatures
and motions. Helium is a tracer of upper thermospheric dynamics, so that
measured line center displacements may offer a unique test of general
circulation models of the upper thermosphere. However, since the 1083 emission
peak altitude is above 400 km, observed displacements will not constitute a
direct wind speed measurement, but rather will reflect the magnitude of lateral
(ballistic) fluxes governed by latitudinal and longitudinal gradients in density
and temperature as well as by wind patterns.