* 9415227
* Dissertation Enhancement in Japan:  Pollinator Loss in an   Isolated Population of Primula Seiboldii:  Analysis and     Intervention
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* James Thomson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 08/31/1997
* USD 36,140.00

9415227 Thomson This dissertation enhancement award supports three research
visits in Japan over a three- year period for Neal Williams, a graduate student
at the State University of New York at Stonybrook, who works under the direction
of Professor James Thomson, Department of Ecology and Evolution. This is a
collaborative project with Professor Izumi Washitani, Institute of Biological
Sciences, University of Tsukuba. Attempts to conserve rare plants often involve
the establishment of small natural reserves surrounded by inimical habitat. In
principle, such plants may risk reproductive failure due to the decline of
pollinators. However, there have been few if any thorough studies, and
management plans for plants seldom consider pollinator management. This project
is a collaboration between a Japanese botanist and American bee ecologists to
investigate such a situation in a wild native primrose, Primula seiboldii. This
plant experiences seed-set failure in an urban reserve north of Tokyo, and a
variety of evidence suggests that this is because native bumble bees have
disappeared from the area. The project is expected to solve a particular problem
and also to draw the attention of conservationists to such problems and their
solubility. It is hoped that this project will be come a demonstration project
for native bee recovery. Exploiting this special opportunity is important to
improving conservation plans worldwide and for emphasizing the interdependence
of species in nature. ***