* 9415488
* High Resolution Vibration - Rotation - Tunneling            Spectroscopy of Weakly Bound Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1994,11/30/1997
* Geoffrey Blake, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 11/30/1997
* USD 370,100.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. Geoffrey A. Blake of the California Institute of Technology will engage in
detailed spectroscopic studies of intermolecular forces as revealed by weakly
bound, i.e., van der Waals and hydrogen-bonded, complexes. These studies will
encompass experimental, computational, and theoretical investigations. The
complexes are formed in supersonic expansions of the component gases into a high
vacuum, and the studies will focus on the far infrared region where most of the
telltale intermolecular vibrational frequencies of the complexes are located.
Hybrid laser spectrometers that operate throughout the microwave, millimeter,
and far-infrared regions will be used to obtain the spectra, with resolution
appropriate to resolve the rotational, tunneling, and hyperfine structures of
the vibrational bands. The experimental efforts are coupled to computational and
theoretical studies to extract from the experimental data reliable
intermolecular potential energy surfaces. Systems to be investigated include
bi-, tri, and higher-order complexes composed of monomer molecules, such as
benzene-water, ammonia-water, nitrogen-water, and carbon monoxide-water; argon-
water in which the several argon atoms and several water molecules form a
complex; dimer complexes composed of water with hygrogen fluoride, hydrogen
chloride, hydrogen cyanide, and acetylene; and larger size complexes such as
glycine-water and others of biological importance such as those involving amino
acids and purines/pyrimidenes. Accurate descriptions of intermolecular forces
play a pivotal role in chemistry and molecular biology. Despite long term
interests in the weak, i.e., van der Waals and, in particular, hydrogen-bonded,
interactions there is a paucity of reliable quantitative data that describe
these effects. Traditional methods for obtaining information on the
intermolecular interactions were based on the determination of the coefficients
in the virial expansion of the equation of state of a gas, pressure broadening
of spectral lines, and other classical properties. More recently molecular beam
scattering experiments have yielded useful results. The couplings of molecular
beam techniques with those of high resolution microwave and laser spectroscopies
have provided tools by means of which the most detailed and exact data on weakly
bound complexes composed of two or more individually strongly bound monomer
molecules are obtained. The investigations pursued in this project will
contribute accurate structures, lifetimes and other dynamical parameters of
weakly bound molecular complexes as well as detailed quantitative information on
their intermolecular potential energies. This information will lead not only to
a better understanding about the cohesion of matter in general, but also for
those systems that are of practical importance in environmental and biological
chemistry.