* 9415426
* The Americas Program: International Conference on Physics inCentral America; San Salvador, El Salvador, October 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* James Vary, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 08/31/1995
* USD 25,000.00

9415426 Vary This Americas Program award will fund travel and related expenses
for a group of U.S., Central American, and Caribbean scientists to participate
in an international conference on the development of science research in Central
America, to be held in San Salvador, El Salvador, in October, 1994. Organizers
are Dr. James Vary, Iowa State University, Ames, and Dr. Galileo Violini,
Universidad de El Salvador. The objective is to analyze the current status of
science in the region with the purpose of developing a program to build research
and education collaborations with the U.S. and other developed nations. The U.S.
participants include noted scientists with strong interests in promoting science
education and research in developing countries. There is a widely recognized
need to improve the level of science teaching and research in most Central
American and Caribbean countries. Due mostly to the low number of scientists at
the masters and doctorate levels in these countries, there is an inadequate pool
of properly prepared college level science educators. Consequently, few
significant programs of science research are established . To address these
issues over the long term, topics of discussion during the conference will
include, among others, advanced studies programs, modalities of realization, use
of new technologies for teaching and communication, and establishment of
international links between research groups. ***