* 9415117
* Laboratory Renovation for Biology Curriculum Reform
* O/D,OIA
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1996
* Robert Prezant, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 11/30/1996
* USD 738,168.00

Indiana University of Pennsylvania is the recipient of NSF funds for the
renovation of research and research training space in Carl S. Weyandt Hall,
constructed in 1965. The building is the home of the science departments,
including Biology. No significant work has been done in the building since its
erection. The section of the building that houses biology presents serious
conditions that impede the conduction of research activities. Some of the rooms
are not configured appropriately, preventing their use at optimal efficiency.
Support facilities are inadequate, and the majority of laboratories lack
sufficient fume hoods, gas, water, electric and telecommunication utilities for
modern, instrument-intensive work. In addition to inadequate utilities, very
little permanent casework is available for current and future projects, and
laboratories are not in compliance with ADA regulations. With the curricular
changes occurring rapidly in science, the facility is not in operative condition
to support the research mission of the department. The renovation will enhance
the department's tradition of student-faculty research that is especially strong
in ecology and environmental biology. Rooms dedicated to investigative studies
for 11 faculty members are slated for renovation. The modifications will
include: installation of new casework, benches, and two fume hoods; redesign
floor plans to optimize efficiency without loss of flexibility; upgrade of
water, gas, and electrical utilities; and the installation of a cold room and
three environmental chambers. The impact of this project will be positive and
immediate. Improved spaces will allow research groups to conduct their work more
efficiently, by accommodating more students, and allowing them to embark on
projects that otherwise would be impossible due to the limitations that exist in
the present building. A more exciting atmosphere will be produced which will
contribute to the department's ability to recruit students and remain
competitive in attracting a diverse and broadly represented faculty and student
base.