* 9415358
* Light Emission From Silicon Nanocrystals Manufactured by    Spark-Processing:  A Novel Technique for Preparing "Porous  Silicon" Under Controlled Conditions
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Rolf Hummel, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1998
* USD 253,400.00

9415358 Hummel The proposed research is aimed towards increasing the level of
sophistication in our understanding of the electronic structure and of the
materials and processing variables that influence photoluminescence in
nanocrystalline ("porous") silicon. We will develop, investigate, and
characterize nanocrystalline silicon which has been produced by spark
processing, a technique that is markedly different from commonly employed
preparation methods (i.e., anodic etching). We intend to develop further
understanding of the mechanisms responsible for the photoluminescence of spark
processed nanocrystalline silicon and to possibly produce an efficient light
emitting test structure. %%% The proposed research has high likelihood for
leading to new scientific discoveries and insights into basic mechanisms of
light emitting silicon. Research of this type on "porous" silicon may eventually
lead to efficient silicon-based light emitting diodes, advanced display systems,
optical memories, or possibly lasers. An important feature of the program is the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area of materials and processing research. This
research will contribute to improving the general performance of advanced
devices and integrated circuits used in computing, information processing, and
telecommunications. ***