* 9415715
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Study of the Dynamic     Characteristics of Plasma Spray Torches
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1999
* Joachim Heberlein, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1999
* USD 18,000.00

9415715 Heberlein This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative
research in plasma-aided manufacturing between research groups at the University
of Minnesota and the University of Limoges. The U.S. investigators are Joachim
Heberlein and Emil Pfender and the French investigator is Pierre Fauchais. The
objective of their research is to perform diagnostic experiments designed to
improve the reliability and controllability of the plasma spray process. The
proposed research addresses the major cause of the lack of reproducibility,
namely the uncontrolled dynamic behavior of the arc in the plasma torch. An
improved plasma torch could have important applications in large-scale
manufacturing and a variety of industrial processes, among them cutting,
welding, plasma spraying, extractive metallurgy, melting- refining, and chemical
synthesis. The U.S. and French laboratories have developed specific diagnostic
techniques for studying the plasma process. The proposal takes advantage
complementary expertise and ongoing experimental efforts. Different diagnostic
techniques will be used on plasma torches of different geometries. Subsequent
experiments on torches of similar design will then be conducted. The project
will advance understanding of the dynamic behavior of the plasma arc and will
result in improved design guidelines for plasma spray equipment. ***