* 9415192
* Renovation of the HH Dow Library for the Establishment of anIntegrated Systems Laboratory
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/1995,03/31/1998
* Debasish Dutta, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 03/31/1998
* USD 455,000.00

The University of Michigan and the National Science Foundation will jointly
participate in the replacement of facilities for an interdisciplinary program in
manufacturing research. NSF support will help establish a new Integrated
Machining Systems Laboratory in the Dow Building. The project is designed to
promote new innovations in all aspects of machining systems, including machine
design, process design and planning, tooling, system design and integration,
computer control architectures, information networks, and measurement and
control systems. These efforts are interdisciplinary in nature and will be
facilitated through proximity of engineers, scientists and students in renovated
space. The machine tool industry is the backbone for all durable goods
manufacturing, including the production of automobiles, airplanes, farm
machinery and construction equipment. Just a decade ago, the U.S. was the world
leader in the machine tool industry; today it is ranked fourth. To regain its
competitive position, the U.S. machine tool industry needs to rely on
technological innovations and a well-trained workforce. NSF-sponsored
renovations will include installation of increased electrical power, and
computer networks with fiber optic cabling to support the integrative machining
system. In addition, modifications will be necessary to reconfigure some of the
space and to increase the HVAC capability.