* 9415178
* Renovation of the Carraway Building Research Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/1995,03/31/2000
* Alan Zindler, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 03/31/2000
* USD 609,999.00

Florida State University is the recipient of funds from the Academic Research
Infrastructure Program to aid in the renovation of the second and third floors
of the Carraway Building. Occupied by the Department of Geology, the facility
was designed and constructed 40 years ago. The range of research activities in
which faculty, graduate, and undergraduate students are involved in span diverse
disciplines within the Earth sciences, encompassing the areas of structure and
tectonics, sedimentology, micropaleontology, marine geology, hydrology,
geomophology, and isotope geochemistry. Changes in faculty, and in growing
research programs over the past 40 years, along with deterioration and aging of
some of the physical infrastructure, have resulted in a precarious situation.
The building is no longer adequate to support current and planned research and
training activities. The renovation will consist of relocating and consolidating
activities dedicated for research and research training. The intent is to make
more efficient use of limited available space, by developing shared laboratories
for purposes and activities common to research personnel. As a result, there
will be a reduction in the duplication of facilities, the alleviation of severe
crowding in existing laboratories, and the provision of better access of
facilities to students and staff. More serious problems associated with the
design and aging of the facility that directly affect the quality of and
potential for certain types of research activities will be addressed. The
renovation will supply adequate utilities to areas where they are needed,
replace old and disabled fume hoods, and significantly reduced the level of dirt
and contamination associated with the building's air-handling systems, exposed
overhead pipes, and decaying acoustical tiles. Upon completion, the modernize
facility will create the ideal laboratory setting, enabling the pursuit of
current and future research that will provide more opportunities for students to
engage in research training. Moreover, the modernization of the laboratory
facilities will enhance the department's capability to attract visiting
scientists, and to recruit quality faculty members.