* 9415101
* Renovation and Consolidation of Astronomical Support        Facilities for Ground Based Observing and Instrument        Development
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/1995,11/30/1996
* Stuart Mufson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 11/30/1996
* USD 162,000.00

A partnership between NSF and Indiana University will renovate facilities for
the Astronomy Department within 34 year-old Swain Hall West. The renovation
activities will develop a high-performance local observing station and a modern
instrument development laboratory for the design and fabrication of state-of-
the-art electronic and electro-optical instrumentation. Coupling today's
computer controlled telescopes and electronic instrumentation with high-speed
digital communication capabilities, it is possible to do interactive
observations from locations that are remote from the physical location of the
telescope. Indiana University researchers expect to conduct observations from
the university facility utilizing the Wisconsin, Indiana, Yale and National
Optical Astronomy Observatories (WIYN) telescope at Kitt Peak, AZ and the more
local, and recently funded, robotic telescope at Morgan Monroe State Forest, 15
miles from the Bloomington campus. The new Remote Observation facility will
include a network of powerful computer workstations, and will enable research
programs to be far more cost effective and efficient. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be able to participate in modern astronomical research utilizing
large telescopes without the expense and time involved in traveling to the
telescope sites. A second emphasis of this renovation effort is the creation of
an electronics and electro-optical fabrication facility for the continued
development of instrumentation for the two telescopes. The development
activities will assure the incorporation of the latest technology in the WIYN
and Morgan Monroe State Forest robotic telescopes. The Astronomy department
plans to make the renovated facility the central focus for departmental research
and research training. Project beneficiaries include 7 faculty, 2 post docs, 18
graduate students and 15 undergraduates. Renovation activities will include