* 9415611
* Biogeochemical Cycling and Authigenic Mineral Formation in  Amazon Shelf Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Josephine Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/1998
* USD 414,275.00

9422470 Savin The Amazon River delivers about 1.2 billion metric tons of
sediment annually to the eastern tropical continental shelf of South America.
The potentially reactive layer of amorphous iron, manganese, and aluminum oxides
coating much of this sediment is exposed on the continental shelf to seawater,
mixed with labile organic matter derived from marine plankton, and then
deposited in shelf sediments where it undergoes a variety of diagenetic (burial-
related) biogeochemical reactions. Having documented a variety of such
diagenetic processes in their past work, the PIs will now look in more detail at
the variety of minerals in Amazon Shelf deposits and attempt to distinguish
those of continental origin from those which have been formed in situ by
diagenetic reaction. Mineralogical analysis will involve transmission electron
microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and electron microprobe to determine particle
structures and composition -especially to newly-precipated minerals from those
of continental origin and to document the formation and/or dissolution of
surface coating over originally deposited particles. Oxygen, strontium, and
boron isotope analyses will be used help establish the origin (continental or
marine) of the variuos mineral phases. This research is geophysically
provocative for two main reason. Some authigenic Amazon Shelf minerals like
siderite (a reduced iron carbonate) are found in ancient sedimentary deposits
whose paleoenvironmental characteristics are unclear and have long been in
dispute; determining the origin of such minerals in present-day deposits could
help solve such problems. Secondly, the Amazon River is a major contributor of
fresh water, solutes, and sediments to the world ocean; thus understanding the
fate of materials delivered to its delta is important for understanding a large
part of global marine geochemistry.