* 9415112
* Renovation of the Environmental Engineering and Sciences    Research Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Vernon Snoeyink, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1997
* USD 1,015,000.00

NSF and the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign will jointly fund the
renovation of the Environmental Engineering and Science Research Laboratories of
the Department of Civil Engineering. The facilities are located on the fourth
floor of the Newmark Civil Engineering Laboratory which was built in 1967. The
original space was designed as traditional chemistry laboratories for use in
water quality research. However, current and proposed research activities in the
Environmental Laboratories have changed substantially over the past 28 years,
and the existing facilities have become completely inadequate to address
increasingly stringent regulations for drinking water, wastewater and solid
waste, efficient, low-cost clean up strategies for hazardous waste spills and
dumps, and aerosol science and air resources engineering. Renovation activity
will focus on the enhancement of the HVAC and systems, and facilities for safe
handling of hazardous materials. Temperature, particle, and humidity control are
necessary for delicate electronic instrumentation, carefully controlled
experiments and sample analysis. Many areas of environmental research have not
been pursued, because facilities were not available to safely handle hazardous
materials. Space reconfiguration and the addition of fume hoods and solvent
storage will address this need. In addition, installation of an enhanced system
for inter-laboratory data communications and re-design and improvement of bench
configurations and casework will be important work undertaken with NSF support.
The renovated facility will be a significant asset to research and research
training efforts in four main areas: environmental microbiology and biological
process engineering; physical/chemical treatment processes; aerosol science and
air resources engineering; and biological monitoring and environmental resource
management. The new facilities will aid researchers in the development of an in-
house capability to apply molecular biology techniques to water quality control
research, preparation of field studies and sample analysis, and for the safe and
efficient handling of organic compounds and environmental pathogens. The
beneficiaries of the project include 9 faculty, 50 masters and 25 Ph.D.
students. Twenty percent of the graduate students are women, and 5% are Black or
Hispanic. Wishing to encourage participation by a greater number of under-
represented minorities in the Ph.D. program, the college has developed an effort
to recruit and retain an increased number of these students.