* 9415419
* Small Signal Stability of Electric Power Systems,           Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1997
* K Padiyar, Indian Institute of Science
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 12/31/1997
* USD 13,548.00

9415419 SenGupta 9302565 Pai Description: This research will investigate small
signal stability of electric power systems as affected by the addition of High
Voltage DC (HVDC) lines and control devices such as Static Var Compensators
(SVC), Power System Stabilizer (PSS) and other Flexible AC Transmission System
(FACTS) devices. The objective will be to develop an overall linearized model to
include the above mentioned devices and to examine their relative influence on
dynamic stability. This research is important in determining the causes of low
frequency oscillations and voltage collapse. Both of these are operating
problems faced by utilities in the U.S. and India. Prof. M.A. Pai, University of
Illinois Urbana will collaborate with Profs. D.P. Sen Gupta & L.R. Padiyar,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. The research team is exceptional. Pai is
an internationally recognized leader in the use of direct methods for power
system stability, Sen Gupta and Padiyar have done state-of-the-art system
studies involving FACTS and adaptive PSS and are highly respected. Scope: This
research will address a problem in the area of power systems that is of
importance in the U.S. and India. While there is much accumulated experience in
the U.S., the Indian academic institutions are very good at keeping up with
state-of-the-art, and the power industry there quite mature in terms of their
absorption of technology. The results expected from this collaboration include
research papers, course development at the University of Illinois, and an
advanced level monograph emanating from the research. ***