* 9415985
* Ecophysiology of Phototrophic Carbon Allocation and         Partitioning in Marine Microbial Mats
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Hans Paerl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1999
* USD 266,856.00

9415985 Paerl Previous research on carbon (C) dynamics of microbial mat
communities has involved the quantification of C in and out of the mats. While
these studies have increased the knowledge of the collective C fluxes of marine
microbial mats, they have failed to take into account that mats are composed of
physiologically and evolutionary distinct constituents including bacteria,
cyanobacteria and eukaryotic microallgae. This research will pursue the next
logical step which is to discern the contributions to the C budget of microbial
mats by the individual components of the mat community. The distinguishing
feature of this research is the use of a mechanistic/functional approach for
identifying the principal organisms and ecophysiological factors controlling the
key processes in benthic microbial mats. Principal research objectives include:
1) elucidating the ecophysiological processes responsible for mat community
structure and function, 2) revealing mechanisms controlling microbial mat
consortial interactions, and 3) identifying species and functional group
succession. Specifically the research will document seasonal changes in the
identity (taxonomic groups) and abundance (standing stock) of mat phototrophs
and diazotrophs using microscopy and HPLC methods. C fixation and allocation
will be evaluated using 14C, O2 microelectrodes, microautoradiography and in
situ growth rates, The primary ecophysiological factors (light, nutrients, sub
aerial exposure, etc.) that regulate C fixation, allocation and community
succession will be assessed in a series of controlled mat manipulation
experiments.