* 9415656
* Studies of Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Robert Meyer, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 373,608.00

9415656 Meyer Technical abstract: This project concerns several related subjects
in the physics of liquid crystals: colloidal liquid crystals based on aqueous
virus suspensions, molecular aggregate liquid crystals, and dynamical systems
and pattern formation. These inter-related subjects involve the physics of
liquid crystals at three levels, the microscopic level of the molecules or
particle and their interaction, the mesoscopic level of ordered phase formation
and materials properties, and the macroscopic level of observable phenomenology.
The objective is to develop fundamental understanding of liquid crystalline
ordering and its consequences in the systems being studied. The general
knowledge gained from these studies has implications for the synthesis and
processing of novel materials, such as ultra-high-strength fibers, and for
potential biosynthesis of materials in which self-assembly is important. %%%
Non-technical abstract: This project concerns several related subjects in the
physics of liquid crystals: colloidal liquid crystals based on aqueous virus
suspensions, molecular aggregate liquid crystals, and dynamical systems and
pattern formation. These inter-related subjects involve the physics of liquid
crystals at three levels, the microscopic level of the molecules or particle and
their interaction, the mesoscopic level of ordered phase formation and materials
properties, and the macroscopic level of observable phenomenology. The objective
is to develop fundamental understanding of liquid crystalline ordering and its
consequences in the systems being studied. The general knowledge gained from
these studies has implications for the synthesis and processing of novel
materials, such as ultra-high-strength fibers, and for potential biosynthesis of
materials in which self-assembly is important. ***