* 9415843
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Dynamics and Geologic    Environment of the Coastal Zone of Baja California Sur,     Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1997
* Donn Gorsline, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/1997
* USD 22,000.00

941583 Gorsline This Americas Program award will support the doctoral
dissertation research of two students, M.C. Enrique Nava Sanchez, and M.C.
Janette Murillo de Nava, under the direction of Dr. Donn Gorsline, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, on coastal studies in Baja California Sur,
Mexico. The goal of the project is to obtain a comparative understanding of
little known arid and semiarid coastal types. Emphasis will be in two areas: the
fan-deltas of the Gulf of California coast of Baja California Sur and the semi-
arid Magdalena Coastal Plain of the Central Pacific coast of Baja California.
These tectonically active areas provide a unique opportunity to contrast broad
coastal plain evolution with steep mountain fan-delta coasts under similar
climatic conditions. Fan-delta deposits are very important potential
stratigraphic hydrocarbon reservoirs. In the study area they serve as ground
water reservoirs and as main habitation areas. An understanding of their
geometry, architecture, physical properties and physiography is thus of
considerable significance. Modern work on fan-deltas has been mainly done in
glacial or humid areas and models for the deposits are based on outercrops in
East Greenland and their occurrences in the North Sea. By diversifying the
climatic and physiographic setting, this study will provide an important
addition to the field of sedimentology and to ongoing studies in Arctic fjords
and protected waters elsewhere. *** .