* 9415346
* Hierarchical Specification, Analysis, and Testing of        Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 06/30/1998
* USD 189,056.00

As computers become ubiquitous, they are increasingly used in safety critical
environments. Typical safety applications are control systems, monitoring
systems and communication systems. Any failure of such computer systems may
cause a great financial loss, environmental disaster or even the loss of lives.
The potential high cost associated with an incorrect operation of these systems
has created a demand for a rigorous framework in which various design
alternatives can be formally specified and rigorously analyzed and tested before
implementation. It is commonly believed that future safety critical systems uill
be more complex due to increased demands on their functionalities, as well as,
the size of the problem domain. Thus, it will be difficult to analyze and test
the correctness without computer-aided tools. One common aspect of all safety
critical systems is that they must respond under stringent realtime constraints.
That is, their correctness depends not only on how concurrent components
interact, but also on the time at which these interactions occur. These systems
are costly to prototype, requiring careful prediction of timing properties
before implementation and evaluation of design alternatives. Thus, it is
important to develop a formal framework that supports automatic and computer-
aided analysis and testing to effectively cope with increased complexity. The
major thrust of this research is to develop analysis and testing techniques for
timing properties, and to implement supporting software tools based on real-time
temporal logic and state machine models. The proposed tools will provide an
environment in which software engineers can generate tests from behavioral
specifications and performance requirement constraints and simulate and test to
validate the specification.