* 9415331
* Mossbauer Diffraction From Polycrystalline Ordered Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Brent Fultz, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 11/30/1998
* USD 253,774.00

9415331 Fultz In this research, Mossbauer diffraction is applied to powder
structure characterization. Hyperfine interactions cause the scattering factor
of an 57iron atom to change strongly for slightly different gamma ray energies.
This could provide a basis for unique chemical selectivity in diffraction
experiments. The chemical selectivity could be used to tune a gamma ray to the
specific chemical environment of an 57iron atom and determine a specific
diffraction pattern from that chemical environment alone. The experimental work
attempts to measure the face-centered cubic and simple cubic diffraction
patterns from two iron sites in DO3-ordered 57iron aluminide. Preliminary
experimental results have been encouraging and have provided practical
parameters for the this work. If these first experiments are successful,
measurement will be made on the arrangements of antisite atoms in partially-
ordered 57iron aluminide and in a B2 57iron - rhodium. In a parallel effort, the
timing capabilities of the position-sensitive detector will be tested. If the
detector can be operated with both time and positron resolution, later
experiments may be performed at a synchrotron radiation facility. %%% To date,
materials science has relied heavily on x-ray, electron, and neutron diffraction
to characterize the structure of powders. Mossbauer diffraction, which occurs by
scattering of gamma rays from nuclei, is explored as an additional useful
technique for powder diffractometry. ***