* 9415829
* Workshop on Research on the Human Dimensions of Global      Change; Washington; June 1994
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1994
* Paul Stern, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1994
* USD 37,700.00

9415829 STERN The maturation of the U.S. Global Change Research Program
(US/GCRP) has placed greater emphasis on research on the human dimensions of
global change, including the policy sciences. The US/GCRP also is looking to
develop more effective methods for conducting integrated assessments that
examine the nature and timing of physical, biological, and human systems as well
as interactions among those sets of systems and policy options for adapting to
or mitigating global change. Agencies like NSF that collectively manage the
US/GCRP traditionally have looked to the National Academy of Sciences and the
component parts of the National Research Council to provide guidance and
feedback regarding planning and conduct of the program. As human dimensions
research reaches critical new stages, the NRC Committee on the Human Dimensions
of Global Change will conduct a two-day workshop to examine two closely related
issues: (1) research needs across the breadth of the human dimensions of global
change and in specific areas, such as the policy sciences and methods for
integrated assessments; and (2) strengths and weaknesses of various modes of
research support (ranging from support for individual investigators to support
for centers), including consideration of the relative balance among different
modes. This two-day workshop will take place in June 1994 in Washington, with
roughly two dozen leading social scientists gathering to share their experiences
and opinions with respect to these issues. A written summary of comments will be
made available within a few months of the conclusion of the workshop in order to
allow others to benefit from the ideas presented at the workshop. Through this
workshop, leaders of human dimensions and other global change programs in NSF
and other US/GCRP agencies will have to opportunity to hear directly from
leading research scientists. The discussions at the workshop also will provide
NSF officials with valuable information as it develops plans for possible new
modes of research support to facilitate research on the human dimensions of
global change.