* 9415692
* Codes and Processing for Two-Dimensional Data Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1995,04/30/2001
* Richard Blahut, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 04/30/2001
* USD 330,537.00

ABSTRACT: NCR-9415692, University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, "Codes and
Processing for Two-Dimensional Data Storage", PI-Blahut: This research is on
two-dimensional communication waveforms and codes for data storage systems of
the future. Emphasis is placed on optical (and magnetic) storage systems whose
read mechanism can simultaneously sense two-dimensional regions of the storage
medium. Systems that employ a one-dimensional array of read sensors against a
moving medium form one type of example. Systems that optically illuminate a
patch of a stationary medium and observe this patch (as with a photodetector
array) form a second type of example. Both kinds of physical systems are now
under study in industry and this proposed research is needed to support the
evolution of such systems. The main topics are (1) Equalization and Bit
Synchronization, (2) Channel Modulation Codes for Data Translation, (3) Error
Control for Two-Dimensional Data Arrays, (4) Block Synchronization, (5) Decoders
for Algebraic Geometry Codes, and (6) Two-Dimensional Information Theory. The
goal is to nurture and develop a body of knowledge on full-surface recording.
The approach will be of two kinds. The very successful methods of communication
theory and information theory will be generalized, when possible, to two
dimensions. In addition, new methods of communication theory and information
theory unique to two dimensions will be developed. It is well known that the
two-dimensional plane is much more complicated than the one-dimensional line, so
new mathematical phenomena arise in the design of two-dimensional waveforms and
codes. The problems are much more difficult but the rewards may be much greater.
Successful completion of the research would provide (1) codes and waveforms for
the novel optical and magnetic storage devices of the upcoming decade, (2)
anticipated large improvement in storage density, (3) recommendations on the
architecture of future optical and magnetic storage devices, (4) new insights
into the classical one-dimensional communication waveforms, (5) a fertile new
information systems research area with strong connections to deep problems both
in physics and mathematics.
*****************************************************************************
Aubrey M. Bush Program Director, Acting Deputy Divison Director Division of
Networking and Communications Research and Infrastructure National Science
Foundation