* 9415675
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Modified Clays in        Hazardous Waste Disposal
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Frank Cartledge, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/1997
* USD 27,060.00

9415675 Cartledge This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program award supports
travel expenses and expendable research supplies for work to be conducted by
Prof. F. Cartledge and Dr. M. Titlebaum, both of Louisiana State University
(LSU), Louisiana, with Dr. P. Buchler, Univ. of Sao Paulo, Brazil. Drs.
Cartledge, Titlebaum and Buchler are conducting research on the
solidification/stabilization of hazardous wastes using cementitious binders, a
common technology applied to waste streams, mostly of heavy metal containing
wastes. The use of organoclays as additives in the process has the potential for
greatly expanding the utility of the method, particularly for the treatment of
mixed waste streams and contaminated soils, where organic as well as inorganic
wastes are present. The research groups at LSU and Sao Paulo have unique and
complementary capabilities. The LSU group is noted for experience with solid
state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, while the Sao Paulo group has
broad experience with real waste streams and the design of mixes that are
effective for the immobilization of organic containing wastes. The proposed
research will involve sample preparation in Brazil, and the examination of
spectroscopic and other properties at LSU. The LSU group will benefit from the
Brazilian groups' expertise in clay uses and modifications, while the Sao Paulo
group will benefit from access to modern instrumentation for solid
characterization. ***