* 9415447
* 1994 Gordon Conference on Aqueous Corrosion, July 11-15,    Colby-Sawer College, New London, New Hampshire
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Hugh Isaacs, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 12/31/1994
* USD 4,000.00

9415447 Storm The conference will be held on July 10-15, 1994 in New London, New
Hampshire. It is focussed on recent advances in understanding the fundamentals
of the resistance of metals and alloys to aqueous corrosion. Individual sessions
are concerned with: in-situ studies of passive oxide films; structure and
properties of passive oxides; location and dissolution kinetics of active
surface sites; initiation and chemistry of localized corrosion; dissolution
mechanisms of metal alloys; corrosion of light metal alloys; research/industry
interactions; and atmospheric corrosion. The emphasis of the conference is in
areas of corrosion where significant progress has recently been made and where
new approaches are being studied. The speakers have been chosen because of their
unique knowledge and research. Where appropriate younger scientists have been
chosen as speakers (half the speakers fall within this category). The speakers
are from laboratories in nine countries: eleven are from the USA, two from the
UK, and one from France, Germany, Japan, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, and
Switzerland. This broad representation is intended to provide an exposure to new
studies not otherwise presented as US conferences. %%% A key to prolonging the
life of components in the infrastructure is understanding and controlling the
processes of degradation through corrosion. This conference addressees many
aspects of this subject. ***