* 9415111
* Replacement of Research and Research Support Space in       Biology and Chemistry
* O/D,OIA
* 05/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Robert Flanigan, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/2000
* USD 1,723,627.00

Spelman College is one of the premier institutions charged with educating
African American women. The College is the leading educator of African American
women scientists in the nation. Integral to the institution's science program is
a strong emphasis in research and research training. Faculty members are
currently undertaking research in such areas as analytical chemistry,
bioinorganic chemistry, spectroscopy, environmental biology, neurobiology cell
and molecular biology, and atomic physics, all having far reaching implications
for society. Each faculty member supervises an average of four undergraduate
research assistants. Opportunities to collaborate with faculty on directed
research projects are further complemented by a wide range of sponsored research
training programs that provide early exposure and hands-on training to over 150
undergraduate students. However, the ability of Spelman to maintain this
momentum is impeded by obsolete and inadequate research facilities in Tapley
Hall, the 70 year old science building. The building cannot support the current
level of faculty and student investigations or provide a safe environment to
conduct such activities. To insure the continued vigor of the science at
Spelman, the College will construct a new science complex that will include a
facility dedicated to research, research training and teaching laboratories in
Biology, Chemistry, and Physics. NSF funds will be used to replace current space
dedicated to research and research training, and laboratory support facilities
including instrumentation and cold rooms. A renovated Tapely Hall will serve as
a classroom and instructional laboratory facility, for five science disciples
including research and research training space for mathematics and computer
science. This replacement project will be instrumental in supporting the efforts
of this historically Black institution as it continues to address the challenge
of African American women participation in the science. It will also enhance the
research program required for early exposure and advanced training to the next
generation of women scientists who will contribute to the nation's research and
development potential.