* 9415086
* Renovation of Laboratories for Research and Training in     Microbial Biodiversity, Physiology, and Genetics
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Jerry Dodgson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/1999
* USD 603,000.00

Dodgson NSF-supported renovations within Giltner Hall at Michigan State
University will support research and research training activities of the
Microbiology Department in microbial diversity, physiology, and genetics. The
department is home to the NSF Science and Technology Center for Microbial
Ecology (CME). Giltner Hall was constructed in 1952; the laboratory facilities
are considerably outdated for modern science and inefficiently designed for
research interactions. The renovations will impact nine faculty directly and a
substantial portion of the Department s more than 70 graduate students. The
renovation will involve the basement and floors one through three of the central
section of Giltner Hall and will be directed at correction of a number of
deficiencies. Laboratory space will be re-configured to improve efficiency and
to cluster faculty by major interest area. In addition, the project will
reorganize space to reduce safety, security, and accessibility problems that
occur with the current mix of general classroom space and research space, and it
will address major systemic problems such as lack of temperature control and a
poor air handling system. A new HVAC system will be installed to correct
problems with space overheating, equipment failures and researcher discomfort.
The new mechanical systems will also greatly reduce airborne contaminants, as
circulated air will be filtered, and new ceilings will be installed to cover
exposed overhead pipes. New laboratory benches will be added to increase work
surface space, and a new self-contained warm room, walk-in incubator, and two
new autoclaves will be installed. Two of the nine faculty directly impacted by
this renovation activity will move from other campus locations to join fellow
faculty in research activities which are expected to provide future benefits in
biotechnology, global change, and environmental research. In addition to ongoing
laboratory-based research efforts, the department is managing the Bergey s
Manual Trust, and the collection and archival activities of two major
bioninformatic projects.