* 9415789
* Processes Affecting Material Transport to the Oceans from Arctic-Subarctic Watershed, from Direct Groundwater Discharge and through Lagoonal Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1998
* Herbert Windom, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 10/31/1998
* USD 346,940.00

9415789 WINDOM Processes affecting material transport to the oceans from Arctic-
Subarctic Watersheds, from direct groundwater discharge and through Lagoon
Systems A number of gaps exist in the understanding of biogeochemical processes
associated with the transport of material across the land-sea boundary. Among
these gaps are lack of data on: 1) small watersheds of different morphoclimatic
zones and their ability/efficiency, relative to larger watersheds, to transport
materials to the oceans, 2) transport of material through lagoonal estuarine
systems, the mixing rates of which are slow and the mixing zones large, and 3)
inputs of material to coastal waters in groundwater. Research is proposed to
address these gaps through investigations on three types of under-studied
systems with the following objectives: A) To obtain a better understanding of
products resulting from arctic-subarctic weathering, the fate of these materials
(primary trace elements) in the freshwater-seawater mixing zone and relative
contribution of fluxes to the ocean from smaller rivers of this morphoclimatic
zone. These studies will be carried out in the Anadyr river-estuary system in
Northeastern Russia. B) To identify the major biogeochemical interactions that
control trace element fluxes through a lagoonal estuary, taking advantage of the
slow mixing rate/long residence times of materials in such systems to obtain
better resolution of solute-master variable relationships during mixing in the
low salinity region. The Patos Lagoons, in Southern Brazil will provide the
field site for these investigators. C) To determine the composition and
concentrations of subterranean weathering products associated with the Floridan
Aquifer and to investigate biogeochemical processes that influence the fate of
trace elements upon entering the marine environment. Freshwater springs, which
discharge directly into coastal waters of the West Florida shelf, and the
adjacent coastal waters will pr ovide the site for these studies.