* 9415022
* Renovation of Research Facilities in the Department of      Biochemistry
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Roger McMacken, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/1998
* USD 896,200.00

The NSF award to John Hopkins University will be utilized to redesign and
completely renovate facilities for the Biochemistry Department in the School of
Hygiene and Public Health, east Baltimore, MD. The School, the first public
health school in the Unites States, offers multiple programs in the basic
biological and environmental sciences and provides leadership in biochemical and
biotechnological research and education. The Biochemistry department is oriented
towards studies of fundamental biological problems which are carried out at the
interface of biology and chemistry. Fundamental chemical, biochemical, molecular
biological, structure, biophysical and genetic approaches are stressed in order
to understand the mechanisms of biological processes in experimentally-
accessible systems. NSF support will be matched with institutional funds to
redesign and renovate decaying laboratories on three floors of the Hygiene
building, the core of which was constructed in 1926. Building additions were
constructed in 1963 and 1968. The original building was last renovated
approximately 40 years ago; the additions have not been renovated since
construction. The three-year renovation project will correct research space
which is poorly configured in very small laboratories, inhibiting spontaneous
interactions, communication and intellectual exchange among researchers.
Centralized instrumentation rooms facilities will be constructed. Ten additional
chemical fume hoods, a cold room, and vented solvent cabinets will be installed,
as will new casework, including benchtops which are resistant to concentrated
acids and bases, organic solvents, and radioactive fluids. The renovations will
have immediate impact on the ten current faculty and will be a major resource in
attracting two new faculty. The new laboratories will facilitate more training
opportunities for graduate students, as bench space will be greatly increased
through the redesign effort. Over the next f ive years, the department will have
65 graduate students, 50 postdoctoral fellows and 15 undergraduates who will be
part of a critical mass of researchers working in the area of enzyme mechanisms
and protein structure and function -- areas critical to leadership in the next
stage of biotechnology.