* 9415096
* Biotechnology Academic and Research Facilities              Modernization Project
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Jose Sy, California State University-Fresno
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 11/30/1997
* USD 148,080.00

The California State University, Fresno (CSUF), is the only state-supported
university serving the rapidly growing central San Joaquin Valley with a
metropolitan population that includes a significant proportion of minorities. To
begin to meet the needs of a scientifically skilled workforce for the next
millennium, CSUF has implemented an interdisciplinary program in biotechnology,
with a research training component to provide students, educators, and community
scientists with additional opportunities to learn advanced technology for
academic and industrial pursuits. The desire for laboratory research
experiences, coupled with increasing interest in exploring the realms of
biochemistry and molecular biology among students for Master-s and undergraduate
degrees, has strained the research space limitations of the architectural design
of the original building. This award from the Academic Research Infrastructure
Program will augment and reorganize a small portion of current space in the
Biology and Chemistry Departments into viable biotechnology research space. In
conjunction to remodeling space, renovations will include reconfiguring work
benches, upgrading a coldroom and environmental room, and consolidating space
for a sterilization and washroom facility. The renovated areas will increase the
quality of space for students to conduct biotechnology experiments and analysis,
and provide better access to research equipment throughout the year. CSUF serves
as a research resource for the central California region, and the Biotechnology
Program in addition to developing strong academic research programs,
incorporates community outreach efforts as an important component to its
research activities. This project will not only enhance the Biotechnology
Program, but will also stimulate minority students to pursue careers in this
scientific discipline.