* 9415256
* U.S.-E.C. Cooperative Research:  Implementation and Analysisof Parallel Logic Programming and Concurrent Constraint     Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Gopal Gupta, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 05/31/1999
* USD 27,000.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-E.C. cooperative research on the
analysis and implementation of concurrent constraint programming. The project
involves cooperation between Gopal Gupta of New Mexico State University and
Moreno Falaschi of the University of Padua, Italy; Giorgio Levi of the
University of Pisa, Italy; Manuel Hermenegildo of the Polytechnic of Madrid,
Spain; and Paul Soper and Andrew King of Southampton University in the United
Kingdom. Their research will analyze and implement logic programming systems and
current constraint programming systems on multiprocessor hardware. The U.S.
investigator brings to the collaboration experience in developing parallel logic
programming systems and designing implementations for concurrent constraint
systems, specifically those based on the Andorra Principle. The European
participants will contribute to the design of a common intermediate language for
implementation of concurrent constraint programming and parallel logic
programming, to the implementation of tools for parallel logic languages based
on formal analysis techniques, and to refining existing frameworks for the
static analyses of concurrent constraint logic programs. The research results
will not only advance the state-of-the-art in logic, programming, parallel
symbolic computing, and data-flow analysis, but also produce systems that can be
used.