* 9415311
* Workshop:  Anglo-U.S. Workshop on Soil Biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1995
* Diana Wall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Allen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 47,772.00

Freckman Attention has focused on biodiversity in tropical forests and marine
environments, but so far the soil environment has been relatively neglected.
Soil biodiversity in particular is of fundamental importance to many vital
ecological processes, but the soil organisms are for the most part small,
numerous, and poorly known. For many taxa, our best estimates of the extent of
diversity are provisional. It is difficult, at present, to say which organisms,
or groups or organisms, are most important in relation to critical ecological
processes and soil attributes such as stability and resilience. This proposal
requests funds for 15 scientist to attend a workshop at the British Natural
History Museum on soil biodiversity that will bring together representative
British and American specialists. The specific purpose of this workshop will be
to: determine the feasibility and scale of one or many soil biodiversity
inventories. The workshop will engender a multidisciplinary approach to soil
biodiversity by bringing together systematist, ecologist and information
management specialist o discuss the relationships between taxonomic groups f
soil organisms and soil ecological processes and to consider how to carry out
inventories of soil biodiversity. A final report summarizing the workshop's
recommendations and properties for research will be released in 2-3 months to
the scientific community and funding agencies. The report would hopefully
mobilize the soil systematist and ecologist to propose research and training for
soil biodiversity and function. Over the long term, results of soil biodiversity
research would generate new knowledge and products for a diverse set of users
(e.g., pharmaceutical scientist to ecosystem managers).