* 9415062
* Renovation of Merrill Hall (Chemistry Building)
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2001
* Troy Story, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,074,850.00

Morehouse College, a historically black institution, has a long tradition in
the development of African American men for careers in science. A majority of
these men have been trained in Merrill Hall, home to the chemistry department.
Constructed in 1952, the present facility is devoid of the required physical
infrastructure required to support modern chemical research and research
training activities. Deficiencies include: inadequate ventilation and air
conditioning, leaking pipes, inoperable fume hoods, poor lighting, and
inadequate chemical storage facilities. Laboratories are in violation of federal
safety regulations and building codes. Not only are conditions hazardous to
students and faculty, but they are potentially damaging to research instruments.
This Academic Research Infrastructure award will provide funds to assist
Morehouse College in its endeavors to renovate the second and third floors of
the Merrill Chemistry Building. Laboratories will be reconfigured into
functional areas where research in analytical, physical, inorganic, and
materials chemistry can be conducted. In addition to upgrading infrastructural
systems, the renovation will involve the installation of new fume hoods,
benches, and casework. Morehouse's role in undergraduate science is particularly
significant in light of the rapidly declining numbers of students, especially
minorities, who enter scientific fields. The shortage of scientifically trained
African Americans has serious implications for the future of a nation
increasingly dependent on scientific and technological advances. A renovated
Merrill Hall will strengthen the institution's role in developing young
scientists to meet this challenge.