* 9415006
* Support of the International Institute for Applied Systems  Analysis
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Peter de Janosi, Internationales Institut fur angewandte Systemanalyse
* Continuing Grant
* William Blanpied
* 03/31/1998
* USD 6,673,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o o
l $ % &amp; ' ( ) * + , - . F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; p ( @ ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! @ X x @ ` ! x ` 9415006 De
Janosi This grant will enable the United States to maintain its core support for
research programs at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IIASA) for another three years. IIASA is a multilateral, non-governmental
institution located near Vienna, Austria which was established in 1972 as a
center for research in systems analysis, "in relation to problems of modern
societies arising from scientific and technological development." Much of its
current research is focused in two areas, consistent with a 10-year strategic
plan adopted in November 1991: (1) analysis of sustainable development issues,
including issues of global change, and (2) analysis of economic reform
processes. IIASA is governed by a council comprised of representatives from 16
National Member Organizations, including the United States, Russia, Canada,
Japan, and several Western and Eastern European countries. is consistent with
official U.S. policy, affirmed by the Office of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP) by means of a September 1994 policy statement which asserted U.S.
interest in maint aining IIASA's capabilities.to conduct research with a
regional perspective on issues related to the environment and on economic
transitions in Eastern Europe and the Newly Independent States. *** Oh +' 0 $ H
l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT B:\IIASABS.TXT Tonya L. S u m m a r y I n f
o r m a t i o n ( # Butler Tonya L. Butler @ @ /s @ /s @ e Microsoft Word 6.0 3
; e 3 e " " j j j j j j j B 1 $ s T @ B j B j j j j ~ j j j j # 9415006 De
Janosi This grant will enable the United States to maintain its core support for
research programs at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IIASA) for another three years. IIASA is a multilateral, non-governmental
institution located near Vienna, Austria which was established in 1972 as a
center for research in systems analysis, "in relation to problems of modern
societies arising from scientific and technological development." Much of its
current research is focused in two areas, consistent with a 10-year strategic
plan adopted in November 1991: (1) analysis of sustainable development issues,
including issues of global change, and (2) analysis of economic reform
processes. IIASA is governed by a council comprised of representatives from 16
National Member Organizations, including the United States, Russia, Canada,
Japan, and several Western and Eastern European countries. is consistent with
official U.S. policy, affirmed by the Office of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP) by means of a September 1994 policy statement which asserted U.S.
interest in maintaining IIASA's capabilities.to conduct research with a regional
perspective on issues related to the environment and on economic transitions in
Eastern Europe and the Newly Independent States. ***