* 9415536
* Regulation of Toxicity in the Dinoflagellate Alexandrium
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1995,09/30/2002
* Donald Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2002
* USD 756,000.00

9415536 Anderson PROJECT ABSTRACT Blooms of toxic dinoflagellates in the genus
Alexandrium result in outbreaks of paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP), one of
the more serious of the global marine phenomena collectively termed "red tides".
The economic, public health, and ecosystem impacts of PSP outbreaks take a
variety of forms, and include human intoxications and death from contaminated
shellfish or fish, stages of fisheries species, and death of marine mammals,
fish, and seabirds. These impacts are caused by the saxitoxins, a family of
neurotoxins produced by the dinoflagellates and accumulated in zooplankton,
shellfish, or fish during feeding. The overall objective of this project is to
identify genes involved in toxin production in Alexandrium spp. and other
saxitoxin-producing organisms and to study the manner in which they are
regulated. The approach will use differential display to identify messenger RNA
differences between cells that differ in their ability to make toxin.
Differentially expressed sequences can then be used to screen for the putative
toxin genes in a wide range of toxic and non-toxic species of dinoflagellates
and cyanobacteria. Other indirect evidence for the toxin-specificity of the
identified genes will derive from manipulations of dinoflagellate metabolism
using inhibitors that block toxin biosynthesis at different levels. If the
differential display approach is not successful because the toxin genes are not
regulated at the transcriptional level, traditional methods of two-dimensional
protein electrophoresis will be applied to extracts of Alexandrium from
different cell cycle stages to address the remaining possibility of
translational/post-translational regulation. This in turn will lead to the
identification and isolation of genes implicated in toxin production. Both of
the above approaches will provide genetic tools needed to conduct regulatory
studies to determine the mechanisms by which these genes are turned on and off.
The information gained will aid in deciphering some of the long-standing
mysteries surrounding the metabolic role of saxitoxin in dinoflagellates and the
toxin variability observed in different isolates or in individual isolates under
different environmental conditions.