* 9415558
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Equilibrium Properties of Aqueous Solutions at Superambient Temperatures
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Everett Shock, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/1999
* USD 16,350.00

*** 9415558 Shock This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative
research in geochemistry between Everest L. Shock of Washington University and
Vladimir Mayer of the University of Blaise Pascal. The objective of their
research is to test models of thermodynamic data with experimental measurements
for a wide variety of aqueous inorganic and organic fluids. Minerals, gases,
organic compounds, microorganisms and the byproducts of human activity are
brought into contact by aqueous fluids in relatively shallow regions of the
earth's crust. These fluids facilitate reactions which would otherwise be
sluggish. Accurate thermodynamic data for dissolved ions, electrolytes, gases,
and organic compounds are needed to develop predictive models. Dr. Shock brings
to this collaboration his expertise in theoretical geochemistry. He has
developed a model for prediction of thermodynamic data for thousands of aqueous
organic and inorganic species. Data are incomplete or wholly lacking at high
temperatures. The French investigator, Dr. Mayer, has worked for a number of
years in the generation of high temperature measurements for these species. His
experimental work will provide the high temperature data that are needed to
extend the accuracy and applicability of the existing model. Their joint effort
will advance our understanding of sub-surface earth processes and improve
current efforts to contain, and eventually avoid environmental problems. ***