* 9415474
* Mathematical Sciences:  DNA Forensic Science:  An Update
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/1995,04/30/1996
* John Tucker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Stephen M. Samuels
* 04/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

DNA typing has increasingly become a common source of forensic information in
the United States and is currently used by federal, state and local crime
laboratories. Recently, controversy has grown over how to interpret DNA evidence
scientifically. The debate about this issue must be resolved if DNA typing is to
be used appropriately and if confusion in the courts is to be avoided. The
National Research Council is in the process of beginning a study to address the
central questions, performed by a committee of distinguished experts. The
committee will include expertise in appropriate subdisciplines of statistics and
population genetics, with additional expertise in molecular biology, forensic
science, law, and social science, and other areas as necessary. The study will
emphasize statistical and population genetics issues relating to forensic DNA
evidence and will pay particular attention to how such evidence is used in the
courts. The committee will review relevant studies and data, especially those
that have accumulated since the 1992 NRC report, DNA Technology and Forensic
Science, and will seek outside input from appropriate experts. The committee
will meet five times during the course of the study. The target date for
publication of the report is approximately seven months from the project start
date.