* 9415180
* Modernizing the Nick Building for Research and Research     Training in Biology
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1994,02/29/1996
* Roger Knacke, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/29/1996
* USD 212,011.00

This award will provide funding for the consolidation and modernization of the
biological science research and research training facilities at Penn State-Erie,
The Behrend College, by renovating the ground floor of the Nick Building, a 25
year old facility. Faculty and students in biology concentrate on research
projects relating to the Lake Erie and western Pennsylvania regions. This
research includes studies of species diversity of small mammals, biodiversity of
aquatic insects of Pennsylvania, genetics and byssal morphology of indigenous
species of Great Lakes mussels, and the succession of wetlands and associated
changes of invertebrate diversity. Renovation of the biological research areas
is of critical importance given the growth in the number of biology students.
The renovations will include consolidation in the Nick Building of research
space that is currently interspersed haphazardly with non-research space and
spread out in three buildings: Nick, Science, and Hammermill. The Nick facility
has never been renovated and is inadequate for modern biological research and
training. Among the facility's deficiencies are: an outmoded workplace design,
lack of air conditioning, poor lighting, and the deteriorating condition of lab
casework. The renovated space will accommodate more students in faculty-mentored
undergraduate research and facilitate the College's plan to strengthen and
invigorate the biology program.