* 9415120
* Renovation of Particle Physics and Astrophysics             Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1997
* David Balamuth, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 07/31/1997
* USD 1,200,897.00

*** 9415120 - Balamuth -Elementary particle physics research, utilizing
terrestrial particle accelerators and astrophysical particle sources, is
conducted in space to be renovated in the University of Pennsylvania's
Department of Physics and Astronomy. ARI funds will complement the University's
investment in renovating laboratories for these areas of physics. As one of the
leaders in elementary particle physics, the goal of this research is to discover
the fundamental laws governing the behavior of matter and energy in the
universe, including the structure of space and time. The work requires a
combination of laboratory experiments, astronomical observations, and
theoretical synthesis. Research space, built and configured for the needs of
scientists in the 1950's, will be converted to modern laboratories that will
house world class research and training efforts in elementary particle physics
and astrophysics. Principal components of the project are: 1) Replacement and
upgrading of insufficient of nonfunctional HVAC systems; 2) Rearrangement of
interior spaces to meet the challenges of modern research needs; 3) Replacement
of obsolete electrical distribution systems; and 4) Provision of dedicated
detector and electronics test space. This project will provide the
infrastructure necessary for present and future faculty and students so that
they can exert scientific leadership in multi-institution collaborations that
characterize modern research in the disciple. The renovations will provide the
opportunity to continue a high quality research program investigating important
problems in the physics to objects as small as a neutrino, or as large as the
universe itself. ***