* 9415601
* Distribution, Biomass and Ecological Role of                Macrozooplankton and Fishes in the Arabian Sea and          Equatorial Indian Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* James Craddock, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1998
* USD 329,894.00

9415601 Madin The goal of this project is to determine the abundance and
distribution of macrozooplankton and fishes in the Arabia Sea, and to estimate
their contribution to the vertical flux of organic matter in these environments.
The monsoonally forced Arabian Sea ecosystem is one of the most productive in
the world, but with sharp, seasonal contrasts in production and sedimentation.
The system is unusual in the distribution and comparison of its fauna, and in
the pathways by which surface production is distributed into the water column
and sea floor. The Somali coastal upwelling zone is a productive region
supporting a high-biomass, low- diversity pelagic fauna, and the equatorial
Indian Ocean is a typical oligotrophic zone with a high diversity of
inadequately known species. Many questions remain to be answered on the role of
such processes as defecation and diel vertical migration of large organisms in
regulating vertical fluxes of material in these contrasting regimes. Specific
objectives of the study include: 1) determination of distribution and abundance
of macrozooplankton and fishes; 2) determination of the extent and timing of
diel vertical migration of zooplankton and fish; 3) examination and
quantification of stomach contents and egestion rates of macrozooplankton; 4)
use of trawl collections to provide ground-truth calibration of concurrent
acoustic sampling by other investigators; and 5) analysis of the species
diversity and zoogeography of macrozooplankton and fishes in the Arabian Sea and
adjacent equatorial Indian Ocean. Our results will contribute to understanding
community structure and trophic dynamics in the Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean
pelagic ecosystems. The cruises will be concurrent with two of the JGOFS Pelagic
Process cruises, and our data will bear on JGOFS objectives of measuring and
understanding vertical fluxes in the Arabian Sea.