* 9415556
* Workshop on the Infrastructure Requirements and Design      Considerations for a Federation of Botanical Specimen       Database, Summer 1994 University of California, Berkeley
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Thomas Duncan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 06/30/1996
* USD 35,000.00

During the last five years, an increasing number of botanical collections have
begun to develop specimen databases within their institutions. This activity was
fostered by a workshop held at the National Science Foundation in 1989 to
discuss trends and priorities in the construction of botanical specimen
databases. In 1993, the MITRE Consortium released its report on the information
management needs of free-standing museums of natural history museums and
botanical gardens. Also in 1993, the Department of Energy held a workshop to
discuss the development of community databases within the molecular biological
community and botanists representing various institutions that wished to serve
as regional centers for a national botanical specimen database for North America
discussed a framework for such a project. With these and many other projects
planned or partly underway, it is important that these projects are designed to
enhance interoperability in a distributed networked environment. This proposal
requests funds to bring 30 botanist, other biologists, and information
technologist to discuss issues affecting the design of an interoperable
federation of botanical specimen databases. The result of the workshop will be a
report for general distribution over the network as well as to the National
Science Foundation that will outline the infrastructure and database design
considerations that will guide development projects in the selection or design
of systems that enhance interoperability.