* 9415148
* Renovation of Laboratory Space in Young Hall for Psychology and Psychobiology
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/1995,10/31/1996
* Brent White, Centre College of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/1996
* USD 146,776.00

Centre College, a private undergraduate institution in Kentucky, is the
recipient of ARI funds to remodel research and research training space in Young
Hall for the departments of Psychology and Psychobiology. This project is the
third and final phase of the College's master plan to modernize the science and
mathematics facilities. Research topics, investigated by researchers span from
animal behavior, and psychophysiological research to cognitive science.
Currently, five faculty members and student researchers share four rooms to
conduct research. The renovation will comprise of replacing chemistry
workbenches with a flexible physical environment required to accommodate
psychological research. Three of the rooms will be partitioned to produce a
total of seven smaller rooms, providing visual and auditory isolation for
experimentation. The modernization will also include the renovation of an animal
facility, located in the basement of the building, to allow for the maintenance
of a variety of animal species. As a result, the departments will have improved
space conducive for the undertaking of research activities. The impact of the
renovation will extend beyond the institution. Presently two-thirds of the
majors are women and 15% are minorities; thus such additional improvements will
successfully advance these groups, traditionally under-represented in the
sciences. Of the 74% of the students who pursue advanced studies, over half
pursue graduate programs in neuroscience, mathematical psychology, biophysics
and biochemistry. The renovated facilities will increase more research
opportunities for student researchers and faculty, and enhance the prospects of
majors seeking admission to quality graduate programs in science.