* 9415337
* State-Resolved Dynamics in Atomic-Layer Epitaxy (ALE) and   Laser-ALE of III-V Compound Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Xiaoyang Zhu, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 01/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

In this project funded by the Advanced Materials Processing Program of the
Chemistry Division and the Electronic Materials Program of the Division of
Materials Research, Xiaoyang Zhu of Southern Illinois University will study the
fundamental reaction dynamics underlying thermal- and laser-assisted/induced
atomic-layer epitaxial (ALE) growth of III-V semiconductors, predominantly
gallium arsenide (GaAs). Quantum-state resolved distributions of nascent gas-
phase products (methyl radicals and molecular hydrogen) formed in situ during
laser-ALE growth of GaAs. Experimental techniques include resonance-enhanced
multiphoton ionization (REMPI) spectroscopy and time-of-flight mass spectroscopy
(TOFMS). The energetic information carried by gas-phase species should help
answer such important questions as the molecular basis for the macroscopic
kinetics observed in ALE, the effect on growth kinetics of the evolving surface
structure, the coupling and redistribution of photon energy, and other ALE
pathways involving Ga- and As-containing gas-phase products. The proposed
research will also be extended to ALE growth of other III-V compounds. %%%
Gallium arsenide (GaAs) based semiconductors play a vital role in the
development of the next generation of optoelectronic and digital instruments
because of some of their attractive properties, such as high speed, (for
example, for computational purposes) and desirable active wavelength (in the
case of communications devices). However, the manufacture of GaAs-based
semiconductors has been hindered in part by effective methods for forming the
electronic devices. This project addresses some of the stumbling blocks in one
of the most promising methods of depositing GaAs in order to find resolve some
of the problems.