* 9415204
* Quinone and Redox-Active Amino Acid Cofactors Gordon        Conference:  February 1995, Ventura, California
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1996
* David Dooley, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1996
* USD 4,000.00

9415204 Dooley This is an important and timely scientific meeting on the subject
of Quinone and Redox-Active Amino Acid Cofactors. This particular meeting is one
of many Winter Gordon Research Conferences, a highly-respected and influential
series of conferences that emphasizes the most recent developments on the
frontiers of modern research. The Gordon Research Conference on Quinone and
Redox-Active Amino Acid Cofactors, to be held in February 1995, provides an
unique and proven format for scientific exchanges among the numerous
investigators concerned with this rapidly developing field. At this conference
the most current research on quinone and amino acid radical cofactors in enzymes
will be presented and discussed. All aspects of the basic biochemistry,
biophysics, and molecular biology of these systems will be covered. NSF funds
will be used to support the attendance of well-qualified young investigators who
otherwise would have a difficult time attending, especially those from groups
who are under-represented in U. S. science. %%% This Gordon Conference is
concerned with the generation, fate, and roles of oxidized amino acids and
protein radicals. Collectively the topics to be covered are relevant to a wide
variety of biological and physiological processes, including cell proliferation
and differentiation, connective tissue metabolism, aging and cell death, and
energy conservation. ***