* 9415827
* Mathematical Sciences: Greater Boston Logic Conference,     Spring 1995
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1995
* Ehud Hrushovski, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine Wood
* 07/31/1995
* USD 16,000.00

9415827 Hrushovski Since the early 1980's, the Greater Boston Logic Conference
has offered a major opportunity for prominent researchers and graduate students
alike to meet on an extended and concentrated basis. The Greater Boston Logic
Conference, to be held at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology on May
27-30, 1995, is a continuation and expansion of this biennial conference series.
Each day of the four-day conference will be divided into morning and afternoon
sessions, of which the morning sessions will consist of plenary lectures by the
invited speakers, of interest to a general audience of logicians. Each afternoon
session will consist of three or more simultaneous workshops, each workshop
emphasizing an advanced topic within Model Theory, Recursion Theory, or Set
Theory. These will include workshops on Model Theory and Analytic Functions,
Applied Stability Theory, Degree Theory, and Inner Model Theory and Fine
Structure. The workshops' goal is to aid both established mathematicians and
graduate students to break into important, fast developing, and technically
difficult areas. Workshop speakers will be encouraged to give complete proofs
and to explain the methods and intuition behind them; there will be considerable
time devoted to questions and discussion. The majority of the funds provided by
the National Science Foundation will defray travel expenses for graduate
students and postdocs. Funds will also be used for invited speakers without
other grant support. ***