* 9415134
* Renovation of UNLV Department of Geoscience Mineral Seperation Laboratory
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1996
* Timothy Wallin, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 04/30/1996
* USD 101,000.00

The University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV) and the NSF will jointly fund
renovation of the Mineral Separation Laboratory facilities for the program in
Geosciences. The renovations are concurrent with the institution's transition
from a predominantly undergraduate campus to a major urban research-oriented
environment. Faculty utilizing the Mineral Separation Laboratory conduct
nationally and internationally competitively funded research with collaborators
at institutions that have facilities for state-of-the-art isotopic and
geochemical analyses. Thus the ability to rapidly isolate individual mineral
species from rocks is critical to ongoing investigations of petrology,
diagenesis, and ultimately to tectonic and climatic processes. The current
facilities at UNLV are plagued with sample contamination problems. Processing of
rocks to isolate minerals involves numerous steps, and contamination of mineral
separates may occur during each of the more than 6 individual steps. Even
relatively low levels of contamination can preclude accurate age determinations.
NSF support will enable replacement of fume hoods, the installation of
additional laboratory benches and counters, renovation of windows, installation
of a new HVAC system, replacement of windows, plumbing of water, vacuum and
compressed air lines and installation of a dropped ceiling. Modifications to the
electrical system will be included, as will enhancements to the walls and
flooring. The renovation will increase mineral separation purity, laboratory
safety and research efficiency within the Mineral Separation Laboratory. These
are benefits that will directly impact 7 faculty, 14 graduate and 6
undergraduate students at UNLV, as well as two institutional partners in the
Nevada Consortium for Geology, Geochemistry, and Geophysics. Finally, the
completed renovation will form an important component of the implementation of
the Ph.D. in Geoscience, as UNLV seeks to provide an increasingly research-
oriented environment.