* 9415295
* SGER: The Rapid Evolution of MerA Encoded Metal Ion         Reduction:  A Novel Mutagenesis Protocol
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Richard Meagher, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1996
* USD 49,984.00

9415295 Meagher Heavy metal contamination has reached toxic levels in many parts
of the world and has become an urgent problem. It would be useful to be able to
manipulate single gene traits in plants, which could process heavy metals and
remediate heavy metal pollution by resistance, sequestration and perhaps even
assist in the removal of these contaminants from the environment. The product of
the bacterial merA gene, mercuric ion reductase (MerA) can detoxify ionic
mercury by reducing it to its less toxic metallic form, Hgo. A highly
mutagenized merA gene confers significant levels of resistance to Hg++ in
transgenic higher plants. It is hypothesized that MerA can be mutated to direct
the efficient reduction of a wide variety of metal ions for harvest or
remediation. The specific aims of this research are #1: to explore the present
substrate range of MerA; #2: to develop genetic selections or powerful screens
for the reduction of gold Au+++, silver (Ag+), lead (Pb++), and cadmium (Cd++)
in bacteria; #3: to generate merA mutants with novel substrate specificities
(e.g. enhanced reduction of Au+++ and novel reduction of Pb++ and Cd++; and #4:
to develop a powerful new RE-PCR (recombination polymerase chain reaction)
mutagenesis protocol in which tens of thousands of mutant clones are the only
survivors. The method takes advantage of the incredible natural transformability
and high frequency of homologous recombination with in certain strains of the
soil bacterium, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus. %%% Once developed, this powerful
approach will benefit many areas of biological research and development, but in
particular, it should accelerate progress in bioremediation. ***