* 9415681
* Joint Workshop: Indio-US Research Symposium on Emerging     Trends in Vibration and Noise Engineering, Delhi, Sept.95
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Rajendra Singh, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/1996
* USD 7,600.00

9415681 Singh Description: This proposal will support the participation of three
U.S. scientists in the Indo-U.S. Research Symposium on: "Emerging Trends in
Vibration and Noise Engineering, New Delhi, India, September 1995". The
conveners are R. Singh of Ohio State University and B.C. Nakra of the Indian
Institute of Technology, New Delhi. The symposium will focus on basic research
issues and emerging technology in vibration and noise engineering. This is a
rapidly evolving field in which the need to address noise pollution and to
control noise & vibration in quality products is well recognized. The meeting
will address a wide range of topics such as machine diagnostics, modal analysis,
noise control, smart actuators and sensors, structural and acoustic intensity
techniques and nonlinear problems in vibration and acoustics. Scope: India is
known for its excellence in engineering. It is also a future market for emerging
vibration and noise technologies. Although many Indian researchers are pursuing
important problems in traditional areas of vibrations, little research is being
done in other areas such as noise, sound quality, and diagnostics. No major
national or international meeting on this subject has been held in India during
the last decade. There is a clear need to hold a joint symposium/workshop in
order to stimulate cutting edge research in this area among Indian researchers,
and to identify key research directions and mutual research interests. The
proceedings will be published. ***