* 9415470
* Dissertation Research:  Steatite Vessel Manufacture in      Eastern North America
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1994,04/30/1997
* Robert Dunnell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/1997
* USD 8,920.00

Dunnell Under the direction of Dr. Robert Dunnell, Mr. James Truncer will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct both neutron
Activation and electron microprobe analysis on a series of steatite samples
collected from a number of prehistoric quarries in the U.S. Middle Atlantic
States. He will also conduct similar analyses on archaeological objects
manufactured from this material. Steatite is a soft rock which was widely used
by prehistoric peoples and was carved into cooking vessels and nonutilitarian
objects. Because steatite is fairly uncommon in nature, because it is located in
discrete outcrops which are often widely separated and because chemical
composition is variable, Mr. Truncer hopes to develop a means to chemically and
mineralogically distinguish outcrops. This would allow steatite artifacts
recovered in archaeological sites to be linked to source areas. Preliminary work
he has conducted suggests that such a goal is feasible. Archaeologists have
learned that even early hunter and gatherer groups did not live in isolation but
were linked into regional networks. Just how these larger organizations
functioned, how far they extended and how they changed over time is unknown. The
study of trade networks provides direct insight into this process and steatite,
if it can be sourced, can be used for this purpose. This research is important
for several reasons. It will provide information of interest to archaeologists
who work in the U.S. Mid-Atlantic states. It will help to develop a technique of
widespread potential use and it will assist in the training of a promising young
scientist.