* 9415065
* Renovation of Cordley Hall Biology Research and Training    Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Stella Coakley, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/2000
* USD 890,000.00

Coakley Oregon State University is the recipient of ARI funds for the renovation
and repair of the controlled environment facilities in Cordley Hall, home to the
Departments of Botany and Plant Pathology, Entomology, and Zoology. The research
and research training performed in the departments focuses on increasing the
knowledge and understanding of biological responses to the environment. Research
programs of 28 faculty that will benefit from the renovations are grouped into
four categories: environmental biology, cellular and molecular biology, host-
parasite interactions, and genetics, developmental, and evolutionary biology.
Environmental biologists investigate issues of global environmental change and
their effect on biological diversity and biological productivity in animal and
plant species. Cellular and molecular biology research includes developing
methods for using biotechnology to manage the effects of global change.
Investigative studies, in genetics, developmental and evolutionary biology,
include research on the genetic and hormonal regulation of morphogenesis and
gene expression, and how these control the development in plants and animals.
The goal of the research program is to gain a better understanding of the
processes that contribute to more sustainable ecosystems and maintenance of
biological diversity. The absence of sufficient controlled environment rooms
currently limits the scope of projects that faculty can undertake. Due to
antiquated systems and absence of protective and back-up mechanisms, valuable
experiments have been lost following power failures. Renovations of these rooms
and of the sea water and fresh water aquariums will have a major impact on the
ability of the faculty to conduct research and research training. Several
capabilities not available, including dedicated space for plant and insect
studies, dew deposition, photobiology, seed storage and containments of
transgenic plants, will be available once renovations are comple ted. Such
improved facilities will enhance the Department to pursue new research
opportunities.