* 9415109
* Renovation of Medical Research Laboratory (MRL)
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/1995,02/28/1997
* John Noonan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1997
* USD 914,099.00

NSF and Brown University will jointly fund the renovation of the Medical
Research Laboratory (MRL) for the benefit of researchers in both neuroscience
and ecology and evolutionary biology. The building, constructed in 1965, will be
renovated to upgrade HVAC and energy systems; to bring hood exhaust, electrical
distribution, and fire suppression systems into code compliance; and to replace
deteriorated cabinetry, lighting and floors. The renovation will provide a safe,
and more functional laboratory environment for faculty and student use. The
research activities of the majority of the twelve faculty within the MRL focus
on neuroscientific studies including parallel organization through anatomical
and physiological studies of the mammalian retina and brain; the source of
electrical energy for neuronal function; the physiology of neurons, synapses and
transmitters within the neocortex and the patterns of its synaptic connections;
the function of ion channels in electrical signaling in the nervous system;
molecular neurobiology and neuronal aging. The MRL also provides the environment
for research in ecology and evolutionary biology. Faculty and students in this
area address questions associated with evolution and population biology of DNA;
the interface between ecological and evolutionary processes in natural plant
populations; and behavioral ecology and sexual selection. The renovation project
will require approximately two years to complete as all the original major
building systems will be replaced, and the laboratories will be gutted,
reconfigured, and brought up to meet the demands of modern science including the
addition of centralized facilities. The end result of this activity will greatly
enhance the research possibilities and funding opportunities for faculty and
students.