* 9415066
* Modernization of Research Training Facilities in the Farr   Hall of Science at Ripon College
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Richard Scamehorn, Ripon College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 11/30/1997
* USD 266,444.00

Farr Hall of Science, constructed in 1960, is home to the departments of
biology, chemistry, and physics on the campus of Ripon College located in
Wisconsin. The facility will be remodeled to alleviate several major problems
that inhibit research and research training and detracts from the overall
quality of the college's science programs. As part of a larger comprehensive
renovation and expansion effort, the NSF's Academic Research Infrastructure
Program, in partnership with Ripon College, will provide funds to modernize
existing space dedicated to research activities. Renovations will include:
replacement of air circulation and ventilation systems, installation of fume
hoods where volatile substances are used, reconfiguration of laboratories to
provide more efficient space for student research activities, provision of
adequate space for instrumentation and computers, upgrading electrical and
mechanical systems, and ensuring research spaces are made fully accessible to
physically challenged persons. Once completed, the renovated science facility
will provide modern research and research training space and will create a safe
and healthy environment. As a result, an improved research climate will
contribute to Ripon's recruitment of outstanding students and faculty and in
maintenance of strong educational and undergraduate research programs.