* 9415462
* Dissertation Research:  Prehistoric Andean Ethnicity
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1994,09/30/1995
* George Cowgill, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1995
* USD 8,100.00

Cowgill Under the direction of Dr. George Cowgill, Ms. Vicki Cassman will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze remains from three
prehistoric cemeteries located in Arica, Chile and which date from the period
between A.D. 300-1200. Because of the hot and dry climate human remains as well
as delicate cultural materials are extremely well preserved, and in addition to
ceramic vessels, these prehistoric graves contain abundant textiles. Decades of
archaeological research have indicated that this lowland coastal area of Chile
has served at least once and perhaps repeatedly as the destination for groups of
individuals who moved westward out of the Andean highlands. Ms. Cassman wishes
to understand the long-term mechanisms of culture contact and to determine how,
over long periods of time interactions developed between host and immigrant
groups. She will use stylistic analysis of both interred bodies and included
grave goods to achieve this goal. Textiles play an important role in traditional
Andean cultures and a great deal of effort goes into their production. Cloth,
with its distinctive designs, serves not only utilitarian and decorative
purposes, but also functions as an ethnic marker. The designs it contains and
the manner in which it is woven reveals both the status and ethnic identity of
its wearer. Therefore it provides an excellent medium for the analysis of
cultural process. The Andean and Coastal region of Western South America is
marked by strong latitudinal zonation. Resources change dramatically with height
and different groups both historically, and presumably prehistorically adapted
different strategies to assure an adequate supply of different goods needed for
survival. In some cases this was achieved through trade, in others through
conquest and in others through colonization. Archaeologists wish to understand
the range of strategies and to determine the situations in which different
approaches were employed. Through the use of mortuary analysis, Ms. Cassman will
have a uniquely rich data base to examine this question. The results will be of
interest to many archaeologists. The project will also assist in the training of
a promising young scientist.