* 9415110
* Renovation of the Departments of Psychology and             Environmental Science
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Peter Balsam, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1998
* USD 1,200,904.00

Barnard College, founded in 1889, is an independent undergraduate college for
women affiliated with Columbia University. Its history is distinguished by the
accomplishments of its students and by the quality of its undergraduates. The
College-s commitment to the sciences is substantial, which is reflected by the
success of graduates who have pursue the doctorate degree. The Psychology
Department, one of the prolific producers of women scientists, has an eminent
tradition of faculty research and an impressive record of educating women
scientists. Many of the department-s achievements can be attributed to the
strengths of the integrative neuroscience program. Though successful, the
program is in a position of losing its momentum. Present facilities in Milbank
Hall, built in 1949, severely limit the present, and threaten the future,
research and research training programs in the area of cognition, perception,
memory, learning and behavioral development. Also home to the Environmental
Science Department, a more recently established and rapidly expanding program,
is experiencing dramatic growth despite outmoded facilities. Current
laboratories prohibit faculty and students from conducting research on issues of
climatic change and the geochemistry of water and air-born pollutants, central
to faculty research. ARI funds will be used to relocate and upgrade research
labs for the integrative neuroscience program and for renovating existing
research space occupied by the Environmental Department in Altschul and Milbank
Halls. Renovations will consist of: increasing electrical power to sustain
research needs, improving HVAC and plumbing systems, and installing two fume
hoods. With the renovations, Barnard will be in a position to maintain and
advance the College-s strong research and research training record in
Psychology; while enabling the Environmental Science Department to provide its
faculty and students with the facilities required to achieve the distinguished
record of the other sciences. These improvements will allow Barnard to meet its
long-term goals of providing the necessary resources for scientific research and
of offering undergraduate women significant opportunities to conduct research.