* 9415031
* Rehabilitation of the Ocean and Coastal Engineering         Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/1995,07/31/2001
* Billy Edge, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 07/31/2001
* USD 1,250,000.00

The Texas Engineering Experiment Station is the recipient of funds from the
Academic Research Infrastructure Program for the rehabilitation of the Ocean and
Coastal Engineering Laboratory at Texas A&amp;M University. Constructed in 1935,
the laboratory has provided opportunities for research and research training in
the areas of environmental transport, ocean and coastal engineering, fluid
structure interaction, and fluid dynamics. The entire facility includes: a
dredge pump and pipeloop test facility, deep glass wall wave tanks, a titling
flume, and a deep wave basin. The dredging capability of the laboratory is
unique in the United States and is the only one in the world owned and operated
by a university. The existing facility is rapidly deteriorating, and the fixed
equipment, constructed in the late 1960s, has outgrown the research needs of the
department. With research volume steadily increasing in the Ocean Engineering
Program, from other areas in Civil Engineering such as Environmental, Water
Resources, Geotechnical and Structures, Oceanography, and Chemical Engineering,
the laboratory can no longer support research activities of faculty and
students. ARI funds will be used replace and relocate space and fixed equipment
dedicated to ocean and coastal engineering adjacent to the NSF funded Offshore
Technology Research Center. Currently, the facilities are several miles apart
and it is difficult for faculty to collaborate and coordinate research efforts.
This project will promote synergy and insure that all of ocean and engineering
research, faculty, equipment, and shop facilities are located in a centralized
area on campus. Beneficiaries will include 10 full time faculty, 50 graduate
students, 120 undergraduates, and faculty members in related departments.