* 9415374
* Soft-Decision Decoding, Trellis Structure and Coded         Modulation
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Toru Fujiwara, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 10/31/1999
* USD 451,256.00

ABSTRACT: NCR-9415374, U. of Hawaii, Manoa, "Soft-Decision Decoding, Trellis
Structure and Coded Modulation", PI-Lin: As the demand for data integrity
increases, coding for error control becomes increasingly important in data
transmission systems. It has become an integral part in almost every data
communication system design. Today very sophisticated error control coding
schemes are being used in a broad range of data communication systems to achieve
reliable data transmission. The objective of this research project is to
investigate several problems in coding which are both theoretically and
practically important. The research includes three inter-related areas: (1)
soft-decision decoding of linear block codes; (2) trellis structure of linear
block codes; and (3) coded modulation. In the first research area, the research
will devise efficient soft-decision decoding schemes for linear block codes to
achieve optimum or near optimum error performance with reduced decoding
complexity. The approaches to be taken include: (1) hard-decision decoding based
on certain reliability measures of the received symbols; (2) iterative
reprocessing of the hard-decision decoded word until optimum or near optimum
error performance is achieved; (3) searching for the maximum likelihood solution
through a purged trellis diagram for the code to be decoded; and (4) multistage
soft-decision decoding based on code decomposition. In the second research area,
the trellis structure of linear block codes is investigated in terms of the
state complexity, the branch complexity, the state connectivity and parallel
structure of minimal trellis diagrams. For codes with simple trellis structure,
the Viterbi algorithm can be applied to achieve maximum likelihood decoding with
reduced computational complexity. Other problems to be investigated in this area
include: (1) construction of minimal trellis diagrams for known codes; (2)
finding specific permutations on the bit positions of codes that minimize or
reduce the structural complexity of code trellises; and (3) state and branch
labeling. In the third research area, the investigation of coded modulation will
be continued for bandwidth efficient communications. Modulation codes for both
AWGN and fading channels will be constructed and analyzed. Emphasis is placed in
constructing modulation codes or coded modulation systems to achieve high
performance with reduced decoding complexity. One approach to be taken is to
combine coded modulation and product coding technique. Unequal error protection
modulation codes will also be investigated. The research is intended to advance
the state of knowledge in coding theory and error control techniques. Fruitful
results from this study will have significant impact on coding research and the
design of efficient error control systems for reliable data communications.&lt;b
r/&gt;**************************************************************************
***&lt;br/&gt;Aubrey M. Bush&lt;br/&gt;Program Director, Acting Deputy Divison
Director&lt;br/&gt;Division of Networking and Communications Research and
Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation