* 9415530
* Networking &amp; Control Issues for Mobile Radio Communication  Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1995,04/30/2000
* Stephen Rappaport, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 04/30/2000
* USD 331,850.00

9415530 Rappaport The problem of providing numerous mobile platforms with
reliable switched communications over large areas is a major current world-wide
technological challenge with significant hurdles. Network messages can be a
mixture of voice, data, and stream traffic, and the mobile platforms may have
various communications needs and mobility characteristics. With limited
communication resources to service large populations essentially everywhere, the
need to create suitable networking concepts along with analytical models and
methodology that permit theoretical prediction of system performance,
examination of parameter trade-offs, and cohesive views of relevant issues is
acute. The physical complexity of potential systems and schemes sometimes makes
analytical tractability elusive and limits the perspective and insight that is
often gained from such models. The objective of the research is to devise new
techniques and schemes that are suitable for mobile communications and to
develop tractable models for performance analysis and comparisons. Computer
simulation will be used as a validation and supporting tool. Of particular
interest, from the viewpoint of networking, are techniques that provide
intelligent features in the sense that they enable mobile networks to maintain
performance levels by adjusting and adapting to changes in the communications
environment. Dynamic control, assignment, and management of communications
resources in consideration of traffic loading, interference, and topology will
be investigated for cellular and non-cellular configurations. General areas to
be investigated include: techniques for managing hand-offs of communicating
platforms; use of spatial macro-diversity features; and dynamic control and
assignment of communications assets - including both borrowing and sharing of
channels and gateways. Procedures to accomplish this may involve mixtures of
central and distributed control. Specific topics are: overall traffic pe
rformance for cellular communication systems with hand-off; cellular systems
with mixed call and platform types; hierarchically overlaid cellular
architectures; combined channel and gateway borrowing; and autonomous channel
assignment schemes. Appropriateness of the techniques in various access
technologies will be considered. The research will emphasize the creation of
analytically tractable models. This approach helps to establish a foundation
that provides fundamental insights and fosters the invention of new and improved
techniques of a particular genre. It is expected that as a result of this
investigation, new techniques will be devised that will allow improved
communications with large numbers of mobile platforms over wide geographical
areas. In addition, the analytical models and approach will provide an enhanced
foundation for understanding and designing mobile communications networks. ***
***************************************************************** ************
Aubrey M. Bush Program Director, Acting Deputy Divison Director Division of
Networking and Communications Research and Infrastructure National Science
Foundation 4201 Wilson Boulevard Arlington, VA 22230 703 306 1949 abush@nsf.gov