* 9415021
* Renovation of the Rutgers Nuclear Physics Laboratory into a Central Facility for the Laboratory for Surface Modification
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1994,02/28/1998
* Torgny Gustafsson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1998
* USD 575,500.00

This award will provide funding for the renovation of research space in the
Nuclear Physics building located on the Busch Campus of Rutgers University.
Constructed in 1963, the structure was previously dedicated for nuclear research
activities. However nuclear research is no longer conducted in the building, and
the vacated space will become available for the Laboratory for Surface
Modification (LSM). The LSM is a multidisciplinary laboratory composed of
faculty, postdocs, and students from five academic departments: physics,
chemistry, ceramics, materials science and electrical engineering. Research at
the LSM focuses on advanced developments in the science and engineering of
surfaces and thin films. Presently, individual LSM laboratories are dispersed
throughout the Physics building and five other buildings on the campus. ARI
funds will be used for substantial renovations to laboratory space, including
the installation of new walls, partitions, and upgrading the electrical, HVAC,
and plumbing systems. Moving the LSM to this building will benefit the program
by relieving overcrowding, and by providing a central location to house
individual labs and shared facilities. The relocation will produce enhanced
focus, visibility and identification of research, fostering new opportunities
for the education of students, collaborative interactions between researchers
across traditional departmental boundaries, and for the expansion of
interactions with high technology industries.