* 9415418
* Entrainment in Froth Flotation of Fine Coal, Indo-U.S.      Collaborative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* S.K. Kawatra, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/1999
* USD 31,293.00

9415418 Kawatra Description: This project supports collaboration between Dr.
S.K. Kawatra of the Michigan Technological University and Dr. T.C. Rao of the
Regional Research Laboratory in Bhopal, India. The research aims at
understanding the behavior of entrained particles. Entrainment is one of the
important mechanisms in processing of coal by froth flotation where particles
are transported from the pulp phase to the froth phase. In that process
particles enter the base of a flotation froth and are transferred up and out of
the flotation cell suspended in water between the bubbles. The process is
subject to the influence of many factors, such as the particle size, shape and
surface chemistry, whose effects are not fully understood. In this research,
experiments will be carried out to conduct studies in batch and continuous
flotation cells. Experiments will be conducted using both well-characterized
coals and synthetic mixtures of purified components, to compensate for the
difficulty of determining particle characteristics in the heterogeneous mixture
of minerals in coal. Scope : This project involves collaboration by two
scientists with complementary experiences in testing and in mathematical
modeling in dealing with a fundamental science problem. The solution of this
problem, leading to better understanding of the factors involved in the process
of particle entrainment, could have applications in the future in various
industries. ***