* 9415032
* Renovation of the Willis H. Booth Building for the Center   for Advanced Computing Research
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Paul Messina, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,367,500.00

The California Institute of Technology is the recipient of funds from the
Academic Research Infrastructure Program for the renovation of the Willis H.
Booth Building, constructed in 1962. The modernization of the facility is a
crucial step in forming a new multidisciplinary effort, the Center for Advanced
Computing Research (CACR). The Caltech Concurrent Supercomputing Facilities
(CCSF) will be transformed into the CACR, shifting the original emphasis of the
CCSF from leading-edge parallel computing to a greater emphasis on conducting
multidisciplinary research collaborations to achieve breakthrough scientific and
engineering computations. In order to create an intellectual environment that
stimulates advances in computational science and engineering research, the
physical space requires modernization. The space must catalyze face to face and
remote collaborations, and provide access to a host of advanced computing
communication and information technologies. Presently, CCSF staff and their
research collaborators are dispersed in both the Booth Building and other
buildings on campus. The renovation will consolidate research space in a
centralized location, fostering interaction among research personnel and
students. ARI funds will be used to renovate the interior structure of the
basement, first, and second floors to create cyberspaces that will eliminate
barriers to the physical location of researchers and information. Cyberspaces
are environments created by computers, networks, and hypermedia and multimedia
technologies that provide access to located and remote sources of information
and data, simulation capabilities, and real-time visualization of simulation
results. In addition, mechanical and electrical systems will be replaced, and
fire protection devices and network infrastructure will be installed. By
providing a campus-wide focal point for multidisicplinary computational science
and engineering activities, the renovation of the Booth Building will enhance
research by creating an atmosphere that stimulates interactions involving
additional application scientists and engineers, computer scientists, and
applied mathematicians. Hence, the project will propagate the benefits of high-
performance computing, communications, and multimedia technologies to scientific
and engineering research areas while simultaneously creating new generations of
computational scientists and engineers.