* 9415155
* Renovation of Wetlab Facilities at the University of Southern Mississippi
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Gary Anderson, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1996
* USD 122,300.00

The University of Southern Mississippi at Hattiesburg, is the recipient of
funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program for the renovation of
research laboratories in the Walker Science Building. Constructed in 1959, the
basement was modified for use as laboratory space, including wetlab areas in
1971 for the Department of Biological Sciences. However, due to deterioration,
the space is unsuitable for research. The prevalence of formalin, and problems
with access, ventilation, lighting, and temperature control has led to the
cessation of use of the facility as a wet laboratory. Presently, wetlabs are
dispersed in various buildings on campus, but almost invariably are located in
spaces not originally designed for laboratory use, which limits the capabilities
of the department-s aquatic research programs. Research and training efforts are
directed towards marine and freshwater environments, and the renovation of the
underutilized space is critical to the development of core departmental
programs. The laboratory modernization project will provide a centralized wetlab
facility adjacent to research and teaching areas. The renovated facility will
comprise of: 1) five separate wetlabs, each with independent temperature
regulation; 2) one dry lab which will house electronic equipment and
microscopes; 3) a zooplankton and phytoplankton culture facility; 4) one-walk-in
freezer, work area, and a storage room. In addition to providing space for
present wetlab activities, the renovation will allow for additional research
approaches that are not possible under the current conditions. One laboratory
will be equipped with a built in stream system that will facilitate researchers
in their efforts to investigate the effect of physical and biotic factors on
habitat used of native southeastern stream fishes. The project will increase the
department-s effectiveness in graduate training by facilitating an expanded
program in laboratory studies on the ecology, behavior, and physiology of
aquatic organisms.