* 9415193
* Renovation of Materials Chemistry/Physics Facility at SUNY -Binghamton
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Lawrence Roma, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1999
* USD 815,000.00

Whittingham The NSF award will provide support for renovation of the Materials
Chemistry/Physics Facility in the Science II building at the State University of
New York (SUNY) Binghamton. Science II was constructed in 1967 and has not
undergone any renovation since. Project funding will provide a substantial
improvement for cross-disciplinary activities between chemistry and physics in
the areas of materials chemistry and condensed matter physics. The effort will
benefit 6 faculty members, 22 graduate students and approximately 14
undergraduate researchers. The NSF-funded project to renovate interior
laboratories will complement institutional efforts for major mechanical and
roofing improvements. Laboratories and instrumentation facilities are located on
the ground floor of Science II, and renovation activities will include
consolidation and reorganization of space, installation of fume hoods, addition
of air conditioning units for individual temperature control, installation of a
Helium liquefier, upgrades to the electrical system, installation of a delivery
system for gaseous nitrogen, and installation of new laboratory casework. The
project will substantially improve research facilities for Electronics Packaging
and Materials Research which have been selected by the University as areas of
programmatic emphasis. University identification of these priorities includes
resource investment in faculty recruitment, seed funding for development of two
organized research centers, and substantial start-up funds for conduct of
research.*** Stevenson The NSF and the New York Botanical Garden (NYBG) will
jointly support the renovation of approximately 131 square research meters for
the enhancement of laboratory facilities in systematic and economic botany. The
impacted laboratories have not been renovated since their original construction
in 1957. As a result, they are not configured, or mechanically served, for
molecular plant systematics, and t hey do not meet modern health and safety
standards. Faculty and graduate students have been unable to conduct on-site
research and training and have had to travel to local affiliated laboratories
and, on occasion, to laboratories located out of state. Renovations will include
replacement of two antiquated fume hoods, installation of new electrical wiring
with ground fault receptacles, upgrading of water delivery and drainage systems,
installation of thermostatic controls, replacement of traps and valves on steam
radiators, removal of unused steam lines, and refurbishment of laboratory
cabinets, floors, walls, ceilings, and lab bench tops. The renovation of
laboratories for use in molecular systematics will add new impetus to the
research and research training program at NYBG and will directly benefit five
research scientists, three post doctoral students, and fifteen graduate students
in molecular biology. The molecular research program allows researchers to track
the evolution of the same gene in species from widely different groups of
organisms, which in turn provides new insight on plant evolutionary history. The
Garden is also used by visiting scientists, many of whom travel from Latin
America for study and has cooperative programs with three local universities.