* 9415119
* Renovation of Research Facilities at the College of         Engineering, University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Pranab Mazumdar, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1997
* USD 112,575.00

*** 9415119 Serrano The University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez is the recipient
of funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program for the renovation of
engineering research laboratories. The College of Engineering, being the largest
in Puerto Rico, attracts the best students on the island. Increased enrollments
in the various graduate programs in engineering have prompted the institution to
re-evaluate their infrastructual requirements, including the physical facilities
where research and research training activities are conducted. Currently the
Mayaguez campus trains approximately 11,000 students including 600 graduate and
4,000 undergraduate engineering students mostly of Hispanic ethnicity. Over
twenty percent are female students. Recognizing the need for the renovation, the
University and the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will jointly provide
the resources to see the improvements to fruition. The following six
laboratories will be renovated: Heterogeneous Catalysis and Electrochemistry,
Biochemical Engineering, Anemometry, System Dynamics and Control, Fatigue and
Fracture, and Material Science. Renovations will involve upgrading temperature
and humidity control and air conditioning systems, installing fume hoods,
laboratory benches and cabinets, and equipping labs with proper safety
mechanisms. The remodeled facilities will sustain the current growth trend in
graduate programs and house modern instruments needed to pursue advanced
training in engineering. The renovation will immediately have an impact on the
Department of Chemical Engineering as it establishes a Ph.D. program. New
perspectives for the future of chemical and mechanical engineering will occur by
the renewed experimental scientific capabilities the renovated facilities will
provide. Collaborative interactions within various departments will be promoted
as well as with other universities and national laboratories. With the prolific
promise of academic achievement, the project will enhance research programs that
will draw prospective undergraduate and graduate students from Puerto Rico, the
Caribbean, and South America. ***