* 9415888
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Processing-Micro-        structure-Property Relationships during Plasma Spray        Processing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/2000
* Sanjay Sampath, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/2000
* USD 15,000.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in
manufacturing processes. The investigators are Sanjay Sampath, Herbert Herman
and Christopher Berndt of the State University of New York, Stony Brook, and
Pierre Fauchais and Armelle Vardelle of the University of Limoges. The
investigators will study the process-structure-property relationship associated
with plasma spray processing. The process is currently being used to produce
high performance coatings on a wide range of materials. It has potential as a
new manufacturing technology for aerospace, automotive, energy, chemical and
biomedical industries. The objective of the U.S.-France research project is to
characterize powder particles as they melt in a plasma flame. Using plasma spray
technology, the investigators will study processing of metal/ceramic materials
and determine the microstructure and properties of the coatings. The U.S.
investigators bring to this collaboration their expertise in modeling,
microstructure development and material characterization. This is complemented
by the French investigators' expertise in thermo-chemical modeling, plasma
diagnostics, and particle characterization. Both these areas will advance
fundamental understanding of plasma spray processing and its potential as an
emerging materials processing and manufacturing technology.