* 9415468
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Indoor Air Pollution in the Bolivian Highlands
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1994,11/30/1995
* A. Roberto Frisancho, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 11/30/1995
* USD 12,000.00

9415468 Frisancho / Albalak Air pollution is generally thought of as a problem
in the outdoor environment of urban areas in industrialized countries. In recent
years, however, air pollution research has shifted to include the indoor
enviornment. An enormous proportion of the world's population lives in rural
households that rely on unprocessed biomass fuels (wood, crop residues, and
animal dung) as their major or only source of domestic energy for cooking and
sometimes space heating. There is often an extremely high level of pollution
that results. The few studies that have measured concentrations of particulate
matter from biomass fuel burning in developing countries have shown levels that
are 10 to 20 times higher than the EPA 24-hour standard, and one study in India
showed levels reaching 80 times this standard. To date, the extent and severity
of health effects associated with the burning of biomass fuels have not been
well established in spite of the large population at risk. The few studies that
have addressed this issue are at times inconsistent with one another and many
have serious methodological flaws. In order to examine the relationship between
the elevated levels of air pollution and health, this dissertation study will,
in a rural area of Bolivia with high levels of respiratory disease and biomass
burning: a) determine total human exposure to indoor particulate pollution in a
high altitude community and in a mid-altitude community whcih will be used as a
control, and b) explore potential relationships between this pollution and
respiratory diesease in children and adults.