* 9416005
* Human Modification of Landscape Function in New England and Ireland: Land Use Legacies and Atmospheric Deposition
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* John Aber, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1998
* USD 219,300.00

9416005 Aber The forested and agricultural landscapes of New England and Europe
share a common history of long-term human land use and more recent increases in
anthropogenic atmospheric deposition. The commonality of interests between New
England and Ireland are especially apparent. Both are regions adjacent to areas
of high air pollution emissions which experience variable and episodic pollution
deposition events. Both are humid regions initially covered mainly with
deciduous broad-leaved forests. Both have experienced near-complete
deforestation for conversion to both row-crop agriculture and grazing. A
Critical difference between the two is that much of New England has become
reforested through farm abandonment over the last 150 years, while the Irish
landscape is still dominated by agricultural use. However, recent experience
demonstrating that Ireland's mild climate can support the most rapid rates of
forest growth in Europe has lead to an aggressive program of reforestation,
mainly with conifers native to the northwestern U.S. Impacts of reforestation on
landscape esthetics, land use patterns and water quality have all been
questioned. Specifically, this project is designed 1) to combine existing
biogeochemical data sets from the European EXMAN (EXperimental MANipulation of
forest ecosystems) network with similar data set for the northeastern U.S., 2)
to develop a 1 km resolution GIS for Ireland containing information on monthly
average maximum and minimum temperature, monthly precipitation, monthly solar
radiation and on the distribution of major soils types in order to predict
potential forest productivity for Ireland using the PnET model, and to compare
these results with those from a similar analysis for New England, and 3) to
examine the long-term effects of land use on soil properties and function by
comparing adjacent field and forest systems, adjacent forest systems with
different land use histories, and forest sites with different vegetation types.