* 9416516
* Passive Energy Dissipation Devices for Upgrading of Steel   Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Vitelmo Bertero, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 07/31/1996
* USD 70,000.00

9416516 Betereo The Northridge earthquake caused significant damage to a large
number of multistory steel framed buildings. A number of different explanations
for the damage have been proposed, including problems with welding, the material
properties of the steel, and the general design philosophy and lack of
redundancy and multiple lateral-resisting load paths in the structural systems.
Coupled with these observations is the fact that several recent experimental
investigations have highlighted the potential poor performance of large welded
steel connections under inelastic cyclic loading. One approach for improving the
seismic performance of the types of steel buildings is to increase the
capability of the structural system to dissipate energy by introducing special
devices for this purpose, and thus decreasing the energy demands on critical
regions of the primary structural system. A combined analytical and experimental
study focusing on the benefits of passive energy dissipation for steel frame
structures is undertaken in this project. Four different passive energy
dissipation systems are investigated. These devices are representative of the
main classes of passive devices: friction, metallic, pure viscous, and
viscoelastic. Two devices are studied experimentally (friction and pure
viscous), and the results of the testing are used to develop numerical models of
the two types of devices. These numerical models are then utilized in the
analytical study. Two other types of passive dampers (shape memory alloy and
viscoelastic) are also included in the study, but not investigated
experimentally in the present project. Numerical models are developed for these
dampers based on the results of other pervious and current research. An actual
steel building, typical of those that suffered damage in the Northridge
earthquake is identified and used as the basis of the analytical study. A set of
earthquake ground motions are chosen, representing service-le vel, moderate and
severe earthquake shaking. The selected building is first analyzed in its
existing (non-upgraded) condition. Upgrade schemes based on each of the four
types of damping devices are designed for the building and their benefits
investigated by a careful comparison of response parameters. The performance
benefits are assessed by considering ductility and energy demands on the primary
structural system, and also by evaluating damage to nonstructural components and
contents using appropriate response parameters. The impact of the upgrade
schemes on the vulnerability of the building to economic loss due to earthquake
shaking is finally assessed. Passive energy dissipation techniques represent a
method for seismic upgrading of existing structures that offers performance and
economic benefits over conventional approaches. This research project is
designed to further develop and refine the methodologies for upgrading using
these techniques. This is a Northridge earthquake project. ***