* 9416064
* Benthic Microalgal Production and Nutrient Dynamics on the  Georgia Continental Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1997
* James R Nelson, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1997
* USD 485,000.00

9416064 Eckman Recent evidence suggests that the areal biomass and productivity
of benthic microflora on the SAB shelf can be comparable to, or exceed, that of
phytoplankton through much of the year. in the project Dr. Eckman and
collaborators will assess the importance of benthic primary production and its
role in the biogeochemistry of the South Atlantic Bight shelf sediments. It is
important to understand the magnitude of benthic primary production, its
variability in space and time, and factors affecting benthic primary production,
because present models of continental shelf export, biogeochemical cycles, and
response to global change do not include a contribution of organic matter from
benthic primary production. The principal objectives of the proposed study are:
1) to quantify the spatial and seasonal variability of benthic microfloral
biomass and productivity on the SAB shelf; 2) to measure phytoplankton biomass
and primary production in the water column overlying the sediments so that the
relative role of seafloor microflora on the continental shelf any be determined;
3) to examine the impact of benthic primary production on solute exchanges
between the sediments and the water column of the shelf; and 4) to identify and
quantify the physical, biological and chemical properties of the shelf
environment that may influence benthic microalgal biomass, primary production,
and solute fluxes between the sediments and the water column.