* 9416457
* Re-evaluation of Conventional Seismic Beam-to-Column        Flange Steel Connection
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Stephen Mahin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9416457 Popov A coordinated research effort on steel beam-to-column joints is
conducted in this project. The study will concentrate on the fundamental
problems of welding and connections. Some subassemblages will be tested to
study: 1. The effect of backing bars. By experiments with backing bars and with
such bars removed and weld roots cleaned and rewelded, the extent of improvement
in behavior would be documented. 2. The effect of dams and run-off tabs at the
ends of full- penetration groove welds. A few experiments illustrating the
influence of such dams versus run-off tabs would be valuable. 3. The general use
of FCAW high deposition electrodes. Although the FCAW high deposition electrodes
are almost universally used, laboratory experience using GMAW (stick) often
shows better results. 4. The contribution of preheat and controlled cooling to
the integrity of joints. Cases where AWS guidelines are exceeded or violated
would indicate sensitivity to this parameter. 5. The effect of size on joint
integrity. In many of the failed joints during the Northridge Earthquake, steel
member sizes, driven by desire for long clear spans, were very large. 6.
Improved details for large-size connections. Some possible details will be
studied for enhancing such joints by forcing the critical plastic hinge away
from the face of the column. Testing of several specimens of different size is
contemplated. This may include specimens with concrete slabs. Capacity analyses
will be used in establishing member sizes, as well as in developing design
requirements. 7. Residual Stress Distribution. The residual stresses together
with those imposed by dead and live (earthquake) loads that can cause failures
of the type repeatedly observed in steel building joints in the damaged area. 8.
Cantilever Beam-Column Subassemblages. It is planned to fabricate and test two
conventional beam-column subassemblages. 9. Cantilevers on Both Sides of Col
umn. Due to limitation of the funds, only a single specimen is contemplated. The
main purpose of this test is to study the panel zone, as well as beam
connections. This project is coordinated with companion projects at the
University of California at San Diego and at the University of Texas at Austin.
This is a Northridge Earthquake project. ***