* 9416666
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research:  Knowledge Based      Parameter Design System for Off-Line Quality Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,05/31/1997
* O. Geoffrey Okogbaa, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Donald Gross
* 05/31/1997
* USD 34,986.00

9416666 Okogbaa This research is focused on the development of modeling tools
for quality control that combines some aspects of Taguchi approach and
statistics. The intended users of the tool are design engineers. The technique
is based on parameter design. Parameter design involves and requires deep
process knowledge and the ability to carry out detailed statistical experimental
design and analysis to identify the critical process parameters. Thus, the
research also involves the development of a prototype knowledge base expert
system with tandem architecture that consists of a knowledge base and an
algorithmic base to optimize the resulting design. With the knowledge-base in
place, a user can implement parameter design without engaging in detailed
statistical experimental design and the ensuing analyses. The developed
knowledge-base system for parameter design can bridge the gap between some of
the methodological differences between Taguchi approach and some to the
alternative approaches proposed in the literature. The successful implementation
of parameter design can lead to a reduction in quality losses. It can enhance
the productivity of design engineers who do not have the statistical background
and resources to undertake the rigors of comprehensive statistical experimental
design. This benefit is particularly crucial in a concurrent engineering
environment where fast response time to design is highly desirable.