* 9416466
* Design of Concrete Gravity Load Systems for Lateral         Displacements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* John Stanton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1996
* USD 54,999.00

9416466 Stanton A number of reinforced concrete structures collapsed, either
partially or totally, in the Northridge earthquake. Some of the collapses were
attributed to the failure of columns which were designed for gravity loads only.
Many engineers perform the evaluation in terms of the moment strength of the
columns. This is an inappropriate approach because the real issue is rotation
capacity and not moment capacity. The research undertaken here will investigate
two aspects of the issue. The first is to develop analytical tools with which to
predict the story drift that a column can undergo without failure. The approach
to be used is to construct interaction diagrams relating axial force to
curvature capacity, rather than the conventional axial load to moment capacity.
Curvature is related to rotation which in turn can be used to predict story
drift capacity. The vertical accelerations and the shear strength will be taken
into consideration in the analysis. Innovative column details will be developed
that will permit larger inelastic rotations before failure. One approach is to
detail all columns using the full seismic ties required in the lateral load
resisting part of the frame. Other details will be developed that depend on
either providing local flexibility at the column ends or on providing localized
confinement to prevent bursting and/or shear failure. These column details which
will be simple, economical, and easy to inspect and build will be recommended.
This is a Northridge Earthquake project. ***