* 9416973
* Program Analysis: Logics, Algorithms, and Application
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Alexander Aiken, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1998
* USD 134,821.00

This project is undertaking a systematic investigation of a general class of
structural program analysis problems. The term structural program analysis
refers to compile-time program analyses that deal with the types and structure
of values computed by programs. This class of program analyses is broad,
including within it the classical dataflow analyses of C and FORTRAN compilers,
type inference for languages such as ML, and analysis of class membership of
values in object-oriented languages. The primary goal of this work is the
synthesis of set constraint techniques for structural program analysis in a
common framework; in particular, an implementation of set constraints suitable
for use in a general class of program analysis problems will be developed and
distributed for use in research and teaching. There has been considerable
activity directed towards using set constraints for structural analyses in
recent years. Most of the work has been directed either towards studying the
theory of set constraints itself, or at applications of set constraints to
particular problems. Set-based analysis is the exception; set- based analysis
provides a high-level characterization of a class of program analyses in terms
of set constraints. Currently, however, there is no general-purpose
implementation of set constraints available for experimentation with set-based
(or any other class of) analyses. This system is expected to be expressive
enough to encompass all set-based analyses and many analyses that are not set-
based. Aside from the primary goal of developing an `off-the-shelf`
implementation of set constraints that can be used in many settings, the project
also pursues three secondary goals. The first goal is to develop a common
technical language for structural analyses. The second goal is to describe the
structure of the design space for structural program analyses using this common
technical framework. The tradeoffs between accuracy and speed in structural
analyses are poorly understood. By studying these problems in an abstract
setting, it should be possible to make general statements about the relative
efficiency and precision of various program analysis techniques that apply
across a wide spectrum of applications. The third goal is to design algorithms
using the above results. General algorithms are sought that would provide the
best precision-speed tradeoffs for various classes of analysis problems.