* 9416560
* Photochemical Production and Microbial Oxidation of Carbon Monoxide in Marine Waters
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Yuegang Zuo, Florida International University
* Continuing grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/1998
* USD 298,973.00

9416560 JONES Carbon monoxide is an important component in the cycling of carbon
and nitrogen in the world oceans. Photochemical and microbiological studies have
shown that CO is mainly produced by the oxidation of natural dissolved organic
matter. At present, however, little is known about the major molecular
components responsible for the photochemical production of CO, the main
environmental factors which affect the CO formation and consumption, and the
role of microorganisms in the regeneration of organic source of CO in the ocean.
As a continuation of past research this effort will further study the basic
mechanisms for the photochemical and microbial cycling of CO in marine and fresh
water systems. The main objectives of this research are to: (1) identify
possible molecular components for the photochemical production of CO with basic
photochemical theory and available information about the identified components
of natural dissolved organic matter and possible structures of parent humic
substances, (2) examine the influences of dissolved oxygen, transition metals
and low molecular weight organic compounds which do not appre- ciably absorb
sunlight at sea surface on the formation and con- sumption of CO, and (3)
examine the role of microorganisms in the transformation of aquatic humic
substances including in the photo- production of CO.