* 9416652
* Primary Processes in Bacterial Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1999
* George Feher, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1999
* USD 775,000.00

9416652 Feher Various electron transfer steps in native and mutant reaction
centers will be investigated. Two electron transfer steps will be addressed in
detail: 1) the electron transfer rate from the primary quinone, QA to the
secondary quinone, QB and ii) the charge recombination of QA and QB with the
primary donor D+. The second problem deals with the protonation of the doubly
reduced quinone. Q2- is buried inside the reaction center and is not accessible
to protons from the outside. It is now generally believed that protons reach Q2-
by a charge-relay mechanism involving protonatable residues. The problem is to
identify the residues that constitute the proton transfer chain. This problem
will be addressed by site- directed mutagenesis. Three residues Glu (L212), Arg
(L213) and Ser (L223) have already been identified as being members of the
proton transfer chain. In addition, the mechanism of proton transfer will be
addressed by studying the coupling between electron and proton transfer and the
role of electrostatics in the transfer. Theoretical calculations will be
performed to complement, guide and explain the experimental results. %%% The
goal of the research is to contribute toward an understanding of the primary
processes in photosynthesis, i.e., the mechanism of conversion of
electromagnetic energy into chemical free energy. The research will focus on the
photosynthetic processes in purple bacteria (e.g. Rhodobacter sphaeroides). The
findings will be of general interest and applicability to other biological
systems and mechanisms, foremost to green plant photosynthesis and to other
bioenergetic processes. The primary process of photosynthesis takes place in an
integral membrane protein-pigment complex called the reaction center. Light
produces a charge separation and initiates a set of electron transfer reactions
resulting in the reduction of a terminal acceptor, which picks up two protons,
and initiates the formation of the proton gradi ent that provides the driving
force for the formation of high energy compounds. Thus, the main questions
associated with the primary processes are associated with electron and proton
transfers. ***