* 9416810
* Cross-Site Comparisons, Syntheses and Internationalization: LTER-NTL Site
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1998
* Stith Gower, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1998
* USD 214,710.00

9416810 Magnuson This project encompasses three international efforts on the
long-term temporal and spatial dynamics of temperate lakes at regional to global
scales. Three questions are addressed with data from widely scattered, multiple
lake districts. These questions are: 1. What patterns occur in ecological
variability and organization of lake ecosystems when lake districts are
considered at regional and global scales? 2. Can patterns of gains and losses of
species from individual lakes be related to the overall patterns of species
occurrence for lakes within a region? 3. Can analyses of lake ice freeze and
breakup phenologies around the globe be used to describe and understand large
scale dynamics and trends in climate? The study of ecological variability and
organization of lake districts will examine temporal variability patterns
(conherence) of lakes within lake districts, explore the relationship between
landscape position and lake variability across lakes in different lake
districts, and examine relations between lake variability and factors such as
lake morphometry and land use. Comparisons will provide opportunities to
determine whether patterns observed at the Northern Highland Lake District occur
across lake districts worldwide. The analyses of gains and losses of fish and
zooplankton species will investigate regional dynamics of species gains, losses,
and turnover rates in different lake districts, relate these dynamics to the
extent and strength of interconnections among lakes within these regions, and
investigate how human activities may influence these processes. The analyses of
lake ice phenology, climate change, and variability in the Northern Hemisphere,
will analyze interannual variability in thaw and freeze dates and where possible
the antecedent climatic variability. Are observed patterns in Wisconsin general
for larger regions of the northern hemisphere? Patterns are the recent warming
based on breakup dates, and variabili ty associated with ENSO events and
inderdecadal or longer time scales. Expected patterns will be generated through
global climate and ice freeze modeling.