* 9416016
* NASA/NSF Collaborative Research: Blue-Light Signal          Transduction in Arabidopsis Seedlings: A Multidisciplinary  Study
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Edgar Spalding, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1999
* USD 523,000.00

MCB 9416016 Spalding Blue light induces a large, transient membrane
depolarization a few seconds before a large reduction in the rate of stem
elongation in etiolated seedlings. The molecular mechanism that mediates this
depolarization is unknown although there is evidence that the plasma membrane
H+-ATPase is inhibited and anion channels are activated. The proposed work is an
electrophysiological investigation of the changes in ion transport at the plasma
membrane that participate in the transduction of blue light into growth
inhibition. The growing cells of etiolated Arabidopsis hypocotyls will be
studied with the patch clamp technique to characterize the ion channels that
undergo a change in activity after a pulse of blue light. The participation of
anion-selective channels will be given particular attention. The effect of blue
light on the activity of the H+-ATPase will be determined both
electrophysiologically and biochemically. Mutants in Arabidopsis that do not
display blue-light inhibited growth will be studied in addition to the wild-
type. Well defined energies and wavelengths of blue light will be used to
construct fluence rate response curves for the magnitudes and kinetics of the
electrical responses of the different genotypes. At least one double mutant,
blu1 hy4, will be constructed and similarly studied. The results will
demonstrate if and how the genetic lesions affect these early blue-light induced
changes in membrane transport. This combination of electrophysiology,
biochemistry and genetics is expected to reveal some important features of a
transduction chain that links blue- light receptors to a growth control
mechanism. %%% Seedlings grown in the dark undergo a suite of developmental
changes upon illumination, resulting in a green plant that is competent to
perform photosynthesis. One aspects of this important developmental process is
the inhibition of stem elongation by bright blue light . A pulse of blue light
inhibits stem growth after a few seconds. This means a receptor that absorbs
blue light is closely connected to a mechanism that controls the growth rate of
the stem. The events that occur between the activation of the blue light
receptor and the beginning of the growth response are said to transduce the blue
light into growth inhibition. Collectively these events are called a
transduction chain. All that is currently known about this transduction chain is
that the transport across the cells outer membrane of ions is altered just
before the growth rate slows. The proposed work is focused on elucidating at the
molecular level the details of how blue light alters the activities of ion pumps
and channels in the membrane and how this then affects the seedlings growth rate
. The electrophysiological technique of patch clamping will be used for many of
the experiments, all of which will be performed on the Arabidopsis plant In
addition, genetic techniques to take advantage of the existence of mutants in
Arabidopsis which do not display blue light inhibited growth will be sued, as
will some biochemical techniques. Taken together, these experiments will reveal
certain aspects of how light controls plant growth and development and how ion
channels and pumps participate in the transduction of environmental signals. ***