* 9416999
* RUI:  Large-Scale Patterns of Motion and Magnetic Fields on the Sun
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Herschel Snodgrass, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 12/31/1999
* USD 90,000.00

Abstract - Snodgrass The Principal Investigator and his students will carry out
research to explore the relationship of the Sun's large-scale patterns of
surface motion and magnetic field to the solar activity cycle. They will analyze
solar magnetograph observations taken at the 46-meter Tower Telescope at Mount
Wilson Observatory and also analyze the Carrington maps of Hydrogen-alpha
neutral lines and coronal holes compiled by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. Both data sets span a time period covering most (1967-76) of
cycle 20, all of cycles 21 and 22 (1976-86 and 1986-96, respectively) and will,
by the end of the funding period, include the beginning of cycle 23. The
investigation will include projects to study (1) the meridional motions of both
the field structures and the atmospheric gases, (2) the torsional oscillations,
both in the rotation of the photosphere and in the rotation of the magnetic
fields, (3) the relationship between sizes of magnetic features and their
differential rotation profiles, (4) the correlation of magnetograms with
neutral-line and coronal hole maps, (5) the association between the large-scale
field and the loci of active regions early in the cycle, (6) the Sun's magnetic
dipole and quadrupole moments, determined by least-squares fits to the
magnetograph data, (7) the rotation of the dipole moment as compared with the
rotation rates of coexisting coronal holes, and (8) the association between
polar field reversals and the time evolution of the large-scale field. The
results of the research will provide answers to questions regarding the role in
the Solar cycle played by the large-scale background field, the nature of
coronal holes, and the mechanism behind the torsional oscillations. In addition,
they will provide boundary conditions for both the internal motions and fields i
nferred through helioseismology and for the theoretical studies of the Sun's
internal dynamics. The results will also provide reasons for more detailed, but
shorter term, measurements made at other observatories and from space. All data
reduction and computer analyses will be carried out at the computing facilities
at Lewis and Clark College.