* 9416232
* Response of Low Rise Industrial and Commercial Buildings to Near Field Ground Motion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,02/29/1996
* Ronald Hamburger, EQE International Inc
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 02/29/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9416232 Hamburger Light industrial buildings of tiltup and reinforced masonry
construction with panelized plywood roofs house thousands of workers in the
Western U.S. In addition, strategic sectors of the Western U.S. economy
including the aerospace, defense, electronics, banking, retailing and
semiconductor industries are located within buildings of this construction. The
performance of these buildings in a major regional earthquake clearly has major
potential impact on the safety and welfare of broad segments of the society.
This construction was shown to be vulnerable to earthquake induced collapses in
the 1971 San Fernando earthquake. Building code changes were enacted in the
mid-1970s were effective in mitigating this vulnerability. However, more than
400 such structures in the epicentral region of the Northridge earthquake, many
conforming to these updated code requirements, experienced partial collapse,
graphically demonstrating the inadequacy of current design approaches. This
project examines the response of these commercial and light industrial buildings
with wood framed roofs to near source ground motions, to determine the causative
failure modes for these structures in the Northridge Earthquake, and to develop
and assist in implementing effective design procedure changes to minimize the
potential for catastrophic failures in future events capable of affecting the
Los Angeles region, San Francisco Bay Area, Puget Sound region and other areas
of intense development within seismically active zones. The findings of this
research will be directly presented to code and standards development bodies, in
forms which can readily be implemented. Recommendations will be developed to
modify the design codes to provide adequate margin in the near source zones of
earthquakes. ***