* 9416819
* Biodiversity and Decomposition in Mesic Forests:  An Across-site Experimental Study of Patterns and Processes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* David Coleman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1998
* USD 199,976.00

9416819 Coleman Studies of decomposition and nutrient cycling in ecosystems have
been very important processes for the interpretation of ecosystem function. They
have become "keystone" parameters in the LTER program. There has been an
increasing interest in the functional roles of hundreds of species of litter-
and microbial- feeding fauna which occur in virtually all terrestrial sites. How
do these species operate and interact, and are they "necessary' for optimal
functioning of the system? This project will explore the interaction between
biodiversity and decomposition processes, by studying factors causing marked
differences which have been found between three moist, warm, broad-leaved forest
sites, all on similar soil types. Two tropical sites, Luquillo (LUQ) in Puerto
Rico, and La Selva (LAS Rica, have low and high species richnesses of soil
microarthropods, respectively. Cowetta (CWT), in the Southern Appalachian
mountains, has a species richness of microarthropods approaching that of LAS.
Both CWT and LUQ are in the general substrate decomposition network study
currently being conducted by Harmon et al. The same or similar litter substrates
to those of the Harmon et al. network, will be contained in litter bags
identical to the previous study. The network will be expanded to include LAS, to
test the hypothesis: forests with litters containing the most diverse litter
faunas will have the most rapid decomposition rates. Conversely, forests with
relatively low species richness (LUQ) will have significantly lower rates of
decomposition, when corrected for differences in moisture/temperature regimes.
CWT is expected to have a decomposition rate intermediate to that of the two
tropical sites, because of its seasonal cycles of warm wet weather. This project
uses simple, proven techniques to compare decomposition rates across sites and
should be the groundwork for more widespread studies of biotic interactions and
processes across the LTER network.