* 9416759
* Performance in Shear of Concrete Bridge Piers/Columns Duringthe Northridge Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Mark Bowman, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1998
* USD 121,331.00

9416759 Sozen This project conducts a detailed evaluation of shear failures
observed in bridge piers during the Northridge Earthquake. The primary objective
of this study is to develop design and strengthening criteria for similar
structures in regions of low to moderate seismicity. It is well known that many
aspects of the shear strength of reinforced concrete elements are poorly
understood. Applicability of existing design criteria are limited to the ranges
of the variables involved in available experience and experiments. A
reinterpretation of the available procedures and experimental data for shear
strength are needed in the light of both positive and negative experiences
during the Northridge event. Such a study is needed primarily because of
observations that probable maximum unit shear stresses sustained by bridge piers
failing in shear during the Northridge Earthquake were decisively less than
measured unit shear strengths of comparable test specimens reported in the
literature. Old as well as new hypotheses for shear strength will be evaluated
in the light of (a) existing experimental data and (b) data from damaged and
undamaged piers during the Northridge event. A set of design criteria applicable
to similar structures in regions of low to moderate seismicity will be assembled
on the results of this study. This is a Northridge Earthquake project. ***