* 9416247
* Evaluation of a Non-Linear Deformation Analysis Method Usingthe Jensen Filtration Site-Northridge Earthquake Case       History
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Yoshiharu Moriwaki, Woodward-Clyde Consultants
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1997
* USD 65,000.00

9416247 Moriwaki The Joseph Jensen Filtration Plant (JFP) in the San Fernando
Valley, California, provides an unprecedented case history of seismically
induced permanent ground deformations. The site has been strongly shaken by two
earthquakes-the 1971 San Fernando earthquake and the 1994 Northridge earthquake.
These two earthquakes produced large permanent ground deformations and ground
cracks at parts of the site. The site was thoroughly investigated and studied
following the San Fernando earthquake, leading to a conclusion that the loose
alluvium underlying the fill (up to 50 ft thick) at the site probably liquefied
and contributed to the permanent ground deformations. In 1988, the owner and
operator of the plant, the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California
(Metropolitan), contracted a thorough geotechnical and seismic investigation of
the site prior to a major expansion of the facility. Following the 1994
earthquake, Woodward-Clyde has been working with the Metropolitan to map the
permanent ground deformations, ground cracks, and other damage at the site. The
project involves the following: an assessment of the site conditions; the
development of free-field ground motions at the site corresponding to the 1994
earthquake; and the documentation, simplified analyses, and nonlinear numerical
analyses of permanent ground deformations at the site due to the 1971 and 1994
earthquakes. The documentation, comparison, and evaluation of the permanent
ground deformations at the JFP site during these two earthquakes not only
provides a unique and important case history of ground failure, but also
provides an opportunity to evaluate the use of nonlinear numerical modeling of
the ground deformation as a practical and reliable design tool. Evaluations with
conventional and empirical methods also serve to provide a common basis for
comparison. ***