* 9416771
* Experimental Studies of Two Reinforced Beams to Column      Welded Moment Connections
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* James Anderson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

9416771 Anderson The research under this project will focus on experimental and
analytical evaluation of two design modifications which have been suggested for
welded beam to column connections. These modifications are intended for both the
repair of connections which were damaged during the Northridge earthquake and
for the strengthening of welded connections in new construction. Large scale
beam-column components which are representative of damages during the earthquake
will be considered. Cyclic testing of eight specimens having beam to column
connections which are reinforced using variations of two different schemes will
be carried out. The initial scheme will consider the addition of reinforcing
plates to the bottom and/or top flange. The second will add a knee bracket plate
(structural tee) to the bottom flange of the beam along with associated
stiffener plates in the column. Parallel finite-element analytical studies of
the distribution of stresses and strains in the joint region will be conducted.
The nonlinear behavior of the connection model will be evaluated under
equivalent static monotonic loading. These results will be calibrated against
the experimental results. These studies will suggest repair procedures or design
modifications for new construction to supply the moment and rotation capacity
demanded by the earthquake ground motion. Recommendations for modifying the
connection details so as to strengthen the connection region and avoid these
types of failures will be presented. This is a Northridge Earthquake project.
***