* 9416004
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Science:  Nonlinear Optimization    Techniques for Seismic Inversion Problems
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Jorge Nocedal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/1999
* USD 21,750.00

9416004 Nocedal This Americas Program award will support a collaborative
research project between Dr. Jorge Nocedal, Northwestern University, and Dr.
Susana Gomez, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, on optimization
techniques for seismic inversion problems. The researchers aim to determine
various material properties of the earth, such as slowness and impedance, by
using given sets of seismic data. Seismic inversion requires the solution of two
optimization problems: one highly non-linear and moderately large, and another
nearly quadratic and very large. A new optimization method, tailored to solve
these optimization problems, will be developed and tested on 2-dimensional
seismic models. Determining the properties of the earth from seismic surface
data is of great practical importance. The main obstacle to the solution of the
problem at present is the excessive computing time required by current
optimization techniques. One of the goals of this study is to develop new
techniques that will speed up the inversion process in a fully automatic manner.
The current project is enhanced by the complementarity of the collaborators'
expertise. Dr. Nocedal's main research has focused on the development of new
optimization algorithms capable of rapidly solving very large problems, such as
those arising in seismic inversion, while Dr. Gomez has experience developing
new methods for global and non-differentiable optimization problems. ***