* 9416027
* NASA/NSF Collaborative Research: Molecular Genetic Analysis of Gravitropism in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1999
* Dieter Soll, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1999
* USD 695,000.00

9416027 Soll Gravity is one of the primary environmental signals determining the
orientation of root and shoot growth in many plant species. The gravitropic
response involves perception of the gravity signal, transmission of the signal,
and execution of a response program that re-orients growth. Thus gravitropism
constitutes a plant signal transduction pathway. This pathway is known to depend
on tranport and reception of the plant hormone auxin. This research is designed
to identify and characterize genes involved in the gravitropic response in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Several mutants with defects in gravitropism have already
been isolated. The focus here will be on the anlysis of two especially promising
mutants, rgr1 and rcn1. The data indicates that the RCN1 gene encodes a
phosphoprotein phosphatase, suggesting a specific role for RCN1 in gravitropic
signal transduction; the role of RGR1 remains unknown. Work will continue on
physiological and genetic characterization of the mutants, to establish the
functions of the RGR1 and RCN1 genes. Molecular cloning and characterization of
wild-type alleles will further define these roles. Wild-type clones will be re-
introduced into Arabidopsis by Agrobacterium-mediated stable transformation to
test for complementation of mutant phenotypes. Stable transformation experiemtns
also will be used to demonstrate the biological effects of altering the normal
expression pattersn of these genes. Genetic and molecular approaches will be
used to elucidate interactions of the RGR1 and RCN1 genes with each other and
with other genes involved in gravitropism. This work will provide new insights
into the molecular mechanisms of gravitropism and of auxin-mediated signal
transduction in plants. ***