* 9416265
* Improvements in Code and Dynamic Analyses of Buildings:     Vibration Periods and Modal Damping Ratios
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Anil Chopra, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1996
* USD 80,000.00

9416265 Chopra The objectives of this project are to "measure" two important
properties--fundamental vibration period and modal damping ratios-of some forty
buildings from their recorded motions during the Northridge earthquake and other
recent earthquakes. These buildings, shaken strongly by ground motions with peak
accelerations between 0.15g and 0.82g, would provide information directly
relevant to earthquake resistant design of buildings in contrast to much of the
existing data which are for smaller amplitudes of motion. The vibration
properties will be identified from the recorded motions of the buildings using
system identification procedures. These results from the Northridge earthquake
and other recent earthquakes, combined with similar data available from the 1971
San Fernando earthquake, will create the most comprehensive database which can
be easily updated after every major earthquake. This database will be used to
evaluate and improve: (1) code formulas for estimating the fundamental vibration
period used in calculating the design base shear and lateral forces; and (2)
current recommendations for damping values used in dynamic analysis. The period
formulas in the 1994 UBC and the 1990 SEAOC "blue book" were developed in 1975
as part of the ATC-3 project, based largely on motions of buildings recorded
during the 1971 San Fernando earthquake. Similarly, the damping values used
widely were originally recommended by Newmark and Hall in 1978. This project
will culminate in: (1) formulas for estimating the fundamental vibration period
of buildings using different materials--steel, R/C, masonry etc.--and various
structural systems--moment resisting frames, shear walls etc.; and (2)
recommendations for modal damping ratios for different categories of buildings,
depending on response amplitude and, if appropriate, on mode number. This is a
Northridge earthquake project. ***