* 9416602
* Paleochemistry of V, Mo and Other Oxyanions as Recorded in  Ferromanganese Deposits
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1994,11/30/1997
* Robert Collier, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/1997
* USD 296,501.00

9416602 COLLIER This study will make use of a new analytical technique, Laser
Ablation of solids, integrated with an Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass
Spectrometer (LA-ICP-MS) to determine high-resolution profiles of a group of
trace elements in the hydrous iron oxide phases of ferromanganese deposits.
Target samples range from slowly accumulating hydrogenous crusts to rapidly
accumulating hydrothermal crusts and shallow-water nodules with the goal to
study the paleochemistry of V, Mo and other minor/trace elements present in
seawater as oxyanions (including P, U, As, Se, Cr, and others). Although the
concentration of these elements in the crust may be complicated by a variety of
factors it is hypothesized that the ratios between various oxyanions scavenged
by the iron oxide phases can be related to their paleo-ratios in seawater and
possibly to environmental conditions at the time of deposition. The
determination of other elements, including REEs and 232Th, will aid in the
interpretation of crust chemistry. 230Th will be determined in the younger
portions of rapidly-formed samples in order to refine chronologies. The high
sensitivity of the ICP-MS, coupled with the sampling resolution of laser
ablation (approximately 50 um) contribute to the long-term goal of significantly
improving the utility of ferromanganese crusts for paleoceanographic studies.