* 9416844
* Role of Mn Oxidizing Bacteria in the Degradation and        Utilization of Organic Matter
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1994,11/30/1997
* Bradley Tebo, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/1997
* USD 247,887.00

9416844 TEBO Because most of the nonliving organic matter in the ocean is the
decay-resistant residuum of reworked precursor material, is less readily
available for heterotrophic utilization. In deep waters where sunlight cannot
provide energy to promote further degradation, other sources of energy must be
tapped by decomposer bacteria in order to utilize this large organic pool. In
this study, the principal investigator will conduct laboratory investigations
into the capacity of certain marine bacteria to promote the decomposition of
this recalcitrant organic matter by utilizing the oxidizing power released in
the oxidation-reduction cycle of manganese. The investigator hypothesizes that
bacteria capable of catalyzing the oxidation of Mn might be able to cause the
release of simpler organic moieties from the refractory material and that these
simpler organic substances could be utilized as nutrients. Through laboratory
culture experimentation, the growth efficiency of Mn-oxidizing bacteria and the
yield of metabolizable organic moieties will be studied using bacterial cultures
and natural organic matter from several sources. Depending upon the outcome of
these laboratory studies, the investigator may then be in a position to carry
similar studies into the field at some future date in order to assess the
quantitative importance of Mn-oxidizing bacteria in marine bacterial production
and in the broader biogeochemical context of marine and global organic carbon
mineralization.