* 9416821
* Comparison of Long-term Carbon Dynamics of Two Conifer      Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Arthur McKee, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1997
* USD 178,964.00

9416821 Harmon Forests play a major role in the global carbon cycle, but their
current role is not fully understood. To some degree this uncertainty stems from
the lack of attention to regional scale analysis. Heterogeneity between and
within forested regions can significantly affect carbon cycling processes and
the response to climate and landuse change. This project will compare the carbon
dynamics of two significant forest regions of the globe, the Pacific Northwest
and northwestern Russia at three spatial levels: stand, landscape and region.
The main objective is to determine the major factors controlling the spatial and
temporal patterns of carbon stores and fluxes within these two major coniferous
ecosystems. This analysis will be abased on the synthesis of long-term stand and
weather records, forest inventory data, aerial photography, and remote sensing
imagery for both regions. Past NSF-LTER/NASA studies of the Pacific Northwest
forests provide the template for the proposed Russian project and comparison.
The project also builds upon an ongoing collaborative study with the St.
Petersburg Forest Academy. For both regions the same complex of modeling tools
will be used to analyze carbon dynamics at three spatial levels as well as the
impact of harvesting and carbon stored in forest projects. For northwestern
Russia the models will be calibrated and tested with existing data including
long-term observations on permanent plots, local growth tables and biomass
equations, forest inventory data including forest types and soils, weather data,
remotely sensed images and timber harvest and processing parameters. This
project will encourage further international partnerships in long-term
ecological studies as well as make valuable new Russian data resources available
to the US scientific community.