* 9416638
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Separation of DNA        Molecules Using Combination of Pulses of Electric Field
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/2000
* Michael Rubinstein, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/2000
* USD 14,710.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in polymers
and biophysics and involves Sergei Obukhov of the University of Florida, Michael
Rubinstein of Kodak and Jean-Louis Viovy of the Ecole Superieure for Industrial
Physics and Chemistry, Paris, France. They propose a study of DNA gel
electrophoresis, which is the basic method for DNA separation. The objectives of
their research are (1) to develop a detailed understanding of the structure of a
DNA molecule moving through a gel in a strong electric field; and (2) to improve
separation techniques of long chain DNA molecules. They will work on a set of
analytical and closely related numerical models which allow simulation of the
motion of ultra large DNA molecules. The models will be tested against other
numerical models and experiments developed by the French investigators. The U.S.
investigators bring to this collaboration considerable expertise in polymer
theory and physics. This is complemented by Dr. Viovy's expertise in molecular
modeling and the experiments in DNA electrophoresis currently in progress in
Paris. Their research addresses the ultimate goal of improving the accuracy and
efficiency of current DNA separation techniques. These improved techniques are
essential for mapping the `human genome` and for advancements in molecular
biology and bioengineering.