* 9416740
* Degradation of Colloidal Organic Material and the Formation of Semi-Refractory DOM
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* David Kirchman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/1998
* USD 268,828.00

9416740 KIRCHMAN Large numbers of colloids (submicron particles) have been
observed in the ocean and are thought to play key roles in several geochemical
reactions. Preliminary experiments have led to the hypothesis that colloids are
crucial in the production of semi- refractory dissolved organic matter (DOM)
with turnover times between truly labile compounds (e.g. free amino acids) and
refractory DOM with turnover times &gt;1000 years. Specifically it is
hypothesized that compounds associated with colloids are degraded slower than
the same compound freely dissolved. Experiments will be conducted to test this
hypothesis and to gain more information about turnover of naturally-occurring
submicron particles. These experiments will examine: 1) degradation of
3H-protein sorbed to or trapped inside 14C-liposomes which mimic colloids
produced by flagellates (flagellate fecal pellets); 2) degradation of 3H-
protein sorbed to or trapped inside 14C-liposomes which mimic colloids produced
by flagellates (flagellate fecal pellets); and 2) degradation of protein
adsorbed to natural colloids. Turnover of colloids will be estimated from the
degradation of dual radiolabeled liposomes and from 14C-labeled flagellate fecal
pellets. These experiments will be conducted in the Delaware Estuary and coastal
waters during the spring bloom and summer, which should give a range of colloid
types, concentrations and degradation rates. The work should provide insight
into colloid turnover, the degradation of DOM in oceanic environments, and
perphaps processes leading to the formation of truly refractory DOM.