* 9416866
* The Structure and Development of Coastal Atmospheric        Circulations of Western North America
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Nicholas Bond, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/1997
* USD 322,232.00

9416866 Mass The complex terrain of coastal regions, such as exists along most
of the western U.S. coast, has a major influence on local weather conditions.
The interactions of such terrain with various meteorological phenomena, however,
is not well-understood. The primary objectives of this project are to study and
document: the coastally-trapped disturbances that propagate along the
mountainous coastline of western North America; and the interaction of the
large-scale flow and embedded disturbances (such as cyclones, troughs, and
fronts) with coastal topography. Using an existing research data set collected
under the sponsorship of the Office of Naval Research and the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, this research effort will utilize both
observational and numerical modeling approaches. First, the nature of
orographically-trapped events and the interactions of the synoptic-scale flow
and coastal orography under stable summertime conditions will be examined. Such
features are often associated with significant transitions in temperature, wind,
pressure and cloudiness within approximately 100 km of coastal mountains.
Secondly, the project will address how the structures and dynamical balances of
synoptic systems such as troughs and fronts change as they approach and cross a
mountainous coastline during wintertime, less stable conditions. Such systems
are often associated with significant coastal weather features such as mesoscale
coastal ridging, coastal jets and alongshore surges. ***