* 9416749
* Experimental Analysis of Waterborne Chemical Cues as Agents Regulating Larval Settlement and Metamorphosis
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Richard Zimmer, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1998
* USD 304,875.00

9416749 Zimmer-Faust The process of recruitment of pelagic larvae into benthic
habitats has been given serious attention in biological oceanography because of
its role as a "bottleneck" in the population dynamics of marine organisms. In
the field of larval ecology, emphasis has been given to : 1) the hydrodynamics
of larval delivery to the substratum, 2) the physiological and nutritional
condition of larvae, which provides information on survivorship in the field,
and 3) chemical cues for larvae that dictate attachment sites in the benthic
environment. Dr. Zimmer-Faust has found evidence that larvae of a commercially
important species, the American Oyster, respond to a chemical in the water
column that is sequestered by adults of the same species. This project will
identify the chemical composition of the cue, and perform in situ evaluation of
the role of this cue on larval settlement, and will distinguish the role of this
water-borne cue versus the larval attraction to chemicals from surface films on
substrata, which has been repeatedly documented. This project will contribute to
the program's objective of making incremental steps in the understanding of the
mechanisms which control the input of larval propagules into adult populations.
If the role of water-borne chemical cues is indeed significant, this work could
lead to the restructuring of current theory in the recruitment ecology of marine
organisms.