* 9416838
* Chlorophyll-Labeling Experiments and the Comparison of      Environmental Factors' Influence on Phytoplankton Specific  Growth Rates
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Jan Newton, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1998
* USD 98,192.00

9416838 Newton This project entails laboratory analysis of an extensive set of
chlorophyll-labeling experiments that have been conducted in three different
marine environments which represent very different physical and biological
regimes: the equatorial Pacific, an oceanic upwelling area; the California
boundary current, a coastal upwelling site; and Dabob Bay, a temperate fjord
with seasonal blooms. Roughly 500 samples comprising multi-depth (7-8) profiles
were obtained using identical sampling and procedural techniques. Within each
environment, large variations in growth conditions (e.g., light, nutrients
temperature, etc.) were evident, associated with physical (e.g., EL Nino,
seasonal upwelling, stratification) and biological (e.g., blooms,
biogeographical shifts) variation. Analysis of these experiments entails using
high-performance liquid chromatography to isolate chlorophyll a for
determination of its specific activity. Results will yield estimates of
phytoplankton carbon:chlorophyll ratios and specific growth rates. Correlation
and regression analysis will be conducted to gain insight into phytoplankton
growth response to physical forcing within and between these three very
different environments. The data set carbon:chlorophyll (C:chl) ratios and
phytoplankton specific growth rates (u) generated will be unprecedented in size
and comprehensives. Because of these attributes, statistical analysis will be
meaningful and our basic understanding of phytoplankton growth and cellular
adaptation in relation to environmental and biological conditions will be
increased. These analyses will result in a better appreciation for the
variability in these parameters under different field conditions. Yet, more
importantly, because sampling within an environment spanned variations in growth
conditions that were quantified, these comparisons can yield quantitative
insight to the master variables in determining phytoplankton specific growth
rate in the field. A hypothesis to be evaluated is that an algorithm can be
developed such that typically measured parameters, such as nutrients, light, and
species composition, can constrain phytoplankton specific growth rate (u)
adequately for modeling purposes. The results will be useful for estimating the
errors induced from modeling efforts where C:chl ratio or u measurements do not
exist. Field measurements of u are rare in many environments. The pool of
physical, chemical and biological support data that exists for each of the three
projects will afford insight into phytoplankton response to physical forcing
within each of the three different environments. ***