* 9416565
* Investigation of the Seasonal Variability of the Oceanic    CO2 System and the Air-Sea Flux of CO2 at the U.S. JGOFS    Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series Study (BATS) Site
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/1999
* USD 454,903.00

Knap 9416565 Although the intensity of carbon dioxide exchange between the ocean
and atomsphere may be more greater in biologically rich areas of the world
ocean, the role of the less productive oligotrophic central ocean waters in the
global carbon dioxide cycle must be taken into account because of their
geographic vastness. As part of the U.S. Joint Geochemical Ocean Flux Study
(U.S. JGOFS), this study at the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Station (BATS) will
endeavor to study sea-air carbon dynamics in the oligotrophic North Atlantic.
Specially, high-precision continuos time-series measurements of water column CO2
fugacity (a measure of ideal partial pressure of carbon dioxide in seawater)
will be added to the measurements already being made at BATS to overdetermine
(i.e., provide a check of internal consistency) the components of the carbonate
system equilibrium and permit accurate calculation of carbon dioxide fluxes (air
to sea and vice cersa). In so doing, the investigators expect to more accurately
estimate the sea-air flux of CO2 at the BATS site and to reduce uncertainties in
the role of the North Atlantic as a sink for atmospheric carbon dioxide. Through
comparison with other time-series data at BATS, the investigators expect to
achieve a clearer understanding of the underlying biological and physical
processes impacting the dynamics of inorganic carbon in the oligotrophic North
Atlantic, and by extrapolation, in other central ocean gyres.