* 9416309
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Enumeration of the Flora of the Mixteca Region of Oaxaca and Puebla, Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Jose Panero, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/1998
* USD 42,780.00

9416309 Panero This Americas Program award will fund a research collaboration
between Dr. Jose Panero, Michigan State University Herbarium and Drs. Patricia
Davila and Jose L. Villasenor, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, for a
botanical exploration of the Mixteca Alta region of Oaxaca and Puebla, leading
to an inventory of all vascular plants of the region. This project is part of an
ongoing collaboration between the Michigan State University Herbarium and the
National Herbarium of Mexico to publish the Flora of Oaxaca and adjacent
regions. The Oaxaca area has been divided into ten study regions to concentrate
attention on one particular sub-flora at a time. The present research will serve
as a pilot project for the entire Flora of Oaxaca project. It will include
enumeration of the flora, and implementation of a database system to generate a
specimen database that will produce an accurate account of the floristic
diversity and distribution in the State of Oaxaca. As the project matures,
several other components of the relational database system will be developed.
The composition and distribution of the major vegetation assemblages in the
region will also be examined at this time as part of a project to prepare a
chorological atlas for the state of Oaxaca. The southern Mexican state of Oaxaca
harbors the richest flora in that country. In spite of the high species
diversity and high level of endemism, the flora of the state has never been
systematically inventoried, nor all of its areas collected. Adequately
documenting and describing this flora is important in understanding the
evolution of a major portion of North America flora. Because the area is under
increasing human pressure, there is a need to document its floristic composition
before further disappearance of the native flora. Therefore, the initial
collecting efforts of this project will be directed at gathering as many
specimens as possible in an area where the flo ra is most threatened by
extinction. ***