* 9416708
* U.S.-Chile Research:  Desertification and Soil Disturbance  in the Arid Regions of Chile:  The Role of Mycorrhizal Fungiin the Restoration of Atriplex Shrub Communities
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1997
* Carl Friese, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 10/31/1997
* USD 39,494.00

9416708 Friese This Americas Program award will support a collaborative research
project between Dr. Carl Friese, University of Dayton, and Dr. Lorgio Aguilera,
Universidad de la Serena, Chile. The objective is to study the symbiosis between
mycorrhizal fungi and plant species belonging to the genus Atriflex in order to
better understand the effect of desertification on the plant and microbial
communities, as well as the natural disturbance regime, in the arid regions of
Chile. A descriptive analysis of the plant-microbe communities currently
undergoing desertification will be compared to that of a protected site in the
same region. Two integral components of arid ecosystems will be studied: plant-
microbe communities, and small scale disturbances. Descriptive studies of the
plant, fungal and microbial communities will be linked together with spatial
analyses of animal disturbance, along with experimental studies of the effect of
the disturbance on plant-microbe interaction. This complete analysis will yield
much more information about desertification than a single study of the system.
Desertification is the process by which the productivity and soil quality of
ecosystems are significantly reduced. As a result of mining and farming
activities, much of the arid land of Chile has been subject to desertification.
The effects of this process on arid lands can be devastating, nearly eliminating
the ground forage for livestock and other animals. The aim of this study is to
determine the specific processes of desertification that are causing the loss of
soil fertility and thus, plant community diversity, with the ultimate goal of
reversing or halting the desertification process. ***