* 9416886
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Theoretical Studies on   the Conservation Implications of Predator Removal and       Introductions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Robert Holt, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/1999
* USD 12,045.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in
theoretical community ecology between Robert D. Holt of the University of Kansas
and Michael Hochberg of the Ecole Normale Superieure's Ecology Laboratory in
Paris, France. The project links an NSF-funded Long-Term Project in
Environmental Biology to the biodiversity research program supported by the
French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). The research project is
motivated by problems in conservation biology arising from removal of native
predators from communities and the introduction of exotic predators into
communities. The investigators propose to study the consequences of predator
manipulation from detailed analyses of community models. These communities
consist of a small number of species interacting in a prescribed manner. In
their analyses of these models, the investigators will address issues such as
unlinked food chains, predators feeding on competing and non competing prey, and
pairs of predator species attacking pairs of prey. The U.S. investigator brings
to this collaboration considerable expertise in general ecological theory. This
is complemented by the French investigator's research on models tailored to
empirical population studies in conservation biology. The proposal's focus on
predator removals and additions has conservation and biological control
implications. Its results may lead to improved practices in environmental
management.