* 9416038
* NASA/NSF Collaborative Research: Calcium-Mediated Mechano-  Sensory Signal Transduction in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2000
* Jeffrey Harper, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 08/31/2000
* USD 540,000.00

9416038 Harper This research is focused on exploring the role of Calcium-
Dependent Protein Kinases (CDPKs) in mechano-sensory signal transduction. The
three specific aims are to: 1) Identify substrates for CDPK- dependent signal
transduction pathway, 2) Test the hypothesis that the activity of CDPK isoform
AK1 is critical to a mechano-sensory response, and 3) Develop a fluorescent
tagging system to monitor dynamic changes in the membrane/cytoskeletal systems
of live cells in response to physical stimulation. Since many mechano-sensory
responses appear to involve calcium signals, it is important to determine what
role CDPKs are playing in these phenomena. Using a CDPK signal transduction
pathway as a focus, this research emphasizes the development of unique
collaborations and new tools with far reaching implications for research in the
field of plant cell biology. For example, the specific aim to identify CDPK
substrates will involve a collaboration of researchers from all areas of plant
biology. In the second specific aim, the transgenic plants expressing a mutant
CDPK will be made available as a tool to all researchers seeking to define the
signal transduction pathways involved in a plant's response to an environmental
signal. Finally, it is hoped that the tool developed in the third specific aim,
GFP tagged membrane/cytoskeletal systems, will provide a foundation for a
powerful new approach in investigating the dynamics of cell structure. ***