* 9416837
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Program: Workshop on the Control of Nonlinear Dynamical Systems: Controls and Chaos/Honolulu,Hawaii/June 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1997
* Thomas Vincent, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 03/31/1997
* USD 18,755.00

9416837 Vincent This award will support the participation of ten American
scientists, mathematicians and engineers at a workshop on the control of
nonlinear dynamical systems entitled "Control and Chaos" to be held in Honolulu,
Hawaii in June 1995. The American organizer is Dr. Thomas Vincent of the
Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering at the University of Arizona.
The Australian organizers are Prof. A. I. Mees and Prof. K. L. Teo of the
Department of Mathematics from the University of Western Australia. The
objective of the workshop is to bring together experts in dynamical systems
theory and control theory to focus on the problem of controlling nonlinear and
potentially chaotic systems using limited control effort. The work has
application potential including such diverse fields as economic policy,
medicine, ecosystem management and manufacturing. Assessment considerations will
play an important part of the workshop. There currently exists controversy over
claims that approaches inspired by work on chaos provide unique ways to control
systems with complex behavior. The workshop will also investigate applications
of control theory and consider new tools for controlling complex problems of a
practical interest. The Australian participants are being funded through the
Australian Department of Industry, Science and Technology. Researchers from
Japan and Great Britain will also be participating in the wopkshop.