* 9416938
* Temporal and Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Chemical Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1998
* John Hudson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 10/31/1998
* USD 297,201.00

Abstract - Hudson - 9416938 Oscillations have been known in chemical systems for
some time, phenomena such as bifurcations among states, chaos, and complex
spatial patterns can arise in such systems. In well-mixed open reacting systems
(for example a continuous stirred tank reactor) the concentrations of reacting
species can undergo periodic and chaotic oscillations. Catalytic surface
reactions such as the oxidation of carbon monoxide (one of the reactions taking
place in the catalytic muffler of an automobile), can also oscillate and produce
spatial patterns on the catalytic surface. Electrochemical reactions, such as
electrodissolution of metals, or corrosion, can exhibit temporal as well as
spatial variations in reaction rate. The PI's work is focused on quantifying the
above experimentally observed behavior and on developing quantitative
phenomenological models. The reactions that will be studied are of both
industrial and economic importance and should lead to an improved fundamental
understanding of such reaction processes. Electrochemical reactions have several
features which make them ideal for fundamental studies of reaction dynamics.
They are relatively stationary, i.e., have less drift over the time scale of the
dynamics and they exhibit many types of interesting dynamic behavior such as
complex periodic oscillations, low order chaos, spatiotemporal patterns, etc.
Also, there are easily controlled parameters (the potential or current as well
as the mass transfer coefficient near a rotating disk) so that transitions among
states can be investigated. The PI will study the temporal and spatiotemporal
dynamics of chemically reacting systems. In the temporal studies, time series
emanating from the electrochemical dissolution of metals will be investigated.
The studies are to be both deterministic and stochastic. In the former, chaotic
behavior and transitions, or bifurcations, between states will be emphasized,
applying methods from nonlinear dynamics to the experimental data in order to
identify and characterize the underlying dynamics of the system and to develop
phenomenological mathematical models. A new research program in electrochemical
noise associated with localized corrosion will be initiated, consisting of both
experimental and modeling studies. Spatiotemporal dynamics will be studied by
using a video camera to record spatial nonuniformities. The work is aimed at
developing models which should help answer questions such as how do films grow
and recede on dissolving metals, how much interaction is there among pits on the
surface of corroding metals, and under what conditions is synchronization among
reacting sites local or global in nature. ***