* 9416910
* Theoretical Problems in Condensed Matter and Statistical    Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/1994,11/30/2000
* Bertrand Halperin, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/2000
* USD 670,000.00

9416910 Halperin Research will focus on a range of theoretical problems in the
field of condensed matter and statistical physics. Long-range goals are to
improve the basic understanding of strongly interacting many- body systems and
highly disordered materials, to develop new theoretical and computational
techniques, and to explain outstanding experimental puzzles. A major concern
will be properties of quasi-two-dimensional electron systems at low
temperatures, in very strong magnetic fields. Research will concentrate on
Landau-level filling fractions where the quantised Hall effect is not observed.
Theoretical analysis will be based on a mathematical transformation where the
electrons become a set of fermions that interact through a fictitous electric
and magnetic field of the Chern-Simons type. Topics to be studied include finite
temperature transport experiments, as well as fundamental limits to the
applicability of the fermion Chern-Simons theory. Another major concern will be
low-temperature properties of spin systems where quantum mechanical fluctuations
are very important. One focus will be properties of materials such as high
temperature superconductors which contain quasi-one-dimensional spin-one spin
chains with antiferromagnetic interactions. Other work will explore higher
dimensional spin systems with frustrated interactions. Other research will
include properties of disordered systems, especially nuclear magnetic resonance
studies of water in porous media such as rocks. The focus here will be the
analysis of the effects of the diffusion of water molecules on nuclear magnetic
resonance signals obtained using various pulse sequences in complex geometries.
%%% Research will focus on a range of theoretical problems in the field of
condensed matter and statistical physics. A major concern will be properties at
low temperatures, in very strong magnetic fields of quasi-two-dimensional
electron layers, which occur in various semiconductor devices such as the field-
effect transistor. The research also has implications for other materials such
as high- temperature superconductors. Other research will include properties of
disordered systems, especially nuclear magnetic resonance studies of water in
porous media such as rocks. This work may have application to oil recovery.