* 9416262
* Evaluation and Analysis of the Performance of Masonry       Infills During the Northridge Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Richard Bennett, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1995
* USD 70,000.00

9416262 Bennett Construction with masonry infills remains very popular,
particularly in the low to moderate seismic zones of the eastern/central United
States. Infill walls may have both beneficial and detrimental affects on the
building behavior under seismic loading. Infill walls increase the stiffness of
a building, shift the structure's center of stiffness, and affect the forces in
the framing possible causing premature failure of frame members. The infills can
also provide a redundant load path for both horizontal and vertical loads, thus
have a positive influence on the structural behavior. The objective of this
project is to use data from the Northridge earthquake to characterize the
beneficial and detrimental performance of infills, correlate the performance to
numerical methods, and evaluate the risk associated with both unreinforced and
reinforced infills. Key aspects of in-plane performance of infills that will be
examined are the details of the interface between the infill and bounding frame,
the alignment of the infill with the bounding frame, and the effect of the
infill on the bounding frame. With respect to out-of-plane behavior, the
stability of the panel and applicability of arching theories under dynamic load
will be examined. This research will impact both high and moderate seismic
zones. The level and priority of retrofit required for infills in high hazard
zones may be less than anticipated. Perhaps just as significant is the impact on
infill construction in low to moderate seismic zones, which cover most of the
central/eastern Untied States. A better understanding of infills, which has to
be related to actual seismic performance, is needed to take full advantage of
infill construction in moderate hazard seismic zones. ***