* 9416383
* Evaluation of Local Site Effects Using GIS, SCEC            Geotechnical Database, and Nonlinear Site Response Model-   1994 Northridgequake
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Mladen Vucetic, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

9416383 Vucetic The assessment of past and future damages are of primary
importance in the evaluation of the socio-economic impact of strong earthquakes
in urban areas. Past earthquakes have shown that, besides the source and path
effects, damage patterns are associated with local geologic and geotechnical
conditions. The objective of the investigation is to use the Northridge
earthquake experience to develop innovative methods for the estimation and
forecasting of the damages related to local soil conditions. The methods are
based on modern GIS (Geographic Information System) computing technologies for
microzoning. The primary focus is on the damage caused by soil amplification in
the nonlinear range. The research includes the following components: (1)
completion of a detailed digitized geotechnical data base for the region
affected by strong shaking, (2) modification of the nonlinear site response
model to allow for the integration into GIS, (3) integration of the geotechnical
data base and nonlinear site response model into GIS, and automatic calculation
of the distribution of nonlinear site response characteristics over the region,
(4) comparisons of the results from 1 and 3 with recorded ground surface motions
and damage distribution, and (5) development of the GIS methods for estimation
and forecasting of local site effects based on these comparisons. The results
will include a series of digitized GIS data bases and associated microzoning
maps. They are: (i) a detailed 3-D geotechnical data base containing digitized
boring logs with soil classification properties, shear wave velocity and SPT
results distributed with depth, (ii) maps of average soil properties, shear wave
velocities and SPT results for different depths, (iii) map of site
classification according to new criteria on shear wave velocities, (iv) a data
base of approximate design curves and parameters for 1-D nonlinear site response
analyses, (v) maps of soil-induced amplification for different period ranges,
and (vi) a series of maps comparing recorded damages and the maps listed above.
***