* 9416304
* GOALI/IUCRP:  Modeling, Simulation, and Optimization of     Strip Casting Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Yogeshwar Sahai, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 12/31/1998
* USD 236,438.00

9416304 Sahai Thin Strip casting process for stainless and plain carbon steel,
and aluminum are under development in companies around the world. While
empirical feasibility has been demonstrated by industrial members, the process
is not sufficiently well understood to provide the process parameters for robust
manufacturing operation to achieve maximum yield. In this research, numerical
simulation will be carried out and verified with industrial data from both
Single Roller as well as Twin Roller Strip Casters in aluminum as well as steel.
The ensuping model can predict the rate of cooling which controls the
microstructure which in turn determines the final mechanical properties of the
cast strip. This research will dove tail with similar effort at Temple
University and Drexel University. In the current manufacturing practice, thin
steel sheets used to build car bodies and thin aluminum foils used in the
kitchen, start as large ingots and are rolled numerous times to bring the
thickness down. This process involves several manufacturing steps consuming lots
of energy, adding to work in process (inventory) and slowing delivery to
customers. This novel approach of casting strips directly if well understood and
controlled to a high degree of reliability without sacrificing yields has the
potential to reduce the manufacturing cost significantly. International
competition is intense since the stakes are high for primary metals industry.
Proposed collaboration with domestic steel and aluminum industrial partners in
this research will immensely help both research content and manufacturing
relevance.