* 9416548
* RUI:  The Relationship between Gamete Production and        Reproductive Success
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Philip Yund, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1998
* USD 196,950.00

9416548 Yund PROJECT ABSTRACT This proposal will explore the impact of
population density on the relationship between gamete production and
reproductive success in a colonial ascidian. Previous research has found that
variation in population density will affect the relationship between gamete
production and reproductive success differently in male and female-phase
colonies. The relationship between production and the number of fertilization
obtained by a colony is expected to be linear in competitive situations (high
population densities), but plateau in noncompetitive situations (low population
densities) at the male gamete production level that allows a male to fertilize
all of the eggs in his vicinity. In contrast, the relationship between egg
production and the number of offspring produced by a colony is expected to be
linear at low population densities (where male gamete limit the number of eggs
fertilized), but plateau at high population densities due to constraints on the
number of embryos that colonies can brood. These hypotheses will be tested in
this research project by establishing experimental populations of ascidians that
vary in gamete production under two density conditions and assaying male and
female reproductive success. Male reproductive success will be assayed by using
allozyme markers to assign paternity, while female reproductive success will be
assayed by directly counting the proportion of eggs fertilized in each brood .
This study will contribute to our knowledge of benthic marine organisms by
examining the selective pressures that fertilization processes can exert on
gamete allocation patterns.