* 9416524
* Performance and Behavior of Non-Structural Components in    Instrumented Buildings Including Their Contribution to the  Overall Earthquake Resistance:Inter-Story Drift Behavior...
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Satwant Rihal, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1996
* USD 57,997.00

9416524 Rihal The performance and behavior of non-structural components in
instrumented buildings during the Northridge earthquake of January 17, 1994 is
investigated. The focus is placed on the seismic design implictions/lessons
learned. The proposed research on the influence of the interior as well as
exterior building components on the overall seismic behavior of building systems
is analyzed. Included is also an investigation of the contribution of non-
structural wall components to the overall earthquake resistance of building
systems as well as their influence on the inter-story drift behavior. All
available data on damage of interior as well as exterior building components,
including shelving and contents, will be screened, categorized and analyzed.
Available data on the costs of repair and retrofit of non-structural building
components will also be studied. Case-studies of two buildings that suffered
significant non-structural damage in addition to structural damage will be
constructed. The first one is a instrumentedd seven story hotel building
suffered not only severe structural damage but also significant non-structural
damage. A second case- study will be cladding and connections in steel framed
buildings, especially with moment-resisting frames. The results and final
products of this research will be improved understanding of the contribution of
non-structural component to the overall earthquake resistance of building
systems. The quantitative results obtained will help develop improved seismic
design criteria for non-structural components including guidelines for their
repair and retrofit. This is a Northridge earthquake project. ***