* 9416041
* NASA/NSF Collaborative Research: Integration of Plant       Responses to Mechanical, Thermal, Electrical and Chemical   Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2000
* Barbara Pickard, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/2000
* USD 594,250.00

9416041 Pickard An abundant mechanosensory calcium channel appears able not
only to detect mechanical stimuli such as those that initiate gravitropism but
also to detect thermal, electrical, and various chemical stimuli. Because it
responds to multimodal input with second- messenger output, the channel system
seems likely to be an integrator that can engage in feedbacks with many other
systems of the cell - and feedback is the hallmark of regulation. It is
hypothesized that the mechanical tension required for channel activation is
likely transmitted from the relatively rigid cell wall to the plasma membrane
system via linkage or adhesion sites which have mechanical connections to the
cytoskeleton. Thus, functionally, leverage exerted against any given adhesion
site will tend to control channels within a surrounding domain. Reactions
initiated by passage of calcium ions through the mechanosensory channels could
presumably be more effectively regulated if channels within such a domain were
somewhat clustered and if appropriate receptors, kinases, porters, pumps, and
some key cytoskeletal anchoring sites were in turn clustered about them. Such
arrangements appear likely to play important roles in adapting plant response to
environmental signals and stresses and in directing cellular growth and
differentiation. Newly emergent capabilities of electronic optical microscopy
are well suited for resolving the spatial distributions of many of these
cytoskeletal and regulatory molecules in living cells, and for following
temporospatial changes in calcium levels and cytoskeletal geometry during
challenge by mechanical, thermal, electrical, and chemical stimuli. Moreover,
patch clamp technology can be applied in special ways permitting electrical
resolution of the cascades and feedbacks these stimuli initiate. Using
representative cells from onion (a monocot) and tobacco (a dicot), it is
proposed to employ these two complementary technologies to examine how ar
chitectural arrangements/rearrangements of macromolecules and ionic fluxes help
plant cells react appropriately to the diverse stimuli recognized by
mechanosensory calcium channels. ***