* 9416934
* U.S.-Japan Seminar:  Molecular Aspects of Pathogenicity of  Resistance-Requirement for Signal Transduction/             September, 1995/Ise-City, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Dallice Mills, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Randall Soderquist
* 03/31/1996
* USD 22,000.00

9416934 Mills This award supports the participation of 11 U.S. scientists in a
U.S.- Japan seminar on Molecular Aspects of Pathogenicity, to be held at the Mie
Kohseinenkin Vacation Center at Ise-city, Japan from September 24-29, 1995. The
co-organizers are Dr. Dallice Mills of Oregon State University and Professor
Hitoshi Kunoh of Mie University. The main theme of this seminar is the role of
signal transduction pathways in cell/cell communication and the establishment of
compatible and incompatible interactions between hosts and their pathogens. The
proposed general topics to be discussed include: new concepts regarding genic
interactions between plants and pathogens, the induction and regulation of
signal transduction pathways in pathogen morphogenesis and etiology, the
molecular characterization of pathogen elicitors and plant resistance genes, the
molecular and physiological basis of plant/microbe recognition, the role of
toxins in disease and host-pathogen specificity, and the genetic engineering of
host plant resistance to pathogens. This meeting is the seventh in a series of
U.S.-Japan seminars in this field held over a period of almost 30 years.
Participants in the seminars change through the years to reflect an appropriate
pairing between U.S. and Japanese scientists and the progress of the research.
The U.S. participants provide a broad cross section of expertise and
geographical representation in the general area of plant host/pathogen
interactions, and were selected on the basis of being the most active
researchers in the U.S. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the
Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an
international collaboration. ***