* 9416826
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Biosurfaces
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Robert Baier, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1998
* USD 566,637.00

9416826 Baier The Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for
Biosurfaces is becoming a multi-site university Center. The State University of
New York at Buffalo's Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for
Biosurfaces is being joined by a research site at the University of Memphis and
another research site at the New York State College of Ceramics. Research in the
multi-site Center will address: 1) Characterization of the chemical/physical
properties of various substrata that favor or inhibit bioadhesion, in aqueous
media of varied organic/inorganic content; 2) Determination of the surface
properties of cells as they engage in interactions with well- characterized
substrata, giving special attention to the dynamics of media flow, cell arrival,
surface modification, bio-attachment and -- finally -- stability of the
attachment mechanisms; 3) Documentation of reactions between cells and
supporting films, cells and adjacent cells, films and surrounding media, and
other cross-reactions, with particular attention to technology that may control
these interactions to either promote or prevent bioadhesion in practical
biomedical or bioengineering situations; and 4) Scale- up of these
biotechnologies to macrosystem processes, like adhesive secretion or
biomineralization, that may produce new, or mimic existing, materials such as
structural composite shells and adhesives of natural organisms. This multi-site
Center has been coordinated with Dr. Norman Caplan, Program Director,
Environmental Systems Program. The State University of New York has requested
funding to support undergraduate research assistants. These students will
participate in the Center's ongoing research projects. Additional funding is
provided through a supplemental Research Opportunity Award (ROA) for a woman
Assistant Professor at D'Youville College to perform research for the State
University of New - Buffalo. Pa ge 1 of 2 The Project is determining the protein
structure associated with bioadhesives functionality. The project's goal is to
study the protein structures responsible for the binding ability of selected
native adhesive protein domains and for their use in the development of
manufactured proteinaceous adhesive agents. The Program Manager recommends the
State University of New York at Buffalo be awarded: $50,000 for the first year
of a five-year continuing award (including $25,000 for administrative
activities); $50,000 for the first year of a five-year continuing award to the
University of Memphis through a subcontract; $50,000 for the first year of a
five-year continuing award to the New York State College of Ceramics through a
subcontract; $5,000 for one year with funds provided by the Women, Minorities,
and Disabled Engineering Research Assistants Program; and $54,995 for 24 months
for a Research Opportunity award. Near the end of each 12-month period the
Program Manager and/or the Division Director of the Engineering Education
Centers Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of renewal
criteria requirements, including the following: 1) the extent to which the
industry/university interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which support
base is developing; and 3) the extent to which a robust research program is
developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend
support for the next period of this continuing award. Page 2 of 2