* 9416160
* Energy Dissipation Systems for Bridges
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Maria Feng, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1995
* USD 40,000.00

9416160 Feng The Northridge earthquake of January 17, 1994 caused severe damage
to many bridges including the disastrous collapse of seven bridges. Preliminary
investigations have shown that some collapses are due to inadequate seat widths
at superstructure hinges, although most of them had been retrofitted using cable
restrainers. This project investigates the seismic performance of bridges to
determine whether energy dissipation systems can be effectively used at bridge
hinges and other possible bridge locations for seismic damage reduction. The
objectives of this project are to: 1) extensively investigate the performance of
cable restrainers at bridge hinge locations during the Northridge earthquake; 2)
examine the effectiveness of dampers as hinge restrainers through analysis of
bridge response to the ground motion (including the vertical component);
3)examine the effectiveness of dampers installed at bridge abutments and bent
caps as restraining devices; and 4) compare different damper devices including
viscous, viscoeleastic, friction, and steel yielding dampers and recommend
appropriate damper devices and installment configurations suitable for bridge
applications. A bridge model of Gavin Canyon Undercrossing which collapsed
during the Northridge earthquake will be used for the analysis with the aid of
the nonlinear analysis computer code NEABS. Engineers of California Department
of Transportation (Caltrans) offered their strong support to ensure the results
of this research will be utilized for retrofitting and in the new design of
their bridges. Caltrans will provide technical assistance and will make a
highway bridge located in seismic-prone San Bernando, California, available for
the PI to perform field testing of energy dissipation systems to be recommended
as a result of this research. This is a Northridge earthquake project. ***