* 9416775
* SGER:  A Novel Method for In-Situ Fatigue Experiments
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Michael Kassner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 09/30/1996
* USD 38,216.00

9416775 Kassner This is a high-risk, small grant for exploratory research (SGER)
to perform in-situ fatigue experiments in the transmission electron microscope.
The classic metal-fatigue phenomenon is poorly understood, partially because the
dislocation dynamics of reversed deformation has not been characterized. Only
limited success has been achieved with direct observation of dislocations during
cyclic deformation, such as observed in in-situ cyclic or reversed plastic
deformation tests in the transmission electron microscope. The problem is
associated with buckling of thin foils when the applied tensile or shear stress
is reversed. Analysis shows that dislocation movement can be reversed by tensile
stressing in alternating perpendicular directions, and buckling of the foil can
be avoided. A new specimen holder has been designed by the principal
investigator for performing such mechanical tests in-situ in the transmission
electron microscope. A series of in-situ reversed deformation fatigue tests will
be run and should provide new insights into reversed deformation phenomena. %%%
Fatigue of metal alloys can lead to unanticipated failure of metal alloy
components used in industrial machinery, transportation systems, and related
infrastructure areas. This research should provide improved understanding in
this field. ***