* 9416813
* Trace Gas Cross-Site Comparison: A TRAGNET Project
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Arvin Mosier, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1998
* USD 200,000.00

9416813 Ojima This project will establish a database and model analyses to be
used in determining general relationships of trace gas exchange across a broad
environmental gradients in climate, atmospheric deposition of N, and soils to
better quantify fluxes of these biogenic radiatively active trace gases across
North America. Trace Gas Network (TRAGNET) sites will be used, an International
Geosphere-Biosphere Programme/International Global Atmospheric Chemistry
(IGBP/IGAC) Midlatitude Activity of a network of locations around the U.S., as
the core set of study sites. This network includes many LTER sites and other
long-term research sites, where fluxes of CO EMB1 2, CH4, and N2O and possibly
other trace gases are being measured and locations where trace gas model
development is being conducted. Measurement of biogenic trace gas across a
network of sites in North America and comprehensive analysis of these data are
critical to understanding the factors controlling biogenic trace gas production
and consumption. Ecosystems in this region are major contributors of these
important radiatively active biogenic trace gases. Human activities modify gas
fluxes both directly and indirectly. Directly, agricultural and forest
management practices affect soil physical and biological properties, including
those that control gas fluxes. Indirectly, air pollution and acid deposition
affect fluxes and modifying biogeochemical cycles associated, especially N
dynamics, with trace gas fluxes. Natural systems are both sources and sinks of
trace gases, but the magnitudes of these fluxes are not known. Although trace
gas flux measurements in temperate ecosystems have been made for decades,
measurements have generally been infrequent (rarely extending beyond a growing
season), usually small-scale, e.g., plot size treatments and may not always be
comparable to other flux data collected at other sites. A coordinated analysis
of biogenic trace gas flux measurements is essential to understanding these sour
ces and sinks in a regional and global context. Three critical research needs
are : (1) improved estimates of net fluxes of methane, nitrous oxide and carbon
dioxide and of environmental factors which control these fluxes; (2)
identification and quantification of other potentially important regions of
significant fluxes, particularly those from geographic areas that have been
neglected in past research; and (3) development of models to quantify how trace
gas fluxes will respond to climatic, N deposition, and land management changes.
The effort will bring together data from on going trace gas flux projects and
provide the integrated database to researchers involved in the study. {PAGE \#
"'Page: '#' '"|Page: 1 } EMB1