* 9416175
* Undegraded Nonlinear Inelastic Shear Stress vs. Strain      Characteristics for Soil Deposits at the Sites of Three     Freeway Structures that Collapsed During the Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Wanda Henke, Dynamic In Situ Geotechnical Testing Inc
* Continuing grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 08/31/1997
* USD 78,000.00

9416175 Henke The aim of this project is to help advance the Nation's ability to
engineer freeway structures to resist earthquakes. The main objective is to
provide detailed information on in situ undegraded nonlinear inelastic shear
stress vs strain characteristics for the soil deposits at the sites of the three
freeway structures that collapsed during the 1994 Northridge earthquake. The
information is expected to be of value to analytical investigations aimed at
identifying the roles of soil conditions in the collapses. The sites are the
I-5/Highway 14 Interchange, Highway 118 close to Woodley, and I-10 at La
Cienega. Local soil conditions may have amplified ground motions at these sites.
The main feature of the project is that uncertainty caused by test- related
disturbances to in situ conditions is expected to be held to a relatively low
level. Data is to be measured using a field prototype simplified in situ
torsional cylindrical impulse shear testing system currently being constructed
for the Federal Highway administration (FHwA). This method provides detailed
information on in situ undegraded nonlinear inelastic shear stress vs strain
characteristic for soil deposits. The method addresses the well known, but not
yet fully-resolved, problem of obtaining detailed information on the soil
characteristics of interest without disturbing in situ conditions excessively.
This problem can cause considerable uncertainty in the results of earthquake
analyses. This project is being co-funded with the FHwA. ***