* 9416756
* Liquefaction Susceptibility Mapping, Simi Valley
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1996
* William Lettis, William Lettis & Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* James H. Whitcomb
* 12/31/1996
* USD 55,634.00

9416756 Lettis This study will produce a detailed map of liquefaction
susceptibility in the Simi Valley, Ventura County, California, an area of rapid
urban development. Limited liquefaction and lateral spreading occurred in the
region during the January 17, 1994 Northridge earthquake, which presents an
hitherto unassessed hazard in this and other alluviated valleys of the Los
Angeles area. Liquefaction is generally restricted to areas within a narrow
range of identifiable geologic and hydrogeologic characteristics in Quaternary
deposits. The distribution of Quaternary deposits will be mapped at surface and
in shallow subsurface, and liquefaction susceptibility determined using the
criteria set forth by the California Division of Mines and Geology Seismic
Hazards Mapping group. Primary areas of concern are historically-deposited
sediments and areas of saturated, poorly engineered artificial fill. Methodology
will include field mapping at 1:24,000 and collection of borehole data. The
final products will include a digitized 1:24,000-scale Quaternary geology map, a
1:24,000-scale liquefaction susceptibility map and a final report, all of which
will be freely available to earth scientists, engineers, planners and government
agencies, including the USGS. An easy-to-read version of the final report will
be made available for a lay audience. ***