* 9416480
* Implication of Northridge Earthquake on 1994 NEHRP          Provisions and Seismic Restraint Performance on             Nonstructural Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Tsu-Teh Soong, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1996
* USD 80,000.00

9416480 Soong Observed nonstructural damage during major earthquakes has played
an important role in the investigation of a wide range of research issues
dealing with seismic behavior of nonstructural components. These include the
formulation of codes and provisions for nonstructural components which specify
safety levels at which these components must be anchored or attached to a
primary structure and the development of seismic design guidelines for their
anchorage details and restraints. The objectives of this research project ar to
assess the impact of the Northridge earthquake on the following two specific and
interlocking research issues: (a) The recently recommended 1994 NEHRP provisions
for nonstructural components. The Northridge damage data provides a unique
opportunity for assessing the values assigned tovarious dynamic-effect factors
contained in the force and displacement formulas. (b) The performance of a
selected group of seismic restraints located in the affected area, some of which
were only recently developed. The Northridge event provides the first
opportunity for evaluating their performance under an actual code-level
earthquake. The results of this research will lead to a better understanding of
the seismic behavior of nonstructural components under a wide variety of
conditions. In turn, these results will leade to the development of safer and
more rational design guidelines for operating these components in a seismic
environment. ***