* 9416713
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Transfer Function Methodsfor Electrochemical Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Mark Orazem, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 06/30/1999
* USD 18,000.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in
electrochemical systems between Mark Orazem of the University of Florida and
Claude Deslouis of the Laboratory for the Physics of Liquids and
Electrochemistry at Pierre and Marie Curie University. The investigators will
apply new statistical techniques and models using impedance spectroscopy. Their
objective is to increase the amount and quality of physical and chemical
information that can be gained from impedance measurements. Impedance
spectroscopy has been established as a useful tool for characterization of
electrochemical and electronic systems. The project addresses difficulties in
interpretation of impedance spectra data through application of French
experimental techniques. Based on the use of driving forces, the experimental
techniques isolate the phenomena responsible for the electrochemical behavior.
The U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in statistical
interpretive techniques and models. This is complemented by the experimental and
measurement techniques developed by the French investigator and his group in
Paris. Electrochemical processes play a fundamental role in many technological
areas. The project will lead to new, user-friendly methods for data
interpretations for use by the electrochemical research community.