* 9416878
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells and Electrocatalysis of Methanol Oxidation
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1998
* Supramaniam Srinivasan, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1998
* USD 15,000.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in chemical
engineering and catalysis. The investigators are Supramaniam Srinivasan, A. John
Appleby of Texas A &amp; M University, James McBreen of the Brookhaven National
Laboratory, and Claude Lamy of the University of Poitiers in France. The
objectives of their research are to develop new alloy or mixed metal
electrocatalysts for oxidation of methanol in proton exchange membrane fuel
cells. They will develop binary and ternary alloys of platinum using ruthenium,
tin and molybdenum as alloying elements. Proton exchange membrane fuel cells are
among the most promising types of fuel cell power sources for electric vehicles.
These studies are expected to pave the way for the development of direct, high
powered, and efficient methanol fuel cells for application in methanol powered
electric vehicles. The U.S. investigators bring to this collaboration
considerable experience in electrochemistry, electrocatalysis and proton
exchange membrane fuel cells. This is complemented by the French investigator's
expertise in electrocatalysis and characterization of fuel cells using
spectroscopic studies. The project takes advantage of specialized
electrochemical and spectroscopic instrumentation available at the University of
Poitiers.