* 9416164
* Indirect Effects on the Performance of Telecommunications Systems at Northridge Earthquake
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Felix Wong, Weidlinger Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 09/30/1995
* USD 55,000.00

9416164 Wong Reconnaissance of damage to telecommunications assets caused by the
Northridge earthquake confirmed that: (a) Countermeasures (primarily lateral
bracing)implemented since 1971 to protect equipment against direct ground
shaking effects were effective, and (b) As a result, system integrity now
depended on indirect effects. The major indirect effects identified were, for
inside plants, collateral building damage and dependency on support lifelines;
for outside plants, they were collateral damage to other lifelines by virtue of
collocation. In this study, telecommunications performance data from the 1994
Northridge and the 1971 San Fernando earthquakes will be evaluated and used to:
(1) Assess the effectiveness of mitigation procedures (e.g., equipment bracing)
introduced between 1971- 1994; (2) Identify vulnerabilities in
telecommunications systems that remain unchanged since 1971; (3) Quantify
sources of such vulnerabilities, with emphasis on indirect effects such as
collateral hazards, damage to outside plants and support lifelines; and (4)
Prioritize data/research needs based on the impact of indirect-effects related
disruptions on the economics/recovery needs of telecommunications. The study
makes use of a recently developed computer simulation tool that combines
geographic information system technology with state-of-the-art seismic risk
models, and is designed expressly to quantify the effects of lifeline
interaction on seismic security of telecommunications system. This research will
contribute to improved security of telecommunications systems which benefits the
carriers, the public, governments, private enterprises, emergency response, and
disaster recovery. This is a Northridge Earthquake project. ***