* 9416184
* Seismic Evaluation and Upgrading of Existing Steel          Concentric Braced Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Subhash Goel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1996
* USD 69,945.00

9416184 Goel The primary objective of this research project is to develop
methods for evaluation and upgrading of existing "non- ductile" (ordinary)
concentric braced frame structures of steel for survival during future
earthquakes. Whereas, widespread connection failures in steel moment frames due
to the Northridge earthquake were quite unexpected, it is also generally
recognized that concentric braced frames (CBF) are among the most efficient and
popular structural systems in steel for lateral load resistance. There exists a
large inventory of these structures which are potentially hazardous. A
significant number of such structures suffered widespread damage during the
Northridge earthquake and required extensive repair and upgrading work. Current
or past design practice and codes did not focus on providing ductility in these
structures previously studied. The Northridge experience has emphasized the need
for developing methods for evaluating and upgrading existing CBF in order to
ensure satisfactory performance during future more severe probable earthquakes.
Two theme structures are selected for the study. The four story building in
North Hollywood which suffered the most dramatic failures and which represents
the typical CBF structures designed by modern codes and practice has been chosen
for detailed investigation including correlation of the results with observed
damage. The second part of this project is devoted to the development of
practical and effective upgrading schemes to mitigate future earthquake hazard.
This is a Northridge earthquake project. ***