* 9416112
* Evaluation of Column Cracking in Steel Moment Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Charles Roeder, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/29/1996
* USD 65,000.00

9416112 Roeder Cracking has been noted on approximately 50 steel frame buildings
as a result of the Northridge Earthquake. Considerable concerns have been
expressed about the welding practice and procedures used on these structures.
These welding concerns are clearly well placed, but it is unlikely that these
are the sole source of the steel frame cracking. The progression of cracking
into the steel column and panel zone suggest that factors in addition to the
welds affect the process. At the same time, there have been changes in the
professional practice and seismic design codes for steel moment frames during
the past 10 years. This research project will determine if the recent changes in
seismic design practice have combined with welds and contributed to the cracking
problem. The research will examine the cause of cracking and possible solutions.
A subcontract to the consulting firm of Brandow and Johnston will be involved in
this study to provide design drawings, detailed advice, practical insight and
information on the damaged buildings. Three buildings will be selected for
investigation. A series of global elastic and inelastic analysis of the
structures will be performed using the best available information for the
shaking experienced by the buildings. Detailed elastic and nonlinear analysis of
critical areas will be used to examine the weak links, the sequence of yield and
cracking and the estimated resistance of the critical components. The effect of
alternate design provisions to the UBC provisions would be predicted and
examined. A limited series of experiments examining weld effects will be
performed, and the experiments will be correlated to the analytical results.
This is a Northridge Earthquake project. ***