* 9416484
* Analysis of Tank Damage During the Northridge Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Medhat Haroun, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1995
* USD 55,870.00

9416484 Haroun The Northridge earthquake induced a number of incidents of damage
to ground-based tanks, and even to some retrofitted tanks. Utilities and
industrial facilities in the strong shaking area include a large inventory of
tanks of all types, and many records have been obtained in the vicinity of
damaged and undamaged tanks. The mass of data on earthquake ground motions and
observations of the structural response have important implications for the
earthquake resistant design. This is project will study the performance of tank
structures as follows: Collection of data and documentation of the damaged
sustained by ground-based water and petroleum storage tanks. Calculation of the
dynamic response of representative tanks and correlation of the computed
response with observed damage or lack of damage. Study of the effects of long
period components on the sloshing phenomenon. Study of the damage to retrofitted
tanks to deduce the reasons for the ineffectiveness of implemented to retrofit
mechanisms. Specifically, a study of damage to the anchors is proposed to devise
improved ways for the anchoring system. Comparison of induced seismic forces
with those specified by available codes and standards such as API 650, AWWA 100,
EPRI, UBC and the New Zealand Recommendations. New advances have been made in
the analysis of liquid-filled tanks such as non-linear sloshing of liquids,
elephant foot buckling of the tank shell, and combined liquid-structure-soil
interaction. This is an opportune time to compare the predicted response with
actual behavior under earthquake loading to refine and tune these methods and to
provide improved seismic design procedures. This is a Northridge Earthquake
project. ***