* 9416870
* Buoyancy and Morphological Studies of Antarctic             Notothenioid Fishes
* O/D,OPP
* 05/01/1995,10/31/2000
* Joseph Eastman, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 10/31/2000
* USD 164,912.00

Eastman 9416870 This research centers on the evaluation of organismal
diversification in Antarctic fishes of the perciform suborder Notothenioidei.
Notothenioids are the dominant fishes by number and biomass in all inner shelf
areas of the Southern Ocean. They are an evolutionary novelty - the only known
example of a fish species flock in a marine habitat. Although derived from a
benthic stock lacking swim bladders, notothenioids have diversified into most
water column habitats. Nototheniods display the wide scope of organismal
diversification in an ecosystem historically underutilized by non-notothenioid
fishes, and they are a striking example of the nature of Antarctic marine
biodiversity. Primary objectives of this study are: (1) to evaluate organismal
diversification with emphasis on neutral buoyancy, reduced density (compared to
the pleisomorphic benthic condition) and the associated morphology in members of
the families Nototheniidae, Channichthyidae and Bathydraconidae; (2) to explore
the evolution of neutral buoyancy and reduced density by mapping these and other
morphological features on cladograms independently derived from other
information; (3) to determine whether the diversification of buoyancy (life
history) types and the associated morphology are reflective of the phylogenetic
history of various notothenioid clades or are related to environmental
adaptation and (4) to add new buoyancy and morphological information to the
existing suites of characters available for phylogenetic analysis of
notothenioids. In addition to elucidating the morphological basis for
evolutionary changes in buoyancy, this study will provide insight into how
notothenioids diversified to occupy a variety of water column habitats in the
Southern Ocean.