* 9416510
* Earthquake-Induced Movements of Wedge Fills
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Alan Kropp, Alan Kropp and Associates Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 09/30/1995
* USD 50,468.00

9416510 Kropp This project addresses the damage resulting from the 1994
Northridge Earthquake to houses built on fill slopes. "Wedge" fills are often
used to form cut/fill level building sites on hillsides. Numerous houses build
on wedge fills experienced substantial (though seldom catastrophic) damage as a
result of the earthquake; this, in the absence of any apparent large-scale shear
failure in the fill soils or building foundation materials, such as landsliding
or bearing capacity failure. The damage appears to have resulted from a
combination of differential ground shaking between the cut and fill portions of
the building pads, and from shaking-induced settlement and lateral ground
movements in the fill soils. A primary objective of the project is to document
the seismic performance of "wedge" fills, especially recent fills constructed to
modern standards. In order to gain further insight into the patterns of stresses
and strains developed in the fills under earthquake excitation, numerical tools
for dynamic response analysis of two-dimensional soil systems are used to model
the behavior of typical "wedge" fill sections during the Northridge Earthquake.
The validity of these analyses are verified by comparison with typical damage
patterns observed following the Northridge event. Following completion of this
work, promising mitigation schemes will be identified; such as the use of
geosynthetic layers within the fills, the use of over-excavation and thick
blanket fills at the top of the embankment, and the development of guidelines
for setbacks of structures from the cut/fill interface. ***