* 9416139
* NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC)for Magnetics
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1995
* Rodger Walser, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 01/31/1995
* USD 24,992.00

9416139 Walser This is a grant for the PI to plan an NSF Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center on Magnetics at the University of Texas at Austin.
The award provides funding for the planning, determination of the feasibility
and viability of developing an Industry/University Cooperative Research Center
at the University of Texas at Austin with focus on research on the topic of
magnetics. The funds are used for the administrative costs involved in the
preparation of an operational plan for the Center, and in acquiring industrial
support for the Center. The institution will plan and host a two meeting with
potential industrial partners to review potential research topics and determine
interest of industry to support the Center as partners/collaborators/supporters.
The topics proposed for the Center include: power electronics and
telecommunications, integrated electromagnetics, identification and security,
electromagnetic radiation control, and magnetic sensors. Research to be
addressed by the center will include (1) synthesis, processing and
characterization of advanced magnetic materials, (2) design, analysis,
fabrication, and testing of novel magnetic devices and, (3) integration of
advanced magnetic materials, processing and devices, and (4) transfer of novel
technologies to industry. The success of the effort will be measured by the
success of a proposal to the National Science Foundation for support of the
planned Center as an Industry/ University Cooperative Research Center. The
Program Manager recommends the University of Texas at Austin be awarded $24,993
for 6 months for this planning grant.