* 9416441
* Evaluation and Design Requirements for RC "Gravity"         Columns
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Jack Moehle, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/1996
* USD 57,248.00

9416441 Moehle It has been common practice in building seismic design to assume
part of the building resists all the seismic forces and the remainder of the
building resists only gravity forces. Though code provisions require the
gravity-load- carrying system to be designed to accommodate the imposed lateral
drifts, it is not clear that the procedures for checking the imposed drifts are
adequate, and it is not certain that many engineers actually check the gravity
system for lateral drifts. Several reinforced concrete (RC) buildings designed
in this way sustained damage and collapse associated with failure of the so-
called gravity columns (the columns not designed to resist lateral forces. This
project is to develop improved understanding of the factors leading to failure
of RC gravity columns, as well as to develop improved designed approaches. This
need is relevant to evaluation and upgrading of existing buildings, and equally
relevant to the design of new buildings. The proposed research will address this
need using analytical methods based on experimental evidence, and will involve
both academic researchers and design professionals. Specifically, the research
tasks include: (a) study of the deformability of reinforced concrete columns;
(b) study of deformation demands imposed on columns by practical building
systems; (c) examination of practical procedures for design and evaluation; (d)
transfer of findings to relevant code/guidelines activities; (e) coordination of
other Northridge research projects that are related to the ongoing NSF R/R
program; and (f) contribution to the professional papers series to be assembled
by NEHRP agencies, as well as other publications and professional presentations.
This is a Northridge earthquake project. ***