* 9416956
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Theoretical Studies of   Irreversible Adsorption at the Solid Liquid Interface
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1998
* Julian Talbot, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/1998
* USD 17,550.00

9416956 Talbot This three-year award will support U.S.-France collaborative
research in chemical engineering between Julian Talbot of Purdue University and
Pascal Viot of the Laboratory for Theoretical Physics of Liquids, the French
National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). They will conduct theoretical,
analytical and computational studies of irreversible adsorption of large
molecules from solutions onto solid surfaces. The objective of their research is
to understand the kinetics of the adsorption, the structure of the deposited
films and their connection to equilibrium processes. Molecules of proteins,
latex spheres and bacteria will be used in their studies. The U.S. investigator
and his group will focus primarily on numerical simulation of adsorption
processes and the application of the results to actual experimental data. This
is enhanced by French theoretical expertise. The collaboration balances
complementary expertise in chemical engineering (Purdue) and in theoretical
physics and chemistry (CNRS). Theoretical understanding of surface adsorption is
a relatively new research area. Past research on surface adsorption focused on
experimental studies. This research project will provide a much needed theory of
surface adsorption. These processes underlie important phenomena, including
catalysis, cell function, and coating. ***