* 9416822
* U.S.-China Workshop on Scientific Visualization and Virtual Environments, Hangzhou, China, September 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Judith Brown, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 07/31/1995
* USD 10,000.00

9416822 Brown Scientific visualization is a descriptive term for the use of
computer graphics and interactive techniques to gain insights from scientific
data, and the hardware and software of virtual environments allow the scientists
to interact with the data in more natural ways than the typical screen,
keyboard, and mouse allow. An invited workshop is planned for Hangzhou, P.R.
China, September 5-9, 1994, with selection for invitation to be based on
position papers. The goals of the workshop are to bring together researchers
from the United States and China, as well as other Asian countries such as
Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore, to spend three days of intensive brain-storming
and accomplish the following: *Survey what is currently happening in the United
States and Asia. *Identify future research and development issues and trends in
scientific visualization and virtual environments, looking at both the
technology and at possible new scientific applications. *Identify research
collaborations between the United States and the Chinese and other Asian
researchers. A workshop report will be produced, published in respected journals
such as Computers and Graphics and ACM SIGGRAPH's Computers Graphics, and made
widely available. This award will cover the travel expenses of five researchers
from the United States.