* 9416035
* NASA/NSF Collaborative Research: Evaluating Phytohormone    Signal Transduction Using Xenopus oocytes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* Fedora Sutton, South Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/2000
* USD 632,130.00

9416035 Sutton The long-term objective of the proposed research is to identify
signal transduction components involved in plant response to environmental
stimuli. Using the Xenopus oocyte/mRNA injection system, research proposed will
focus on signal transduction in response to the environmental stimuli of low
non-freezing temperature and dehydration in higher plants. A common effect of
these two stimuli on plants is to modulate endogenous abscisic acid (ABA)
levels, not all responses to low temperature are ABA dependent. The mode of
action of ABA has not been conclusively demonstrated. Questions remain regarding
actual location of ABA receptors, and second messengers, if any, that are
necessary for signal transduction. Research proposed will initially focus on
ABA, since there is evidence in the literature of ABA stimulating Ca release.
Preliminary data from this lab suggests that ABA may interact with plasma
membrane receptors and cause an increase in intracellular Ca. Specific aims of
this proposal are: 1) To characterize the responses, to ABA and several ABA
analogues, from oocytes injected with tobacco mRNA. 2) If Ca is mobilized, to
localize its source in an attempt to determine the manner in which ABA and its
receptors are functioning. If Ca is not mobilized, to determine the alternative
second messenger system being utilized by ABA. 3) To utilize the Xenopus oocyte
system to isolate and characterize ABA receptors cDNA clones. Knowing how ABA
and receptor(s) interact will help in understanding plant responses common to
the stimuli of low temperature and dehydration. Research proposed will involve
the areas of electrophysiology, molecular biology, biochemistry and cell
biology. The integrative nature of this research will make it possible for
research to be performed at appropriate collaborative research laboratories and
will prove to be a rewarding and exciting environment for training of
postdoctoral associates and graduate students. ** *