* 9416149
* Earthquake Performance of Electric PowerSystems During      the January 17, 1994 Northridge Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Masanobu Shinozuka, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1995
* USD 85,000.00

9416149 Shinozuka The objective of this research is to significantly improve the
tools, methods, and procedures for analyzing and evaluating the seismic
performance of lifelines using data from the Northridge earthquake. System
performance will be measured in terms of physical damage, system functional
performance, extent of postearthquake repair/restoration effort and attendant
down-time. The research undertaken will: (1) enhance the existing database on
geological, soil, and topographical conditions in the area pertinent to the Los
Angeles Department of Water &amp; Power (LADWP) systems, as well as the database
of physical and operational characteristics of the LADWP systems, (2) develop a
database of the Northridge earthquake ground motion and the resulting LADWP
system performance, (3) analyze and evaluate the seismic performance of the
LADWP water and electric power systems, and (4) validate, calibrate and improve
the tools, models and procedures. The improved procedures can then be used to
better predict lifeline performance in future earthquakes. The effectiveness of
the retrofit measures implemented after the San Fernando earthquake will be
examined based upon analysis and to the extent that the existing data permits.
This research will significantly enhance the quality and quantity of the
lifeline seismic performance knowledge base, as well as the performance modeling
capability, and will allow better evaluation of the seismic performance of
lifeline systems. In addition, the information on seismic performance on
lifelines serves as crucial input to be used by social scientists and economists
for the evaluation of the socio-economic impact of lifeline failures. This is a
Northridge Earthquake project involving EQE International and Princeton
University. ***