* 9417916
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of the Maize kn1 Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Sarah Hake, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1998
* USD 238,000.00

9417916 Hake Experiments suggest that the homeobox containing gene, kn1, is a
reasonable candidate for a gene which influences meristem development in both
maize and Arabidopsis. A variety of approaches will be taken in order to
understand how kn1 functions. Additional loss-of-function mutants will be
obtained. Excisions of the transposable element Ds from a Ds-induced dominant
allele in corn will be analyzed and anti-sense phenotypes of the Arabidopsis
homologue will be obtained. Two approaches for isolating potential downstream
target genes will be taken. The Arabidopsis over expression phenotype will be
used to isolate suppressors and to find enhancer trap lines whose expression
patterns change in relation to ectopic expression of kn1 or its homologue.
Concurrently, a subtractive library made from maize knotted leaves will be used
to isolate clones that show increased expression in knotted leaves as compared
to normal leaves. Those clones will be characterized and expression patterns
determined. %%% Plant development occurs by the action of meristems, groups of
self-renewing cells whose derivatives elaborate the organs of the mature plant.
In order to understand how the meristem functions, it is important to identify
genes that play a role in the meristem. The kn1 homeobox containing gene is a
reasonable candidate for a gene which influences meristem development and a
variety of experiments and approaches will be taken in order to understand how
this gene functions. ***