* 9417593
* Hydrologic Impacts of Variations in the Albedo of           Seasonal Snow
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Anne Nolin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 09/30/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9417593 Nolin The primary objective of this proposed research is to examine and
evaluate how the spatial and temporal variability of snow albedo affects the
timing and intensity of seasonal snow melt and other hydrologic variables
including soil moisture, potential evapotranspiration and atmospheric
circulation patterns. Seasonal snow accumulation and ablation in both the mid-
latitudes and the polar regions will be modeled using a general circulation
model (GCM) with which spatially and temporally varying snow albedo will be
employed. Current means of snow albedo parameterization in GCM's are based on
temperature, latitude, and snow depth rather than the physical properties of
snow. Validation of the GCM- derived extent of snowcover and snow water
equivalent will be performed. Physically-based parameterizations of snow albedo
will be developed for use in mathematical models of climate. The viability of
using particular GCM's for large-scale snow hydrologic estimates will be
determined. The feasibility of using physically- based, time- and space-variant
snow albedos in a GCM will also be evaluated. Remote sensing data will be
investigated as a means of assessing the accuracy of GCM snowcover estimates.
Current models of climate are sensitive to snow albedo, yet they use simple,
inaccurate parameterization. What is needed is a comprehensive study of the
relationship between snow albedo and hydrologic response of climate models to
sptial and temporal changes in snow albedo. GMC accuracy for seasonal snow
extent and depth is still untested.