* 9417985
* International Conference on Ribosomes in Victoria, British  Columbia, Canada  May 20-25, 1995.
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Walter Hill, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 03/31/1996
* USD 5,000.00

Approximately every three years, for the past twenty years, international
meetings have been held on the subject of ribosomes. The purpose of these
meetings is to review the current research on the structure/function of the
ribosome and the interactions of this complex macromolecule with other factors
and ligands necessary for protein biosynthesis. PRIVATE Topics to be discussed
include rRNA structure/function; rRNA synthesis, processing and organization;
ribosomal protein structure/function; rRNA/r protein interactions; ribosome
assembly; evolution of the translational apparatus; mRNA interactions, tRNA
interactions; fidelity of translation; and extrinsic factors/antibiotic
interactions with ribosomes. This meeting, scheduled to be held May 20 25, 1995
in Victoria, British Columbia, will have a major impact on the international
efforts being made in ribosome research. It is a time when workers in the field
from around the world will interact, discussing the progress made since the last
meeting (Berlin, 1992) and outline that work which is expected to transpire in
the future. Excel lent books summarizing the ribosome and its role in protein
biosynthesis have emanated from most of the previous conferences. Such a book is
planned for this conference as well. These books become rather standard in
research laboratories throughout the world as comprehensive references for the
work done in this complex field. %%% The ribosome is the cellular machinery for
protein synthesis. The ribosome field is a small but vibrant research arena for
many workers throughout the world. Even though this field does not enjoy all of
the popularity it once did, much critical research and many advances take place
with great regularity. Further research on ribosomes is essential to our
understanding of protein synthesis. Of special interest in the last few years is
the evidence mounting that the ribosome interacts in a pliable way with tRNA
(the structural RNA) and mRNA (which carries the message to encode the protein).
A main emphasis of this meeting is to understand the dynamics of theqe complex
interactions. This meeting, scheduled to be held May 20-25, 1995 in Victoria,
British Columbia, will have a major impact on the international efforts being
made in ribosome research.