* 9417582
* Molecular Genetics of Flower Scents
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Eran Pichersky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/1999
* USD 388,092.00

9417582 Pichersky Flower scents exert strong influence on plant reproductive
success, and thus are crucial determinants of yield in fruit crops that require
scent-seeking pollinators. However, the biosynthetic pathways of floral scents
have scarcely been investigated on the biochemical, genetic and molecular
levels. Dr. Pichersky proposes to study scent production in Clarkia, a genus of
annual plants native to California. Clarkia breweri is the only species in the
genus with floral scent; its flowers are visited mostly by hawkmoths. The
odorless flowers of C. concinna, a closely related species from which C. breweri
arose, are visited mostly by butterflies, whereas all other outcrossing Clarkia
species are pollinated by bees. The investigator has identified two major
pathways that contribute to the floral scent of C. breweri. One of these
pathways, the subject of this propoal, results in the production of the
monoterpenes linalool and linalool oxides. It has been shown that this pathway
also operates in C. Concinna flowers as well, albeit at a greatly reduced level,
and it therefore appears that the evolution of monoterpene emission in C.
breweri has occurrred by up- regulating this pathway. To test this hypothesis,
Dr. Pichersky and his colleagues have already developed an enzymatic assay for
linalool synthase (LIS), the enzyme that catalyzes the formation of linalool,
and have purified the protein. They will now develop a spectrophotometric assay
for linalool epoxidae (LIE), the enzyme that catalyzes the formation of
6,7-linalool expoxide, an intermediate in the formation of linalool oxides. They
will isolate and characterize the Lis and Lie genes from both Clarkia species
and investigate the genetic and molecular control mechanisms that govern their
expression and are responsible for the interspecific differences, using
recombinant promoter - GUS reporter gene fusion and plant transforation and DNA-
protein interaction assays. The cellular and subce llular localization of the
enzymes will be determined using a combination of immunological techniques. The
data obtained will increase our understanding of the biochemical and genetic
control of flower scent production, and may lead to future ability to manipulate
these traits in agronomically important plants.