* 9417559
* U.S.-Japan Seminar:  New Trends in Computer                 Simulations of Spin Systems/August 29-September 1, 1995/    Honolulu, Hawaii
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* David Landau, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Randall Soderquist
* 03/31/1996
* USD 15,000.00

9417559 Landau This award supports the participation of 12 U.S. scientists in a
U.S.- Japan seminar on New Trends in Computer Simulations of Spin Systems, to be
held in Honolulu from August 29-September 1, 1995. The co-organizers are Dr.
David Landau of the University of Georgia and Professor Masuo Suzuki of the
University of Tokyo. The purpose of this seminar is to bring together U.S. and
Japanese scientists in an environment that is conducive to informal interaction
in addition to formal presentation. Participants are leaders in different
aspects of computational physics, who come from diverse institutions in
different geographical areas of each country and who are at different stages of
their careers. The topics of interest include the determination of critical
exponents in different spin models, the nature of phase transitions in complex
spin systems, and the development of algorithms for both classical and quantum
models. The seminar will foster the type of contact between Japanese and U.S.
scientists that can be expected to have significant influence on the future
course of the field. The proposed participants and observers have been selected
for their past contributions and current activity in the field, and the meeting
can be expected to produce concrete plans for future cooperation and exchange.
Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange
and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international collaboration. ***