* 9417872
* (GRGC) Cyclostratigraphy and Carbonate Platform             Evolution, Middle Cretaceous, Northeastern Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1997
* David Osleger, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 01/31/1997
* USD 61,183.00

9417872 Osleger The proposed research intends to investigate the Mid-Cretaceous
(Albian) Coahuila carbonate platform of northeastern Mexico, a laterally-
extensive, passive-margin platform that represents the final major episode of
carbonate sedimentation in the Gulf Coast region. The first objective of the
proposed research is to determine the history of Mid-Cretaceous relative sea-
level changes at time scales ranging from 104 to 106 years. This aspect of the
project will involve the use of high-resolution sequence stratigraphy and
cyclostratigraphy to document cross-platform relationships and interpret the
temporal evolution of the Coahuila platform. The second objective is to
determine the extent to which Milankovitch-scale cyclicity is developed in
Albian shallow-marine carbonates of northeastern Mexico; Milankovitch
periodicities have been unequivocally recognized in coeval Albian deep-sea
sediments in Italy. The third objective is to use the observed field
relationships to constrain two-dimensional computer models so that rates,
frequencies, and magnitudes of accommodation change through Albian time can be
quantitatively estimated for northeastern Mexico. The proposed
cyclostratigraphic and sequence stratigraphic research is part of a larger-scale
collaborative effort on the Mid- Cretaceous of northeastern Mexico currently
underway involving a multidisciplinary team of biostratigraphers and
magnetostratigraphers associated with Project Albicore of the Cretaceous
Resources, Events and Rhythms working group. The proposed research is expected
to result in several major contributions. More precise global correlations of
Albian depositional sequences should be possible after the cyclostratigraphic
and sequence stratigraphic results are integrated with the refined
chronostratigraphic resolution attained by the collaborative researchers. The
improved geochronometry, representing the merger of detailed sequence
stratigraphy and computer modeling with bio - and magnetostratigraphy, will
permit the quantitative estimation of rates and durations of global processes,
and enhance interpretations of the regional- to global- scale mechanisms
governing sequence deposition (tectonism, eustasy, environmental change). A
further application of this interdisciplinary research on the relatively-
uninvestigated Coahuila platform is that a new model will be developed for
comparison with other Albian platforms worldwide, including the economically-
significant carbonate platforms of the Middle East.