* 9417252
* Americas Program Dissertation Enhancement Research:         Historical Biogeography and Systematic Relationships of     South American Murid Rodents
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1994,03/31/1998
* Terry Yates, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 03/31/1998
* USD 20,750.00

9417252 Yates This Americas Program award will support the dissertation research
of Jorge Salazar-Bravo, a Bolivian doctoral student working under the direction
of Dr. Terry L. Yates at the University of New Mexico. The research, on the
historical biogeography and systematic relationships of South American Murid
rodents, will take place in Ecuador. The researcher will test two current models
of murid evolution in South America using sigmodontine rodents, a genus of mice
widely distributed on the continent. The hypotheses have specific predictions in
the form of area cladograms that can be tested using a cladistic approach, but
neither of the two models have been adequately tested. This project will
estimate the phylogenetic relationships of two distantly related genera of the
sigmodontine rodents, based on the cladistic analysis of mitochondrial DNA
sequence data and outgroup comparisons with other closely related genera. If
neither of the hypotheses fit the phylogenetic relationships, alternative
hypotheses will be tested. This project will benefit the areas of macroecology
and biogeography because it will shed light on historical factors that determine
species richness at the local and continental scale, which, in turn, will help
in defining and strengthening areas of potential interest for conservation
purposes. The results may also be used in combination with those of avian
biologists and others to strengthen and/or revise hypotheses of the evolution of
open vegetation in South America. ***