* 9417179
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Synthesis and Structure   of Ordered Surface Alloys:  Alkali Metals Deposited on      Transition and Noble Metals
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* M. Van Hove, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1998
* USD 9,400.00

9417179 Van Hove This award supports a two-year cooperative research project
between Dr. Michel Van Hove of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and Professor
Hiroshi Tochihara of Hokkaido University. The collaborators will conduct
research on atomic-scale surface structures of ordered surface alloys obtained
by depositing alkali metals on transition and noble metals. These surface
materials are of considerable interest in such important technologies as
catalysis and magnetic superlattice properties. The main technique to be used
will be low energy electron diffraction (LEED.) The sample preparations and LEED
intensity measurements will be carried out at Hokkaido University in the
laboratory of Professor Tochihara who is particularly well-experienced with
complex alkali metal adsorption structures. The structural analysis of the
measured data will be performed by Dr. Van Hove in Berkeley. By combining these
expertises, the two groups can achieve a deeper understanding and more rapid
progress than can either group alone. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the
objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge
through an international collaboration. ***