* 9417337
* Helioseismic Probing of Convection Zone Dynamics
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1999
* Juri Toomre, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Terry D. Oswalt
* 03/31/1999
* USD 255,000.00

Toomre 9417337 The study of the dynamics of the solar convection zone requires
substantial advances in helioseismic inverse theory in order to develop new
analysis techniques that are needed to make good use of the highdegree
oscillation data to be provided by the Global Oscillations Network Group (GONG)
and by other helioseismology observations. The wave-field distortions and
frequency splittings of high-degree oscillations should allow one to measure
large-scale flows and associated temperature fluctuations in the convection zone
immediately beneath the surface of the sun. This project will develop and refine
advanced inversion techniques to interpret the observed frequency splittings and
distortions in the wave field following two approaches. The first employs ring
diagrams of power spectra obtained from 3-D Fourier transforms to do mosaic
mapping of the flow fields and thermal fields, with the detailed shapes and
displacements of such rings depending upon the averaged velocities and their
gradients within each of the small areas being assessed. The recent potential
discovery of zonal jets below the surface using preliminary ring-diagram
analysis adds strong impetus to this work. The second method uses Hilbert
Transforms of acoustic wave trains, analyzing their phase and amplitude
variations to detect changes in wave propagation speeds caused by underlying
temperature and magnetic fields. Phase information provided by the Hilbert
transform of distorted wave packets as they travel through an assembly of
convection cells is used as input to inversion procedures to obtain spatial maps
of sound-speed variations. The ringdiagram and Hilbert wave-train analyses are
complementary: ring analysis is a robust local procedure which sacrificeq
certain global information for simplicity, whereas the Hilbert technique is more
sophisticated, relating phases in widely separated regions of the flow to obtain
higher spatial resolution than is possible by Fourier techniques. Both methods
are essential to understanding how the solar convection zone operates. Such
procedures will be first employed on high-degree oscillation data now being
obtained at the National Solar Observatory with the HighDegree Helioseismometer
(HDH) in order to develop them as refined tools for later use on other
helioseismic data sets, including those to be provided by the NSF-funded GONG
project and by the SOI-MDI instrument on the SOHO spacecraft. ***