* 9417185
* Crystallization of Complex Metal Oxides from Ionic Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Angelica Stacy, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/1998
* USD 303,000.00

9417185 Stacy The long-term goal of the proposed research is to prepare new
metal oxides at temperatures below 400 C by selective precipitation from ionic
liquids. The general strategy is to dissolve the reactants in a molten salt, and
precipitate the oxide product either by adjusting the acidity, by changing the
electrochemical potential, by supersaturating the melt by melt decomposition, or
by adding a precipitating agent. This scheme, which is an alternative to more
typical reaction routes involving solid-state reactions at relatively high
temperatures (above 800 C), offers two key advantages. First, low-temperature
processing is desirable for many applications of oxides, especially for the
formation of thin films for devices in which high- temperature processing would
destroy other components. Second, new materials that are not stable at elevated
temperatures can be prepared. Specifically, the proposed research is concerned
with the use of molten alkali metal and alkaline-earth metal hydroxides and
nitrates for the preparation of transition metal oxides with the metals in high
formal oxidation states. The chemistry of these two melts will be explored in an
effort to prepare: A) copper oxides; B) rhodium oxides; and C) early transition
metal oxides. Interest in the copper and rhodium oxides stems from the
possibility of discovering new phases, potentially ones that exhibit
superconductivity. For the early transition metal oxides, lowtemperature
synthetic routes will be designed to known phases that are electronic ceramics,
and potentially useful as device components. %%% Metal oxides, including most
ceramics and cuprate superconductors, generally are prepared by solid-state
reactions of reactant mixtures (e.g., metal oxides, carbonates, oxalates, and/or
nitrates). These mixtures can be obtained by a variety of methods, including
repeated grinding, co-precipitation, or sputtering . Upon heating, reactions
occur due to solid-state diffusion. However, beca use of high energies of
activation, relatively high temperatures (typically above 800 C) and long
reaction times are required to enhance homogeneity and ensure complete reaction.
As an alternative to this synthetic scheme, the proposed research will explore
low-temperature solution routes to metal oxides involving the use of molten
alkali and alkaline-earth metal hydroxides and nitrates as solvents. The
utilization of fluxes for synthesis has become a valuable technology, especially
for the preparation of high-quality single crystals and epitaxial films. These
are essential for many measurements of structure and physical properties, and
are