* 9417004
* Robust Adaptive Control Based on Kharitonov Theory and Its  Extensions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* S. Bhattacharyya, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2000
* USD 282,802.00

August 2, 19959417004 Datta The research proposed here addresses fundamental
problems in three distinct areas: a)Robust Control with an emphasis on
parametric uncertainty b)Adaptive Control with an emphasis on robustness and
performance issues and c)Robust Adaptive Control with the thrust being the
development of new quantitative analysis and design methods exploiting the
recent explosion of results obtained using Kharitonov's Theorem and its
extensions. First, we intend to develop "best case" results involving the
parametric stability margin, Hoo stability margin (norm), gain and phase margins
over a parametrized set of transfer functions, such as an interval plant. These
robustness results in the area of Robust Parametric Stability, would then be
used for non- conservatively quantifying the robustness of adaptive control
schemes. The second objective is to develop extremal parametric results
involving the H2 and L1 norms which, we believe, will play an important role in
studying adaptive system performance. The third objective is to address some
important open problems in each of the areas of adaptive control and robust
parametric stability. The objectives mentioned above are motivated from our
prior research which has not only enabled us to identify some of the outstanding
unresolved problems in the areas of adaptive control and robust parametric
stability, but has also highlighted the need for inter-twined research efforts
in these two traditionally very diverse fields. None of the existing theory in
either of these fields can solve the problems related to this proposal in a
practical or satisfactory manner. However, successful resolution of these
problems is imperative from both a theoretical and a practical point of view.
Indeed, practitioners of both robust and adaptive control stand to benefit a lot
from the "non- conservative" parametric L1 and Hoo robustness results that we
seek to develop. ***