* 9417599
* Mirror Symmetry Workshop; Stillwater, Oklahoma;             February 9-12, 1995
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1995
* Sheldon Katz, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia R. Brown
* 11/30/1995
* USD 2,000.00

9417599 Katz Mirror symmetry, since its discovery about five years ago, has been
under intense investigation by both physicists and mathematics. From the
viewpoint of physics, mirror symmetry provides a powerful computational tool for
extracting the properties of a broad class of string compactifications; it has
also led to arguments establishing that there are physical processes in string
theory resulting in unusual developments such as space-time topology change.
From the viewpoint of mathematics, mirror symmetry uncovers a hitherto unknown
structure in algebraic geometry which shows a deep connection between a priori
distinct algebraic varieties through their common conformal field theory. This
physical connection, among other things, allows for the calculation of various
topological properties which have proven intractable using more standard
mathematical methods. recent research in mirror symmetry has underscored the
unusual degree to which it serves as an arena where physical and mathematical
methods can be harmoniously united to produce important results for both fields
of study. The Mirror Symmetry Workshop will be held at Oklahoma State University
February 9-12, 1995. The efficacy of this workshop will be augmented by its
taking place during a Special Year in Algebraic Geometry which will be held at
Oklahoma State University during the 1994-95 academic year with partial support
from the Division of Mathematical Sciences of the National Science Foundation.
***