* 9417436
* Effects of Alloying Additions on the Liquid and Solid State Characteristics of Machinable Steels
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Alan Cramb, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 08/31/1997
* USD 80,000.00

9417436 Cramb This award is a "Tie" project between two Industry/University
Cooperative Research Centers (I/UCRC) designed to evaluate the effects of alloy
additions, added to enhance machinability of the steel, on the liquid and solid
state processing characteristics of SAE 4120 alloy steel. The
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Advanced Steel Processing
and Products at Colorado School of Mines is determining the effects of alloying
and solute segregation on the hot working behavior and final microstructures of
the alloys. The Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Iron and
Steel Research at Carnegie Mellon University is evaluating the effects of these
alloying additions in slag-metal interactions and solidification
characteristics. The two efforts define independent yet collaborative studies of
selected alloy additions, and the combined research creates a synergism in the
understanding of machinable steels that would not be possible at either
institution alone. Environmental and health concerns increase the urgency of
replacing lead as an additive for enhanced machinability of steels. A number of
chemical elements have potential substitutes for the lead, for example copper,
niobium, bismuth, tellurium, and selenium. Some of these elements are known to
adversely affect the hot shortness (a term that describes the deformability of
the steel over a reasonable processing temperature), brittleness, segregation of
alloying elements in the steel, solidification and casting processes, and the
reaction of the steel melt with the refractory lining in the smelting furnace.
Any utilization of these alloying elements as substitutes for toxic lead must be
done in a manner to avoid any of the adverse situations above. Colorado School
of Mines is investigating the properties of the steel and Carnegie Mellon
University is investigating the melting, casting and solidification
characteristics of the same experimental alloys. This combination of expertise
addresses the complete scope of issues needed before these new alloys can become
commercially viable. The Program Manager recommends Carnegie Mellon University
be awarded $80,000 for 36 months for this "Tie" project.