* 9417011
* The Fine-scale Hydrology and Geochemistry of the Areas of   Active Venting Middle Valley, a Sedimented Rift on the      Northern Juan de Fuca Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Marcus Langseth, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 12/31/1997
* USD 179,171.00

Langseth 9417011 This research program, involving researchers from Indiana, Duke
and Columbia Universities, proposes to investigate in detail the processes
involved in circulation of hydrothermal fluids in a heavily sedimented setting
adjacent to active hot springs on Juan de Fuca Ridge, a mid-ocean ridge
spreading center located off Oregon, Washington and western Canada. The specific
programs proposed for the one-month field effort include studies of heat,
chemical and fluid transport within the sedimentary section and the physical
properties of those sediments. The objective in acquiring this detailed,
multicomponent data set is to use these three interdependent components to
constrain and define models of the fluid pathways and chemical reactions,
including the deposition of sulfide minerals within the mud and rock overlying
the thermal vents. The detailed program is possible in part because it uses
cutting edge technology for heat flow and pore water measurement, which this
group of investigators has been instrumental in fostering and bringing to use.
Previous study at the two proposed sites includes drilling by the NSF-sponsored
Ocean Drilling Program vessel JOIDES Resolution, and the new data allows
extrapolation of results both areally (with new measurements from the upper 20
meters of the sediments) and with depth (with existing drilling data and planned
future drill data, which is expected in the 1996- 97 time frame) to define the
3-dimensional architecture of circulation and mineralization. In addition to
providing the first study at this level of detail over sedimented hot springs
known to produce large mineralized deposits, the program will provide valuable
data for precise selection of sites for future drilling.