* 9417692
* Committee on Radio Frequencies
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1998
* Robert Riemer, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Tomas E. Gergely
* 02/28/1998
* USD 275,488.00

ABSTRACT REIMER, Robert 9417692 The CORF plays an essential role in defending
the spectrum related interests of the U.S. scientific community before national
and international organizations that deal with the allocation and efficient use
of the radio spectrum. During the last year the CORF filed comments before the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), on matters related to the upcoming
World Radio Conference (WRC-95), Mobile Satellite Proceedings, and Use of
Frequencies Above 60 GHz. The Committee has made presentations to the FCC staff
on radio astronomers' use of the spectrum, and related interference issues.
These activities will continue next year. The next WARC (WRC-95) will be held in
October-November of 1995, and the CORF will have to represent the point of view
of the scientific community in various national and international fora dealing
with preparations for the onference. Moreover, since WRCs are now held on a
regular, two yearly basis, preparations will have to begin for the 1997
Conference, which will deal with space related issues, among others. The CORF,
through it's liaison member, also participates in the work of the
Radiocommunication Sector (formerly CCIR), particularly in the work of Study
Group 7 (Science Services) and Task Group 1/3, dealing with spurious emissions.
Recommendations issued by the Radiocommunication Sector provide the technical
underpinnings for the protection of radio astronomy from interference from
active radio services. ***