* 9417047
* Theoretical Problems in Condensed Matter and Statistical    Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1997
* David Nelson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/1997
* USD 375,000.00

9417047 Nelson This research is on a range of topics in condensed matter theory,
including columnar liquid crystals, vortex transport and pinning in high-
temperature superconductors and fluctuations in two- dimensional spin systems.
The emphasis is on defects, intermediate degrees of order, and the interplay
between geometry and statistical mechanics. Columnar liquid crystals, often
composed of semiflexible polymers, provide fascinating examples of partially
ordered systems, with material properties influenced by linear vacancy and
interstitial defects. Such defects have no analogue in assemblies of point-like
particles. Additional challenging problems arise when the polymers are chiral,
as in DNA or the polypeptide poly (y-benzyl glutamate) (PBG). Work on flux
pinning in semiconductors is directed at predicting optimal vortex pinning
structures, such as splayed columnar defects induced by heavy ion radiation. A
complete understanding of the resulting "splayed glass" and flux liquid phases
requires an extension of quantum mechanics in the equivalent many-body boson
problem to allow for a quenched random imaginary vector potential. Studies of
vortex smectics and entanglement around fixed obstacles are also planned. The
existence of the flat phase and a continuous broken symmetry in flexible
polymerized membranes raises interesting questions about closely related spin
systems in two dimensions. Investigations will be made on a dyadic spin model
which interpolates between Heisenberg-like systems, for which genuine long-range
order is impossible, and tehered membranes, which have now been observed
experimentally to exhibit continuous symmetry-breaking. %%% The interplay
between geometry and statistical mechanics which arises in certain liquid
crystalline polymers, in high temperature superconductors, and in magnetic
materials will be studied. Polymer liquid crystal phases, such as those prepared
from biological materials, like DNA double helix and certain a rtificial
proteins, can be strongly influenced by the effects of chirality, i.e., by the
lack of mirror symmetry in these macromolecules. It is hoped to investigate
vacancy and interstitial defects, and to understand how chirality can cause such
polymers to braid up spontaneously. This work may eventually lead to strategies
for synthesizing stronger polymeric materials. Many applications of the new high
temperature superconductors require efficient pinning of quantized lines of
magnetic field called vortices. In additional work, optimal arrangements of
defects in the underlying crystal which pin the vortices in place will be
searched. Finally, the relationship between oder in a special class of magnetic
materials and the crumpling of sheet polymers will be studied.