* 9417959
* The Bulk Aerodynamic Method for Heat Flux Based on Surface  Radiation Temperature
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Jielun Sun, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 10/31/1999
* USD 232,810.00

Jielun Sun &amp; L. Mahrt/Abstract ATM-9417959 The surface radiative temperature
is the only available surface temperature in most large scale field programs and
is therefore used to estimate the vertical temperature difference in the bulk
aerodynamic relationship. In many numerical models, the vertical temperature
difference is estimated in terms of radiative surface temperature computed from
the surface energy balance. Both of these applications generally retain existing
similarity theory even though such similarity theory is appropriate only for the
temperature at the roughness height. Several recent studies have shown that the
combination of surface radiative temperature with existing similarity theory can
lead to large errors, counter gradient fluxes and/or absurdly small values of
the roughness height for heat. This document research proposes to ameliorate
these problems by considering modification of existing similarity theory and
relationships between the surface radiation temperature and the aerodynamic
surface temperature. These developments must be preceded by replacing the value
of the surface radiative temperature with a function of the microscale
distribution of the surface radiative temperature. As one example, appropriate
weighting of the temperature of hot dry ground, partially covered by transpiring
vegetation, should eliminate cases of countergradient heat transport. Several
models and measurement schemes or representing the microscale distribution of
surface radiation temperature are proposed. The data analysis will take
advantage of existing tower and aircraft observations from a number of field
programs. In addition, more focused measurements of the microscale distribution
of surface radiative temperature will be implemented along with flux
measurements from the NCAR ASTER System. The bulk aerodynamic formulation will
be re-evaluated in terms of the improved representation of the surface radiation
temperature. Special attention will be given to problems associated with the
free convection case of nearly vanishing mean flow and the case of spatially-
averaged fluxes under weak wind conditions.