* 9417279
* Classification of Mouse Chromosomes Using Artificial Neural Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1997
* Mohamad Musavi, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 04/30/1997
* USD 118,351.00

The specific goal of this proposal is to use adaptive capabilities and parallel
computational properties of novel artificial neural networks (ANNs) for
automatic classification of mouse chromosomes. The overall objective is to
provide a computer software system to automate the mouse karyotyping process,
thus signifcantly reducing the time and human effort neccessary, and improving
the quality and efficiency of analysis. Analysis of mouse chormosomes is
important to many fields of genetic research. Example applications include gene
mapping by in situ hybridization to nucleic acid probes to mouse chromosomes,
substance screening which requires chromosome analysis of large numbers of
animals (most drequently mice) after treatment with the substance, and testing
breeders to maintain stocks of mice that carry chromosome aberrations of
interest. Mouse chromosomes are significantly more difficult to classify than
human chromosomes. Although automated human karyotyping systems are available,
none have been used successfully to classify mouse chromosomes automatically.
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) represent an emerging technology rooted in
many disciplines. An ANN is an information processing system that has certain
performance characteristics in common with biological neural networks. ANNs have
been developed as generalizations of mathematical models of human cognition or
neural biology. An ANN consist of a network architecture and a learning
paradigm. The architecture defines the topology and complexity of the network
necessary to acquire a specific level of knowledge in the area of interest,
which in this case is recognition of specific chromosomes. The learning paradigm
involves a training process for embedding the knowledge in the network. We
propose to design, train, test, and eveluate two novel ANNs, Radial Basis
Function (RBF) and Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN), for classification of
mouse chromosomes. The superior ANN will be integrated into an existing
karyotyping software distribution and will replace the conventional
classification module. Use of the existing karyotyping software allows us to
concentrate on the important issue of classification by providing the tools for
capture of metaphase spreads under a light microscope , segmentatiion and
enhancement of digitized images, as well as a user interface. To achieve the
objective of this porposal, the specific plans are to 1. obtain raw images of
mouse chromosomes 2. identify distinctive features of mouse chromosomes 3.
develop the programs for automatic extraction of the features, 4. prepare the
training and testing data sets, 5. design, train, and test the radial basis
function (RBF) neural network classifier, 6. design, train, and test the
probabilistic neural network (PNN) classifier, 7. select the optimal artificial
neural network classifier for mouse chromosomes, 8. improve the classification
performance, 9. develop the mouse karyotyping qystem.