* 9417063
* Hydrology and Regional Climatology of the East African      Lakes: Applications for Paleoclimate Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Sharon Nicholson, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 12/31/1997
* USD 184,672.00

Abstract ATM-9417063 Nichloson, Sharon E. Florida State University Title:
Hydrology and Regional Climatology of the East African Lakes: Applications for
Paleoclimate Studies This award supports a study of the climate history in the
area of the East African Lakes. The primary goal is to quantify the hydrological
balances of the East African lakes in order to facilitate interpretation of
their long-term histories in terms of regional and global climate. The second
goal is the production of a regional data base of climatic and hydrologic
information relevant to the project. The work will involve five main tasks: 1.
Archiving relevant climatic and hydrologic information for each lake; 2.
Assessment of means and temporal variations of key climatic elements; 3.
Reconstruction of historical fluctuations of East African lake and catchments;
4. Derivation of a water and energy balances model for lakes and catchments; 5.
Application of models to historical lake levels of Lake Victoria. One major
result of the project will be a record and analysis of climate and lake levels
in East Africa during the past two to three centuries. It will help to determine
the nature and degree of response of the lakes to global and regional climate,
including lag relationships between climate and lake-level fluctuations. The
study will help to uncover the relationships between climate of this region and
climate variability in other areas of the tropics and in the higher latitudes.
The results will also provide a framework for the interpretation of long-term
ecological changes in the lakes.