* 9417225
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Science Program:  Periphyton   Communities in Stream Ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Rex Lowe, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 08/31/1997
* USD 11,300.00

9417225 Lowe This award partially supports the travel expenses for Dr. Rex L.
Lowe and a graduate student from the Department of Biological Sciences at
Bowling Green State University, Ohio, to conduct cooperative research with Barry
J. F. Biggs, Ecosystems Scientist with the National Institute of Water and
Atmospheric Research, located in Christchurch, New Zealand, over a two year
period. The research will focus on mechanisms that regulate spatial and temporal
differences in the structure of periphyton communities in stream ecosystems.
Disturbance, as used in ecological studies, denotes an event causing disruption
in an ecosystem, community, or population structure and changes resources,
substrate availability, or the physical environment. The ability of a community
to resist the effects of a disturbance is referred to as resistance and the
ability of a community to recover to some predetermined state is termed
resilience. This study will examine resistance and resilience factors regulating
benthic algae communities in twelve New Zealand South Island streams, six on the
west coast (high disturbance) and six on the east coast (low disturbance). The
laboratory-based experiments will be conducted at the University of Michigan
Biological Station Stream Research Facility which provides numerous replicated
artificial stream channels. The laboratory experiments are designed to examine
variables which appear to have a strong regulatory influence in the natural New
Zealand streams. Most of the New Zealand streams are fully protected (within the
New Zealand National Parks and Reserves System), and provide a unique natural
outdoor stream environment where one can investigate streams with similar or
contrasting physical, chemical and biological traits. Support for the visit by
Mr. Biggs to the University of Michigan facility is provided by the New Zealand
Ministry of Research, Science and Technology under the U.S.- New Zealand
Cooperative Science Progra m.