* 9417835
* Direct Methods in Organic Electron Crystallography
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Douglas Dorset, Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 12/31/1998
* USD 287,100.00

Dr. Douglas Dorset, Medical Foundation of Buffalo, is supported by a grant from
the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division
and the Polymers Program in the Division of Materials Research to continue his
research in the development of direct methods for use in electron
crystallography of organic compounds and polymers. He is working with Herb
Hauptman (who shared the 1985 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Jerome Karle for
related work) to develop a direct phasing method for electron crystallographic
data for the ab initio determination of unknown crystal structures. A number of
steps are being taken to improve the reliability of the technique including: 1)
improving a figure of merit for automated procedures that are more resistant to
dynamical scattering; 2) developing more reliable phasing procedures; 3)
incorporating a multislice calculation to improve refinement; 4) developing a
better understanding of the limitations of crystallographic phase determination;
and 5) increasing the use of higher voltage sources to ensure data closer to the
single scattering limit. Applications include: 1) oriented films of poly
(tetrafluorotheylene) ; 2) small molecules such as C60 and C70, copper
phthalocyanine and copper perfluorophthalocyanine, and 3) alkane chains
substituted with ester, ether, amine and keto groups. By far the most widely
used structural tool is X-ray crystallography. One of the reasons for it's
widespread use is the fact that techniques have been developed for automatically
solving the phase problem for many systems. In spite of this, there are
limitations to X-ray crystallography arising primarily from the difficulty of
obtaining crystals of suitable size. Electron crystallography should provide a
complementary alternative to X-ray diffraction for cases where the latter
technique is problematic. Dorset's work is directed at attempting to improve the
electron crystallographic technique to the point where it will be as automated
and as easy to use as X-ray crystallography now is.