* 9417833
* Comparative Evaluation of Flood Control Approaches for      Bangladesh and the Mississippi River Basin, Workshop,       Dhaka, Bangladesh, March 12-15, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Mir Ali, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/1996
* USD 17,200.00

9417833 Rashid Description: This project supports participation of a U.S.
delegation in an International Seminar at the Bangladesh University of
Engineering and Technology (BUET) in Dhaka. The seminar will be devoted to the
topic "Comparative Evaluation of Flood Control Approaches for Bangladesh and the
Mississippi Rivers". The P.I., Dr. Salim Rashid of the University of Illinois,
Urbana, is also the Vice President of the U.S.-based Bangladesh Environment and
Flood Committee in America (BEFCA). Dr. Rashid, with support from BEFCA, will
conduct the seminar with Dr. M. Mozzamel Hoque, Professor and Director,
Institute of Flood Control and Drainage Research at the BUET. The seminar is
scheduled for March 12th to March 15th, 1995, and is expected to focus on ways
of comparing flood disasters in developed and developing countries, and of
transferring knowledge about disaster alleviation. It will particularly
emphasize the aspects of the socio-economic impacts of flood control. Scope:
This project meets objectives of the Division of International Programs: it
supports a joint seminar in an area of importance to the U.S. and the
collaborating foreign country, Bangladesh. The topics are particularly
important, in light of the recent floods in the U.S., including the major
Missouri flooding in 1993 and the California floods of 1995, and given the
nearly perennial flood problems in Bangladesh. The seminar should lead to
recommendations on research areas in flood control policies and flood damage
mitigation procedures. ***