* 9417357
* Studies of Redox Kinetics and Long-Range Electronic Coupling Using Self-Assembled omega-Hydroxythiol Monolayers on      Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Janice Reutt-Robey, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 11/30/1998
* USD 315,000.00

Self-assembled organic thiol monolayers on gold electrodes can be used to probe
the details of electron transfer from the electrode to redox couples in
solution. In this research project, supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program, insulated electrode voltammetry will be developed by
Professor Cary Miller and his students at the University of Maryland as a method
to probe electron transfer processes, taking advantage of the structure of these
self- assembled organic monolayers. Electron coupling within the thiol
monolayers will be investigated by functional group replacement within the
molecular overlayer. The work combines the synthesis of specific molecules to
test ideas of electron transfer in these layers, as well as the detailed
electrochemical measurements needed to understand the kinetics of electron
transfer across these layers. This information could have long range use in the
design and control of molecular electronic devices. In order to rationally
design ultra small scale electronic devices using molecular components, a
detailed understanding of electron transfer across molecular species must be
developed. This research project begins to develop this sort of understanding by
making detailed measurements of electron transfer processes across model organic
thin films, whose structure and functional group make-up can be readily varied.