* 9417766
* Finite Element Models for Lithospheric Deformation in       Collisional Orogens
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1995,03/02/1999
* Sean Willett, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/02/1999
* USD 110,000.00

Willet 9417766 Relative convergende between lithospheric plates cannot be
described by the simple kinetic rules of plane tectonics. Convergence leads
inevitably to deformation of one or both plates. In the case of continental
collision, convergence produces dramatic deformation with attendant uplift,
erosion, mountain building and high relief. This most spectacular of the Earth's
tectonic processes is the cause of much of the Earth's conctinental geology
throught eh formation fo continents by successive collisions and mechanical
accretion, but also important are the impacts of cllisional orogenesis on the
ancient and modern atmosphere, biosphere, and hydrosphere. Mountain building
processes affect global atmospheric circulation patterns and hence global
climate, but climate also affects mountain building through its effeciency in
eroding excess topography. Understanding and modeling the coupling and feedback
between the lithospheric and atmospheric systems is one of the goals of the
Earth Systems Evolution program of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
of which this project is a part. This project focuses on the lithospheric
mechanical process component of the Earth system by numerical modeling of
lithosoheric deformation and comparison to geological (surface) and geophysical
(subsurface) observations in orogenic belts. ****