* 9417284
* U.S.-Japan Seminar: High Pressure-Temperature               Research:  Properties of Earth and Planetary Materials/     January 23-26, 1996/Maui, Hawaii
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Murli Manghnani, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 12/31/1997
* USD 38,000.00

9417284 Manghnani This award supports the participation of eight U.S. scientists
in a U.S.-Japan seminar on High Pressure-Temperature Research on Earth and
Planetary Materials, to be held in Hawaii from January 23-26, 1996. The co-
organizers are Dr. Murli Manghnani of the University of Hawaii and Professor
Yasuhiko Syono of Tohoku University. The main purpose of this seminar is to
enable the exchange of information and ideas on the recent experimental and
theoretical results in high pressure-high temperature research in mineral
physics. Recent progress, future problems, evaluation of theoretical issues
related to experimental results, pressure calibration scales at high temperature
in international use, as well as the applications of recent research results to
the Earth and planetary interiors will be discussed. This meeting is the fifth
in a series of U.S.-Japan seminars in this field held over a period of 20 years.
Although a core of individuals has provided continuity from meeting to meeting,
participants in the seminars have changed through the years to reflect an
appropriate pairing between U.S. and Japanese participants and the progress of
the research. The U.S. participants provide a broad cross section of expertise
and geographical representation in the overall area of ultrahigh pressure-
temperature techniques, and were selected on the basis of being the most active
researchers in the U.S. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the
Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an
international collaboration. ***