* 9417115
* Assembly and Regulation of Myosin II in Endothelial         Locomotion
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* John Kolega, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1999
* USD 237,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F { C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t 4 O b j e c t P
o o l { { % & ' ( ) * + , - . / F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9417115 Kolega The goal of this project is to understand how
myosin II is involved in moving and shaping endothelial cells, the cells that
form the inner lining of blood vessels. Myosin II is a protein that can act as a
motor by moving other molecules within the cell. In order to understand how this
products movement of the whole cell, the location and movements of myosin II
inside of cells will be defined. To do this a fluorescent dye will be attached
to myosin II and this labeled myosin injected into cells growing in culture
dishes. The organization and dynamics of the labeled myosin II will then be
followed through a fluorescence microscope. In order to understand how the
behavior of myosin II is controlled, the myosin II in moving cells will be
examined for biochemical changes that occur when its location or movement
changes. This will be accomplished by making antibodies that bind only to
modified forms of myosin II. These antibodies can be used to stain cells to show
when and where biochemical changes occur. %%% Endothelial cells, like many cells
in the body, move about during normal d evelopment, wound healing and in many
diseases, particularly cancer. Understanding how movement occurs and is
controlled at the cellular and molecular level is important for developing new
strategies for treating wounds and disease. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( $ 9417115
Shirley Parker Shirley Parker @ u @ @ u @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e 3 e P 4 P
j j j j j j j x 1 : Z T 7 x j x j j j j ~ j j j j r 9417115 Kolega The goal of
this project is to understand how myosin II is involved in moving and shaping
endothelial cells, the cells that form the inner lining of blood vessels. Myosin
II is a protein that can act as a motor by moving other molecules within the
cell. In order to understand how this products movement of the whole cell, the
location and movements of myosin II inside of cells will be defined. To do this
a fluorescent dye will be attached to myosin II and this labeled myosin injected
into cells growing in culture dishes. The organization and dynamics of the
labeled myosin II will then be followed through a fluorescence microscope. In
order to understand how the behavior of myosin II is controlled, the myosin II
in moving cells will be examined for biochemical changes that occur when its
location or movement changes. This will be accomplished by making antibodies
that bind only to modified forms of myosin II. These antibodies can be used to
stain cells to show when and where biochemical changes occur. %%% Endothelial
cells, like many cells in the body, move about during normal development, wound
healing and in many diseases, particularly cancer. Understanding how movement
occurs and is controlled at the cellular and molecular level is important for
developing new strategies for treating wounds and disease. ***