* 9417160
* High-Resolution Vegetation and Climate Records from the U.S. Southeast: Glacial to Holocene Changes
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1995,02/29/2000
* Dorothy Peteet, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 266,059.00

Abstract ATM-9417160 Peteet, Dorothy Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory Title:
High-Resolution Vegetation and Climate Records from the U.S. Southeast; Glacial
to Holocene Changes This award supports a project designed to establish the
patterns of vegetation change across the U.S. southeast. The timing, magnitude
and geographical extent of the vegetation response, in conjunction with ice and
ocean records, will help link mid-latitude and high- latitude climate regimes.
Improved chronological control on a variety of paleoclimate records has focused
attention on the rapidity with which climate may change. This proposal will
result in high-resolution paleovegetation records from Virginia, North Carolina
and Georgia, encompassing an interval from approximately 18,000 to 9000 yrs BP.
These records, combined with those existing, will reveal if vegetation responds
unidirectionally across the region. Climate forcings will be identified and
their potential to influence the southeastern region will be evaluated with
general circulation model (GCM) simulations. The GCM simulations will evaluate
the model's sensitivity to variations in solar insolation, ice sheet extent and
height, and sea surface temperatures (SSTs) in the North Atlantic Ocean. Data-
model comparisons will point to future directions of observational and model
research.