* 9417035
* RUI: Coordinated Studies of Close Binary Stars as Tracers of Stellar Evolution
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/2001
* Paul Etzel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 04/30/2001
* USD 187,036.00

9417035 Etzel Post main-sequence stars, having exhausted the hydrogen fuel in
their core, undergo core contraction, thermonuclear ignition of hydrogen in a
thin shell, and expansion of their outer layers. When such a star is in a close
binary system, evolutionary expansion causes it to fill its so-called Roche
surface, a tear-dropped shaped lobe with a cusp pointed at the other star.
Matter flows along the surface of this star (the "loser"), through the cusp
(where the gravitational forces are equal), and is collimated in a stream that
sends mass to the other star (the "gainer"). This evolution by mass exchange
occurs on a time scale of one million to ten million years, some 100 to 1000
times faster than the rate of evolution when the star is on the main sequence
path of stellar evolution. Nature has conspired to make the details of mass
flows and accretion processes especially observable in Algol-type binary star
systems. Research on these systems will improve our physical understanding of
these processes. The research effort will be concentrated on studying long-
period Algol systems in which the transferred mass supplies a flattened
accretion disk rotating around the "gainer". The viscous dissipation in the disk
allows matter to spiral inward to be accreted by the "gainer", supplying mass
and angular momentum to that star. The mass, structure, composition, viscous
heating, and instabilities of accretion disks will be studied using the strong
hydrogen-alpha wavelength emission lines and infrared wavelength absorption
lines of oxygen produced in these disks. A diagnostic model to predict line
profiles will be developed. The orbits of binary star systems are viewed nearly
edge-on, so the stars eclipse each other. The "losers" also partially eclipse
the disks, and the disks partially eclipse losers, adding greatly to the
observed spatial resolution of the images. Multi-color photometry of the stellar
light variations and spectroscopic observations of stellar radial velocities
will provide data to calculate stellar masses and radii, which will set the
gravitation stratification in the accretion disks. Equatorial accretion of
matter from the disk onto the "gainer" leads to rapid rotation of that star.
Unless the angular momentum transport to the star is very efficient, the surface
rotation of the "gainer" should be differential. The detection of the
differential rotation will be sought by observing spectral line profiles as
eclipses of the gainer proceed and various portions of the stellar surface are
eclipsed or exposed. Results from using other techniques that gauge the average
rotation of the stellar envelope, will be combined with the differential
rotation data to shed light on the ultimate mass and angular momentum
assimilation by "gainers". Estimates of the rate of mass transfer in some
systems will be made. It will be possible to judge critically from photometric
solutions whether "losers" truly fill their Roche surfaces. In a significant
number of cases, the Roche volumes are not filled. Some mechanism other than
simple lobe overflow must therefore drive mass transfer and evolution in these
systems. Magnetic activity on "loser" surfaces, and cool stars in related
systems, will be studied.