* 9417563
* Climate Analysis and Extended Range Seasonal Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1997
* William Gray, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 10/31/1997
* USD 431,902.00

Abstract ATM-9417563 Gray, William M. Colorado State University Title: Climate
Analysis and Extended Range Seasonal Prediction This project involves the
analysis and further development of basic scientific concepts related to
extended range quantitative climatic forecast schemes for Atlantic basin
seasonal hurricane activity, African Sahel seasonal rainfall, ENSO variations,
selective regional Asian monsoon rainfall, and the potential for seasonal
predictability in the middle latitudes. Along with the basic science concerning
underlying mechanisms, this work seeks accuracy at 9-14 month forecast lead
times, sufficient to allow the development and implementation of meaningful
policy and mitigating actions. The spectrum of potential climate precursor
signals will be exhaustively explored. Potential predictability will be studied
in the hindcast mode, principally from global data sets for the last 35 to 45
years (primarily since 1950), but with some extensions to much earlier data.
Similarly, statistical regression methodology for combining predictor signals
using both Least Absolute Deviations and Ordinary Least Squares procedures will
be extensively explored. Although surprisingly skillful seasonal hindcast test
results have been obtained, these results suggest that greater forecast skill is
possible through further analyses with additional combinations of climate
variables. Equal emphasis in this research is directed toward diagnostic work
for greater physical understanding of the underlying atmospheric and oceanic
processes responsible for long range precursor signals. This research is
important because it seeks to improve our ability to predict climate variations
of major economic and human safety importance.