* 9417419
* Engineered Biosynthesis of Novel Aromatic Polyketides
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1998
* Chaitan Khosla, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shiladitya DasSarma
* 03/31/1998
* USD 292,000.00

Khosla 9417419 Our research focuses on understanding the relationships between
structure and function of natural and designed biosynthetic enzymes. Polyketide
synthases (PKSs) are examples of these enzymes. They catalyze the biosynthesis
of polyketides (a structurally diverse family of bioactive natural products) via
repeated condensations between carboxylic acid derivatives. After each
condensation, the added -keto group is suitably reduced. It is the controlled
variation in chain length, choice of chain- binding units, extent of each
reductive cycle, and regiospecificity in cyclization that leads to the variation
among naturally occurring polyketides. Our work seeks (i) to understand how PKS
structure controls catalysis, specificity, and subunit assembly, and (ii) to
develop biosynthetic rules for the rational design of novel polyketides. Towards
this end, we have recently generated and characterized several novel polyketides
by using genetic engineering. On one hand, this knowledge leads to new insights
of molecule reconstruction and opens the possibility of expanding nature's
repertoire of polyketide compounds. The present research extends studies on a
group of PKSs involved in aromatic polyketide biosynthesis, which exhibit four
principal catalytic degrees of freedom. The structural determinants of these
degrees of freedom will be defined. %%% Molecular biology owes much of its
appeal and technological power to the elucidation of mechanisms for DNA, RNA,
and protein biosynthesis. In particular, these biosynthetic mechanism have in
common the use of "template" molecules that determine the structure of the
product molecule. However, it is well-known that DNA, RNA, and proteins are not
the only biomolecules synthesized by iterative mechanisms. An examination of the
molecular diversity of a number of natural products leads one to speculate that
the equivalent of a genetic code must also exist for these molecules. However,
the apparent absence of "t emplates" has frustrated attempts determine how
compound structural specificity is achieved along these biosynthetic pathways.
Our work uses the complementary tools of genetics and chemistry to unravel the
structural and mechanistic basis for molecular diversity in one family of
natural products: the polyketides. The research directions proposed here seek to
(i) understand how PKS structure controls catalysis, specificity, and subunit
assembly, and (ii) develop biosynthetic rules for the rational design of novel
polyketides. This project is funded jointly by the Metabolic Biochemistry
Program (Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences) and the Organic
Synthesis Section of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program (Division
of Chemistry). ***