* 9417895
* Collaborative Research:  Carnian-Norian Magnetostratigraphy and Biostratigraphy at Silica Brezova (Slovakia)
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/2000
* James Channell, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2000
* USD 105,206.00

9417895 Channell High quality Carnian-Norian magnetostratigraphies derived
recently from two marine sections in Turkey and a thick continental (lacustrine)
section in the Newark Rift Basin are not easily correlated. The correlation even
between the two Turkish sections is problematic, and is facilitated by supposing
that the two condensed sections were in opposite hemispheres in Late Triassic
time. A 200m thick Carnian-Norian (Upper Triassic) section at Silica Brezova
(Slovakia) provides the opportunity to resolve the uncertainties in Carnian-
Norian magnetostratigraphic correlations. The Silica Brezova section contains
all Late Carnian and Norian conodont zones in an exceptionally thick
(uncondensed) section of "Hallstatt Limestone" facies. The conodont alteration
indices are close to 1, indicating no appreciable burial of the thrust unit
which contains the section. A pilot magnetostratigraphic study on a 35m interval
from the middle (Lacian) part of the Silica Brezova section has yielded a clear
polarity zonation and a positive fold test. Magnetostratigraphy and
biostratigraphy of the 200m Silica Brezova section should provide a first
correlation of the high resolution cyclostratigraphy from the Neward Basin to
the marine realm which is essential to the development of an integrated Late
Triassic timescale linking marine and non-marine stratigraphies.