* 9417659
* Development of a Computer Engineering Research Environment  at the University of Puerto Rico - Mayaguez
* CSE,EIA
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* Jaime Seguel, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 08/31/2000
* USD 870,101.00

9417659 Espinosa The ECE Department of the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez
has a tradition of producing highly qualified Computer Engineering graduates
with the necessary skills, knowledge, and expertise to succeed in either
graduate school of the industrial environment. Involving undergraduates students
in research as; increased their enthusiasm and interest in their studies,
provided them with additional knowledge and experience, increased their
employment opportunities, and motivated them towards graduate school. Besides
continuing this successful undergraduate research program, the major goal of
this project is to develop the research environment needed to start a Ph.D.
program in Computer Engineering and to increase minority participation in
graduate school and research. To maintain an excellent research environment and
to accomplish the CISE II-MI program's goal of increasing minority participation
the following activities are planned: * to create a proposal, during the first
two years, to establish a Ph.D. program in collaboration with the Math
Departments of the Rio Piedras and Mayaguez Campuses: * establish a plan to
retain and increase minority participation; conduct research and establish a
productivity plan for researchers; * establish a plan for faculty development; *
acquire new research equipment; and * establish a Computer Engineering Center to
administer and coordinate the proposed activities