* 9417250
* Octahedral Metal Clusters as Building Blocks, Active Sites  and Markers in New Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Duward Shriver, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 12/31/1998
* USD 392,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports work on Group 5 and 6 metal clusters with labile ligands by Dr. Duward
F. Shriver, Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University. The overall goal
of the work is to synthesize extended solids and large molecular clusters
containing redox and photoredox active early d-block metal clusters. New
compounds will be synthesized and characterized photochemically and
electrochemically, and used as the basis for preparation of micro- and
mesoporous solids and for markers in electron microscopy. These compounds will
serve as precursors to: (1) mixed clusters with potentially interesting bonding,
reactivity, electrochemistry and photochemistry; (2) clusters containing
atypical ligands for these metals; and (3) solids consisting of clusters of
clusters with size and shape selectivity for small molecules and redox or
photoelectrochemical activity. A number of possibilities for interaction of
clusters with functional groups on solids will be investigated. For example,
silica-supported molybdenum clusters will be investigated as a solid medium for
photochemical or photoelectrochemical transformations of small molecules. Heavy
metal clusters will be employed as markers for functional groups on polycarbon
species. Also, some clusters, which can be readily imaged by high resolution
electron microscopy and analyzed by electron nanodiffraction and spectroscopy,
will be utilized to differentiate between competing structural models for carbon
nanotubes. Molybdenum, tungsten, niobium, and tantalum form "clusters" in which
six metal atoms form an octahedral core around which are associated ions, such
as chloride. In this project easily exchangeable ions will be associated with
some of these clusters so that they can be attached to surfaces of novel
materials. The size, photochemistry, and electrochemistry of these clusters can
then be used to determine the shape of the support material t o which they are
attached, or to increase the chemical capabilities of both the cluster and the
surface. The results could be helpful in characterizing known materials or in
synthesizing new materials.