* 9417390
* A Cooperative Learning Environment that Fosters the Pursuit of Scientific Careers for American Indians
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Ted Wetherbee, Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,380,523.00

9417390 Wetherbee This project proposes to significantly increase the number of
American Indian students attaining four year and graduate degrees in computer
science and engineering, FDLTCC and Fond du Lac Ojibwe School (a tribal K-12
institution) will hold summer camps for American Indian youth in grade 5-8, and
bridge-to- college camps for grades 9-12, to study interesting, engaging
computer science activities and applications. They shall also study traditional
Native American view of the world - not to abandon standard Western scientific
methods, but to examine fresh approaches to problem solving. FDLTCC will create
a lower division computer science program designed specifically to support and
encourage American Indian students through successful transfer to a four year
institution to complete their upper division CISE studies. Formal mentoring and
curriculum designed to encourage performance in a cooperative manner will
characterize the tribal college program. This model, cultivating interest in
CISE work among American Indian youth, supporting the bridge from K-12 schools
to the tribal college, strongly supporting American Indian students in lower
division CISE studies, and supporting students through transfer to high quality
four year computer science programs, is designed to be attractive and applicable
to tribal K-12 schools and colleges governed by sovereign tribal nations which
are the key education providers for American Indian youth living on or near
tribal lands. ***