* 9417874
* Climatic Temperature Record of Cherts
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1997
* L. Paul Knauth, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 07/31/1997
* USD 110,124.00

9417874 Knauth The oxygen and hydrogen composition of ancient cherts will be
investigated to explore the idea that the earth's climatic temperature history
is imprinted in isotopic data for these rocks. A large secular variation exists
in the isotopic composition of cherts, and this has been attributed to either
climatic temperature changes, variations in isotopic composition of the oceans,
or later alteration of the isotopic record. Mounting evidence that the isotopic
composition of the oceans cannot account for the observed variations warrants a
new look at whether the secular variations are recording the earth's climatic
temperature history. New samples from key time periods and different geologic
settings will be analyzed to build up the currently limited data base and to
test whether later alteration is responsible for the observed secular
variations. Samples from existing collection of Precambrian cherts made by
various groups over the last 10 years for paleontological and sedimentological
investigations will be analyzed. Preliminary data suggest a major warming around
the Precambrian-Cambrian boundary, and new samples from localities bracketing
this boundary will be collected and analyzed. Hydrogen isotope analyses can
provide additional constraints on interpretations, and these will be used on
suitable cherts such as those from paleokarst horizons. The effects of
metamorphism and the field/petrographic criteria used to select least-altered
samples will be evaluated by analyzing bedded and modular cherts that have been
metamorphosed in vary degrees to higher grades than would ever be sampled for
secular variation studies. Later alteration by meteoric ground waters will be
evaluated by isotopic analyses of coexisting carbonates. Existing data on the
Miocene Monterey Formation will be augmented to confirm that even chert which
form during deep burial leave isotopic signatures characteristic of the local
climate. The anticipated result of this work is a new data base for che rts over
geologic time which can be meaningfully evaluated as an indicator of past
climatic temperatures.