* 9417978
* Permian and Triassic Biogenic Structures in the Shackleton  Glacier Area,Transantarctic Mountains: Record of Nonmarine  Benthic Communities and their Response to Climate Change
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Molly Miller, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/1998
* USD 104,579.00

This award supports a project to study trace fossils in the Permian and Triassic
portions of the Beacon Supergroup in the central Transantarctic Mountains. The
sedimentary sequence in the central Transantarctic Mountains indicates that
during the Permian and Triassic this portion of the paleo-Pacific margin of
Gondwana was successively covered by a continental glacier (Pagoda Formation),
flooded by an inland sea (Mackellar Formation), blanketed with sediment
deposited by rivers flowing across a sandy braid plain (Fairchild Formation),
and covered with sands and silts deposited in braided river channels and
floodplains (Buckley and Fremouw Formations). This sequence of events was
induced by amelioration of the climate and changes in tectonic regime. Although
the rich floras of the Buckley and Fremouw Formations and well preserved
vertebrate fauna of the Fremouw Formation are the subject of continuing
extensive studies, little is known about the benthic fauna that inhabited the
widespread inland waters throughout the Permian and Triassic and its response to
climate change. The animals themselves are not preserved as fossils, but
biogenic structures, including both trace fossils (ichnofauna; discrete tracks,
trails and burrows) and ichnofabric (general disruption caused by biologic
activity), give information about the benthic fauna that produced them. This
information includes: 1) the size and general body plan of the producers, giving
keys to their identity; 2) an approximation of the faunal diversity; 3) the
behavior of the producers; 4) the environmental preferences of the producers; 5)
the use of trophic and spatial resources by the producers; and 6) the activity
and abundance of the benthic fauna relative to physical and depositional
processes, as reflected by ichnofabric. In this study, the trace fossils and
ichnofabric in diverse subaqueous facies within the Mackellar, Fairchild,
Buckley and lower Fremouw Formations will be described and interpreted t o
develop a picture of the Permian and earliest Triassic benthic aquatic fauna and
its response to climate change. Trace fossils and their sedimentological context
will be described and photographed in the field, representative specimens will
be collected for laboratory study, and the extent of sediment disruption by
animals will be evaluated. Samples will be cut and polished in the laboratory to
elucidate trace morphology and enhance ichnofabric. Very little is known about
ancient nonmarine aquatic benthic communities and ichnofaunas, in spite of the
fact that these habitats have been occupied since the Paleozoic. Recent work
suggest that major changes in these communities occurred during the Permian and
earliest Triassic when burrowers became more abundant. This study will provide
rare documentation of ichnofaunal (and indirectly faunal) distributions in
diverse aquatic environments at a crucial time during evolution of aquatic
benthic communities, and will uniquely address the question of how aquatic
benthic faunas responded to climate amelioration after glaciation. Equally
important, data collected will be used to assess the ichnofaunal similarity in
correlative units between Antarctica and other Gondwana continents, particularly
South America and Africa, and to test hypotheses regarding differences between
ichnofaunas found in equivalent depositional regimes in marine and nonmarine
environments.