* 9417391
* Radiocarbon Investigations of Dissolved and Particulate     Organic Carbon Cycling in the North Pacific and Antarctic   Oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Ellen Druffel, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/1998
* USD 566,654.00

9417391 DRUFFEL Organic carbon pools will be studied at two open ocean sites
that reflect potential differences in carbon cycling and transformations in
polar and temperate regions. Carbon isotopic signatures ( 14C, 13C) and
concentrations of dissolved, colloidal and particulate organic carbon
(DOC,COC,POC) will be measured at Station M in the Northeast Pacific Ocean and
in the Antarctic Ocean south of the Indian Ocean. The following carbon pools
will be studied: ultra-violet and high-temperature catalytically-oxidizable
fractions of DOC (DOCuv and DOChtc), suspended and sinking POC (POCsusp and
POCsink), COC specific organic constituents (total hydrolyzable amino acids THAA
, total carbohydrates TCHO , total lipids) of suspended and sinking POC and of
COC, detrital aggregates on the seafloor, marine snow, and dissolved inorganic
carbon (DIC). The following questions will be addressed: 1) Do the 14C profiles
in Antarctic DOC, POCsusp, and COC support the hypothesis that deep DOC is
transported quasi-conservatively through the world's deep ocean? 2) How does the
lateral transport of shelf/slope derived organic matter to the deep sea change
with time and what is the extent of adsorption of DOC onto POCsusp and POCsink
in the water column? 3) From what depths do specific organic constituents of the
COC,POCsink, and POCsusp, originate and how are they recycled? 4) What are the
sources of carbon to detrital aggregates and marine snow, and are the labile,
surface-derived compounds utilized exclusively during remineralization? 5) What
is the overall labile and refractory nature of DOC with respect to its
heterotrophic utilization, and what does the 14C signature of microheterotrophic
biomass reveal about the assimilation of DOC/COC/POC in the deep ocean?