* 9417138
* Aspen Global Change Institute Interdisciplinary             Summer Science Sessions
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* John Katzenberger, Aspen Global Change Institute
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 07/31/1995
* USD 143,956.00

The complex nature of problems associated with global environmental change
requires far more interdisciplinary research than traditionally has occurred.
The development of interdisciplinary collaborations requires scientists from
different fields to become familiar with the perspectives, experiences, and
methods that each employs. This award supports three two-week sessions that will
be conducted by the Aspen Global Change Institute during July and August 1994.
The sessions will bring together natural and social scientists for in-depth
discussions during which they will share the results from their latest work,
learn from each other, and stimulate new ideas regarding central topics for
global change research. The three sessions in 1994 will deal with issues that
have been identified as being of major importance to agencies participating in
the U.S. Global Change Research Program (US/GCRP). Those topics are (1)
radiation feedbacks and the credibility of atmospheric models, (2) anticipating
global change surprises, and (3) biological invasion as a global change. The
results of the sessions will be disseminated through a variety of media. Summary
reports will be published in widely circulated major newsletters. Session chairs
will conduct a briefing for US/GCRP agency officials, and more complete written
reports of session proceedings and conclusions will be made available in both
written and electronic forms. Support for this project is provided by NSF on
behalf of other US/GCRP agencies, including the Environmental Protection Agency.
Through support of these sessions, new insights will be gained about critical
issues in global change research. Of potentially greater importance will be
opportunities for leading scientists to become familiar with counterparts from
other disciplines. Experience has shown that from initial discussions like those
that occur in these sessions, effective interdisciplinary collaborations needed
to conduct global change resea rch often develop.