* 9417594
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Carnian-Norian Magnetostratigraphy and Biostratigraphy at Silica Brezova (Slovakia)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1998
* Dennis Kent, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/1998
* USD 35,133.00

9417594 Kent High quality Carnian-Norian magnetostratigraphies derived recently
from two marine sections in Turkey and a thick continental (lacustrine) section
in the Newark Rift Basin are not easily correlated. The correlation even between
the two Turkish sections is problematic, and is facilitated by supposing that
the two condensed sections were in opposite hemispheres in Late Triassic time. A
200m thick Carnian-Norian (Upper Triassic) section at Silica Brezova (Slovakia)
provides the opportunity to resolve the uncertainties in Carnian-Norian
magnetostratigraphic correlations. The Silica Brezova section contains all Late
Carnian and Norian conodont zones in an exceptionally thick (uncondensed)
section of "Hallstatt Limestone" facies. The conodont alteration indices are
close to 1, indicating no appreciable burial of the thrust unit which contains
the section. A pilot magnetostratigraphic study on a 35m interval from the
middle (Lacian) part of the Silica Brezova section has yielded a clear polarity
zonation and a positive fold test. Magnetostratigraphy and biostratigraphy of
the 200m Silica Brezova section should provide a first correlation of the high
resolution cyclostratigraphy from the Neward Basin to the marine realm which is
essential to the development of an integrated Late Triassic timescale linking
marine and non-marine stratigraphies.