* 9417605
* Physical and Geochemical Interpretation of the 1964         Catastrophic Eruption of Shiveluch Volcano, Kamchatka
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1998
* Michael Sheridan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* William Hart
* 02/28/1998
* USD 150,000.00

9417605 Sheridan The objective of this proposal is to obtain a better
understanding of the physical and geochemical processes related to the giant
1964 eruption of Shiveluch Volcano, Kamchatka. The eruptive event and products
of Shiveluch, the focus of this research, will be compaped with published
information and reconnaissance field work on the other major edifice destroying
eruptions Kusdach (1907), Bezymianny (1956), and Mount St. Helens (1980) . The
goal will be to understand the similarities and differences of these four major
eruptions. Field and laboratory studies will ascertain the nature of processes
leading to the explosive rupture of the eruptive system and the mechanism
responsible for the lateral transport of the materials. Integrated study of the
eruptive history of the entire volcano and the petrologic and geochemical
character of the juvenile products will provide data to determine possible
relationships among: characteristics of eruptive events, evolution of the melts,
formation of volcanic debris avalanches, and occurrence of lateral blast
eruptions. This research would improve our understanding of a very important
class of phenomena that has a significant impact on volcanic risk assessment and
mitigation. Results form this study also could prove useful for long-term
prediction of eruptive behavior at other dangerous volcanoes.