* 9417547
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program: Discovery and   Analysis of Extremely Low Metallicity Stars in the Galactic Halo
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Timothy Beers, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 03/31/1998
* USD 16,128.00

9417547 Beers This award will partially support the travel expenses, over a
three year period, for Dr. Timothy Beers and one of his graduate students from
the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Michigan State University, to enable
them to each made one visit to conduct cooperative research with Dr. John E.
Norris of the Mount Stromlo and Siding Spring Observatories and Dr. Sean Ryan of
the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Epping, Australia. The collaborative
research will focus on the discovery and analysis of extremely low metallicity
in the Galactic Halo. Large numbers of extremely metal-deficient stars provide
crucial information on questions in cosmology, the formation and evolution of
the Galaxy, and the production and processing of light elements in stars.
Observations of low-metallicity candidates through the southern hemisphere sky,
made possible through this collaboration, will provide a significant increase in
the numbers of stars with metal abundances less than 1/1000th of the solar
value, thereby enabling a wide range of investigations concerning the formation
and evolution of our Galaxy, and the Universe. Specific investigations include a
detailed comparison of the metallicity distribution function of extremely metal-
poor stars with predictions of Galactic enrichment models, a study of the
kinematics of metal-deficient stars as a function of abundance and distance from
the Galactic plane, and high-resolution observations of the relative abundances
of the light and heavy elements in stars, which in turn place fundamental
constraints on stellar evolution and on nucleosynthesis processes in the early
Universe. In addition to the access this award will provide to the Australian
astronomers with mutual interests, the project will result in additional viewing
opportunities using Australian facilities to survey the southern hemisphere sky.