* 9417423
* U.S. JGOFS Data Management
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Michael Bacon, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/1999
* USD 756,590.00

9417423 Livingston By the end of their lifetimes, the U.S. Joint Global Ocean
Flux Study (U.S. JGOFS) and Global Ecosystems Dynamics (GLOBEC) will have
accumulated enormous databases on the biogeochemistry and ecology of the world
ocean. Translating the results of hundreds of experiments and hundreds of
thousands of observations, collected at many places and over more than a decade
of time, into a statement of how the ocean functions as a dominant component in
global ecology is a daunting task. Before the final modeling and synthesis can
be done, the immense data base must be collected and organized, subjected to
quality control checks, and organized for redistribution. That is what the
principal investigator and his colleagues on this grant will do. They will
organize a user-friendly data management system enabling individual U.S. JGOFS-
GLOBEC scientists to submit and retrieve high-quality data rapidly and in a
standardized, well-organized format while these two initiatives are still
underway. Each investigator will then have access to synoptic data collected by
other investigators at any given site or on any given cruise. On a grander scale
and extending beyond the lifetimes of the two initiatives, biogeochemical and
ecological modelers will be able to access pre-linked database for studies of
global- scale ocean phenomena. Data management efforts such as this one are
important for maximizing the scientific benefit derivable from large multi-
investigator, multidisciplinary research projects like U.S. JGOFS and GLOBEC.