* 9417697
* Paleobiology of Decapod Crustaceans from Southern Patagonia:A Link with Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1997
* Rodney Feldmann, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 01/31/1997
* USD 43,500.00

This award supports a US contribution to a collaborative project with Argentine
geologists and paleontologists to study late Cretaceous to early Tertiary marine
fossils in southern Patagonia. The US contribution will focus on decapod
crustaceans (crabs). Studies of Cretaceous an dTertiary decapod crustacean
faunas from several sites in the southern hemisphere has provided clear evidence
of faunal relationships between New Zealand and Antarctica, and less well
understood relationships between those faunas and the decapods of South America.
Recent study of Paleocene decapods from La Pampa and R o Negro provinces,
central Argentina, has suggested affinities of these organisms with tropical and
subtropical Atlantic communities. Thus, the biogeographic boundaries between the
Atlantic and southern circum-Pacific regions must lie within southern Patagonia.
This award will allow the US investigators to join an Argentine field program
that is being planned to study Cretaceous and early Tertiary fossiliferous
marine rocks in remote regions of southwestern Patagonia. This is a unique
opportunity to gather valuable information about the distribution of these crabs
in a remote region. The objectives of this project are: 1) to collect,
describe,a nd classify the decapods crustaceans from Cretaceous and Tertiary
exposures in southern Patagonia; 2) to determine the implications of this fauna
for the paleobiogeographic evolution of the southern high latitudes; and 3) to
assess the significance of these organisms to our understanding of the origin
and evolution of modern decapods. This work is important to creating a
paleoenvironmental framework for interpretation of the important Cretaceous and
Tertiary faunas from Seymour Island, Antarctica.