* 9417933
* RNAs that Bind Small Substrates and Cofactors
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Jack Szostak, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Cecilia A. McIntosh
* 01/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

Rare RNA sequences capable of binding specific ligands can be isolated from
large pools of random sequence molecules. Such ligand binding sequences, known
as aptamers, may be enriched by affinity chromatography, and isolated by
repeated cycles of enrichment and amplification. The P.I. will characterize
several recently isolated aptamers with specificity for common metabolic
substrates and cofactors. He will also isolate new aptamers to additional
substrates and cofactors in order to explore the affinity and specificity with
which chemically diverse ligands can be bound by RNA structures. He will study
the nature of the binding sites and the types of interactions that are important
for binding by chemical and molecular biological means. Structural studies will
be pursued in collaboration with NMR and X-ray crystallography labs. As
functional RNA sequences are isolated, the P.I. will search for occurrences of
these structures in the sequence databases for possible examples of the use of
these structures in biology; the significance of any such occurrences will be
tested genetically. This work will have significant implications for a number of
areas of research. The isolation of RNA structures capable of binding all major
classes of biological substrates and cofactors increases the plausibility of
models in which the evolution of intermediary metabolism occurred at the time of
the RNA world. Studies of the directed evolution of RNA structures from one
binding specificity to another will improve our understanding of the
evolutionary flexibility of RNA, and will eventually allow a comparison of the
abilities of nucleic acids and proteins to evolve new functions, including the
development of new catalysts. The solution of new RNA structures should lead to
a better understanding of the principles of nucleic acid folding. Finally, the
technology developed in the course of this work may have applications in the
areas of molecular recognition, diagnostics, biosensors, and pharmaceuticals.
%%% Many scientists now believe that RNA enzymes played an important role in the
origin and early evolution of life. For this to be true, RNA molecules would
have to be able to speed up a wide range of different chemical reactions; this
in turn implies that RNA molecules would have to be able to bind tightly to a
variety of different small molecules. This lab has recently been able to show
that RNA's can in fact form very specific small molecule binding sites. They
started with a large pool of random RNA sequences, and then used a laboratory
version of Darwinian evolution to select for the rare RNA sequences capable of
binding specific target molecules. Several o of these RNA's will be
characterized to try to understand how they recognize their targets. The lab
also plans to try to understand how they recognize their targets. The lab also
plans to search for possible examples of the use of such RNA structures in
biology. This work will improve our understanding of how RNA carries out its
varied structural and catalytic roles in biology, and may lead to applications
in the areas of molecular recognition, diagnostics, biosensors, and
pharmaceuticals.