* 9417748
* Nitrogen Excretion in Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1999
* Wilmar Salo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 04/30/1999
* USD 331,355.00

9417748 Anderson Most fish remove waste nitrogen (from protein metabolism) as
ammonia, which diffuses across the gills into the water. This is in contrast to
most terrestrial vertebrate animals, which convert ammonia to urea that is
stored and excreted periodically in the urine; the metabolic pathway for this
conversion is called the urea cycle. One group of fishes, the elasmobranchs
(sharks, skates, and rays), synthesize and retain high concentrations of urea in
their tissues for the purpose of maintaining an osmotic balance with the high
salt concentration in sea water to prevent the loss of body water. The urea
cycle in these species is analogous to that in species that normally excrete
urea, but with some significant differences. The enzyme catalyzing the first
reaction in the urea cycle is quite unique. Dr. Anderson has determined the
structure of the gene that expresses this enzyme in order to pursue the proposed
studies in teleost (non-elasmobranch) fishes. This same unique enzyme is found
in the early development of some teleost fishes. The proposed studies will help
to establish if the gene for this enzyme of the urea cycle is present in all
fish and when and how it is expressed. Dr. Anderson's hypothesis is that this
enzyme and the urea cycle are expressed only during embryogenesis (very early
development) in most fish. Ammonia toxicity is the number one problem in the
aquaculture industry. Understanding the mechanism of how expression of the urea
cycle enzymes is regulated in fish may provide an opportunity to genetically
modify fish to express the urea cycle and thus increase tolerance to ammonia.
***