* 9417735
* Sigma Factor Exchange During Bacillus subtilis Sporulation
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1998
* William Haldenwang, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 03/31/1998
* USD 320,000.00

9417735 Haldenwang The occurrence of multiple RNA polymerase specificity
determinants (sigma factors) within an organism represents a powerful mechanism
for gene control. The substitution of one for another of these proteins on core
RNA polymerase can activate or suppress a large number of genes by a single
regulatory event. At least ten unique sigma proteins are present in the
bacteriumBacillus subtilis with four of them synthesized only during a simple
form of differentiation (sporulation) that the bacterium undergoes in response
to nutritional stress. The sporulation-specific sigma factors replace the
vegetative cell sigmas on RNA polymerase and are the chief activators of
sporulation gene expression. In this project the investigator will study the
mechanisms by which sigma factor substitution is regulated to properly time the
program of spore gene expression. Specifically the experiments will address the
processes by which the principal vegetative cell sigma factor (sigmaA) is
excluded form RNA polymerase and a predominnant sporulation-specific sigma
factor (sigmaE) is activated to replace it. Immunological and biochemical
approaches will be undertaken to ask whether sigmaA's activity is masked by
modification or sequestration into an inactivating complex. A detailed genetic
study using localized mutagenesis and suppressor analysis will be used to
discover the developmental signals and factors involved in sigmaE activation.
This experimental approach will be supplemented by biochemical and immunological
experiments, where appropriate. Spore gene control by sigma factor substitution
represents an extremely tractable system in which to study sequential gene
expression in a differentiating cell. The devices thatBacillus employs to
communicate ongoing morphological development to its transcriptional machinery
will likely give insights into how these processes are controlled in a variety
of systems. %%% The means by which cell differentiation is controlled continues
to be a centra l topic in biology and a focus of much research. In this project
the investigator seeks to further our undersandng of this basic process through
studying the devices employed by the bacterium Bacillus subtilis to enable it to
respond to environmental stress by switching form vegetative growth to
sporulation. ***