* 9417579
* NC-REN NSFnet Connection
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Stephen Johnson, MCNC
* Standard Grant
* David A. Staudt
* 09/30/1997
* USD 284,000.00

9417579 Courter The NC-REN, the North Carolina Research and Education Network is
a mid-level network that serves the State of North Carolina. NC-REN is connected
directly to the NSFNET Backbone Network. It is the intention of NC-REN to offer
NSFNET connections to all higher education institutions in North Carolina. This
proposal requests support to establish ten new connections for eight small
private colleges and two community college located throughout the state: Barber
Scotia College, Haywood Community College, Livingstone College, Methodist
College, Montreat-Anderson College, NC Wesleyan College, Peace College, St.
Andrews Presbyterian College, Wilkes Community College, and Wingate College. A
primary goal of NC-REN is to facilitate collaborative projects and sharing of
resources between institution, including those outside the state. NC-REN will
provide operations management and information services as well as provide
appropriate dedicated connections to the ten institutions listed above. The
colleges need greater functionality and network speed to be able to access
supercomputers, libraries, and make file transfers along with being able to
implement a more reliable mail system. Students and faculty research will
benefit from the link. This is also a unique opportunity for the schools to
explore innovative educational resources.