* 9417866
* Excited States in Surface Photochemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Wilson Ho, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/1997
* USD 354,000.00

9417866 The objectives of the proposed research are to probe the energies and
lifetimes of the adsorbate and substrate excited states and to understand the
connection between the excited state relaxation processes and the observed
photochemical products. Two-photon photoemission in the pump-probe configuration
with a tunable laser will be used to measure the energies and lifetimes of the
excited states. A mass spectrometer and a high-resolution electron energy loss
spectrometer provide chemical information on the photochemical products. The
uniquely low work function of Lanthanum hexaboride(100) serves as a model metal
substrate on which molecules with different electron affinities are adsorbed.
The effects of a band gap on the relaxation processes will be investigated on
clean and K-preadsorbed gallium nitride thin films. Studies on the
photochemistry of oxygen coadsorbed with carbon monoxide on platinum and the
photodesorption of carbon monoxide from silicon will be pursued. %%%% Surface
photochemistry is intimately connected to the relaxation of excited states at
the surface. Information on the excited states at surfaces is very scarce,
despite their importance in surface photochemistry. The subsequent microscopic
steps following absorption of photons are largely unknown and at best
conjectured from the distribution of end products. It has been firmly
established that the two most important and widespread mechanisms of surface
photochemistry are: 1. direct electronic excitation of the adsorbed molecules,
and 2. substrate excitation followed by interactions of photogenerated hot
carriers with the adsorbed molecules. The objectives of the proposed research
are to probe the energies and lifetimes of the adsorbate and substrate excited
states and to understand the connection between the excited state relaxation
processes and the observed photochemical products.