* 9417810
* GRGC: Reconstruction of Water Balance Fluctuations During   the  Last Deglaciation Based on Glacial/Lacustrine Systems  in the Western Great Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Fred Phillips, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/1999
* USD 225,852.00

9417810 Phillips The end of the last glaciation was accomplished by a series of
major and abrupt climatic events. It is clear that changes in the atmospheric
transport of water vapor played a key role in the deglacial process. Although
these events apparently resulted in a global secession of glacial conditions,
the details of the sequence of events is poorly known outside the North Atlantic
region. In this project we propose to apply new geochronological and
paleohydrological methods to the interpretation of glacial and lacustrine data
in a single, closed drainage basin: the paleo-Owens River system in the western
Great Basin. We will apply mass spectrometric U/Th and cosmosgenic 36Cl dating
to refining the existing chronology for lacustrine deposits and shorelines in
the terminal basins. This chronology will be compared with one derived from
cosmosgenic 36Cl and carbon-14 for glacial deposits and surfaces in the eastern
Sierra Nevada, at the headwaters of the Owens River. These new and refined
chronologies will allow the sequence of events for the glacial and lacustrine
systems to be compared with each other. The combined sequence will then be
quantitatively interpreted in terms of climatic driving forces, using a
transient numerical energy and mass balance model. Finally, the reconstructed
climatic history can be compared with recent ice core and marine sediment
records of global conditions to assess how the global events were reflected by
changes in temperature and water vapor transport in a continental setting.