* 9417851
* Natural Thermoluminescence Levels in Antarctic Meteorites   and Related Studies
* O/D,OPP
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Derek Sears, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 03/31/1998
* USD 106,663.00

This award supports a project to characterize Antarctic meteorites by measuring
natural thermoluminescense (TL) levels. This work is part of the basic
characterization program carried out on all Antarctic meteorites and is used to
determine future research avenues on the Antarctic meteorites. This program will
measure the natural TL levels in as many Antarctic meteorites as possible and
will make the data rapidly available to the community. The data will be used to
determine pairing (fragmentation), orbital distribution, estimate approximate
terrestrial ages of meteorites, and to identify meteorites with unusual thermal
and radiation histories or those that are mineralogically unusual. To enhance
the value of these data, studies are also conducted on natural TL profiles in
other extraterrestrial samples (large meteorites and lunar samples) and
comparisons are made between TL data and cosmogenic radionuclide abundances.
Over the course of this award, the natural TL laboratory will (1) continue
systematic measurement of the natural TL of all suitable Antarctic samples as
part of their preliminary screening, (2) examine pairing and natural TL
distributions for individual Antarctic sites, where several very large pairing
groups may exist, (3) continue the detailed compilation of pairing data, and (4)
perform theoretical and experimental studies to use in the interpretation of TL
data in Antarctic meteorites, including additional studies of modern falls,
lunar samples, and of finds from other regions of the world.