* 9417103
* Hole Burning Studies of Electric Fields in Organic Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Bryan Kohler, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 11/30/1997
* USD 428,900.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. Bryan E. Kohler of the University of California at Riverside will engage
in a study of electric fields in organic solids using the technique of hole
burning spectroscopy. Previous successes for measuring and interpreting the
effects of external electric fields on transition energies are the bases for the
proposed research to map out the internal electric fields at a molecular site in
a molecular system. Specifically, the effets of electric fields on linear
polyene excitation energy, and the effect of external pressure on the effect of
electric field on linear polyene excitation energy, will be determined for a
number of different guest-host systems where the geometry can be calculated by
standard molecular dynamics techniques. More complex systems will become
available for investigation with the refinement of the interpretative model
through a combination of measurement and theoretical simulation. Most
theoretical models used for the determination of internal electric fields assume
the point dipole approximation, which is found to be only qualitatively
successful. The proposed investigations are designed to experimentally measure
the fields using polyene doped alkane crystals. Much of our understanding of
electronic structure of organic solid solutions is derived from optical
spectroscopy. The amount of unambiguous information that can be extracted from a
given optical spectrum is increased if the ensemble under investigation is made
more homogeneous. This may be done by one of several methods of high resolution
site selective spectroscopy, e.g., hole burning spectroscopy. With this
technique resolution enhancements by a factor of up to one hundred thousand have
been achieved. This in turn has allowed the investigations of relaxation
processes such as, for example, optical dephasing, and spectral diffusion;
energy transfer in organic solids; the characterization of photophysical
processes in biological systems; applications of organic polymers to optical
data storage and holography; and others. The research to be conducted in this
project will contribute to a better understanding of optical processes in
diverse solid organic systems and may lead to improved materials used in optical
and electronic devices.