* 9417963
* (GRGC) Timing and Climatic Implications of a Lake-Level     Oscillation, Lake Chewaucan, Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Dorothy Freidel, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 04/30/1996
* USD 24,039.00

9417963 Freidel Rapid and extreme climatic fluctuations have occurred commonly
during the past 250 thousand years, although infrequently during the Holocene.
Information regarding the mechanisms that controlled past climatic fluctuations
and the hydraulic response to such events will aid in understanding possible
future climate change. This study will investigate the timing and climatic
significance of an oscillation in lake level of two paleolake sub-basins that
occurred during the Pleistocene-Holocene transition of Lake Chewaucan, south-
central Oregon. Two hypotheses will be tested concerning possible causes of the
lake-level oscillation: (1) The oscillation was caused by increased
precipitation during a brief period when the mean position of the jet stream
core was located over the study area, as it migrated north following the rapidly
melting Pleistocene ice sheets, sometime after 13,800 yrs B.P. (radiocarbon
years before present) but before 11,000 yrs. B.P. (2) The oscillation was caused
by cooler temperatures and increased effective moisture associated with the
Younger Dryas reversal in deglaciation, after 11,000 yrs B.P. but before 10,000
yrs B.P. Information to test these two hypotheses will be obtained by excavating
across a fan of sediment that was deposited along the shore of one sub-basin
lake when an adjacent sub-basin lake filled and overflowed across the sill
between the two Lakes. Radiocarbon- datable materials will be collected in the
fan sediments, as well as along the shorelines associated with the1 overflow in
both sub- basins. This study is part of on-going research to investigate the
past climate of the Pacific Northwest during the Late Pleistocene and Holocene,
in order to learn more about the relationship between climate, atmospheric
circulation patterns, and surface hydrology during a period of rapid climate
change.