* 9417188
* Postdoctoral Research in Physics at the Tata Institute      of Fundamental Research in Bombay, India
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Michael Bisset, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/1995
* USD 5,000.00

9417188 Bisset Description: This project supports Dr. Michael Bisset, a young
U.S. physicist who received his Ph.D. in 1994 from the University of Hawaii, to
spend one year as a postdoctoral scholar at the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research (TIFR) in Bombay, India. During his stay at the TIFR he will be engaged
in research on collider physics phenomenology, and in particular in the search
for particles of supersymmetry at hadron colliders. He will be collaborating
with Dr. D.P. Roy of the Theoretical Physics Group at the TIFR. Scope: The U.S.
and the Indian scientists are interested in the same area, namely the
phenomonology of Higgs and superparticle search at supercolliders. While the
Indian scientist is a leading figure in the field, the U.S. scientist has
contributed significantly to the field, during his Ph.D. studies. The
opportunity offered for Dr. Bisset to work at one of India's best renowned
institutes, and with scientists of international reputation is likely to further
his scientific career, and to enhance his research capabilities. This
opportunity should also increase the potential for future Indo-U.S. scientific
collaboration in the field of theoretical physics. This project meets the
objectives of the Division of International Programs. ***