* 9417473
* Dissertation Research:  The Social Organization of          Production at K'axob, Belize during the Late Formative and  Classic Periods
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Jeremy Sabloff, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1996
* USD 11,840.00

Sabloff Under the direction of Dr. Jeremy Sabloff, Ms. H. Hope Henderson will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological
excavation at the Mayan site of K'axob which is located in lowland Belize. The
site includes components from both the Formative and Classic periods and
therefore documents the transition from egalitarian to larger more complex
stratified society. The residential portion of K'axob includes a large number of
mounds which represent both single and multifamily dwellings. Ms. Henderson will
excavate a sample which includes each type and each time period. On the basis of
the lithic remains, the ceramics and the faunal materials she will reconstruct
the range of activities conducted. This will permit her to determine variability
within each time period and to examine change across time. In recent years
archaeologists have learned that most activities in prehistoric societies were
conducted on a household level and that these units provided the main productive
units. They have hypothesized how household activity changes as societies
increase in size and grow more complex. Some theories postulate specialization
across households while other archaeologists have suggested that the reverse
occurs and the number of roles taken within households increases. Given K'axob's
time span and the ease with households can be excavated, the site provides an
excellent context to examine this question. This research is important for
several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
will yield new insight into the development of complex societies and will assist
in the training of a promising young scientist.