* 9417370
* Hybrid Control Systems:  Theory and Application
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Pravin Varaiya, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/1997
* USD 254,000.00

Varaiya 9417370 Hybrid systems are models in which a discrete event system
supervises a continuous time system. These models are especially appropriate for
describing situations in which a computer or human symbol-processing system
provides high level supervision of a continuous process. One example is an
automated vehicle whose maneuvers are planned and coordinated at a logical
level, but they are executed using continuous feedback laws that determine the
throttle, braking and steering actuator signals. Another example is our daily
use of "common sense" rules to successfully control sophisticated processes such
as microwave ovens, automobiles and copying machines, without understanding the
physical and engineering principles that govern the behavior of those processes.
The study of hybrid systems is beginning to receive serious attention, but our
knowledge is very poor compared with what we know about continuous time systems
and discrete event systems, considered in isolation. The primary goal of this
proposal is to extend our understanding of decidable or computable hybrid
systems. Informally, a hybrid system is decidable if important questions of its
behavior can be answered by finite algorithms. Specifically, we propose to: 1.
Extend the class of decidable hybrid systems; 2. Design finite decision
algorithms that attenuate the "state space explosion" problem; 3. Apply those
algorithms to problems of control of automated vehicles. Our initial plan for
meeting these objectives are as follows. First, we will extend the range of
nonlinear dynamics of the decidable hybrid models and determine the class of
hybrid systems these models can approximate. Second, we will attempt to
formalize the user-directed refinement procedure which succeeded in containing
the state space explosion. Third, we shall continue to verify the design of
hybrid system controllers for automated vehicles both as a test of our algor
ithms and as a guide to theory development. ***