* 9417210
* RUI:  A Study of the Mass Function of Stars in the Rho      Ophiuchi Infrared Stellar Cluster
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Bruce Wilking, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 03/31/1998
* USD 62,938.00

9417210 Wilking The study of the mass function of a young, embedded cluster of
stars in the Galaxy is the most direct way to investigate the origin of stellar
masses. The young stellar objects in molecular clouds in our Galaxy are strongly
bound and have not had time to wander far from their birthplace. Interpretation
of the observed peaks or low-mass cut-offs in the mass function of a young
stellar cluster can reteal a possible characteristic or minimum mass for star
formation which can be related to the local and global environment. However,
infrared wavelength observations are needed to probe through the obscuring dust
in these regions and new techniques must be developed to estimate stellar masses
for pre-main-sequence stars from infrared data alone. Infrared wavelength array
detectors will be used to observe a flux-limited sample of sources emitting at 2
micron wavelengths in the Rho Ophiuchi cloud core. A scheme will be devised to
identify a subset of this sample which is in a T Tauri star type phase of
evolution, for which the stellar photospheres can be corrected for obscuration
effects, and using recent theoretical models for a given stellar age, the
luminosities and masses of the stars can be derived. To supplement this
observational sample of stars, new and sensitive X-ray, Hydrogen alpha, and
radio wavelength continuum observational surveys will be used to identify young
stars with little or no infrared excess. The goal is to produce a mass function
for 100-150 young stellar objects in the cloud. As a check on the scheme that is
planned, infrared wavelength spectroscopic observations of stars will be used to
determine the spectral types of the stars and to independently estimate the ages
and masses of the starq. In the course of the investigations, other important
issues concerning the Rho Ophiuchi cloud core will be considered; such as the
number of low-luminosity embedded sources, the three-dimensional distribution of
young stars, the freque ncy of binary stars, and the degree of Hydrogen alpha
wavelength emission variability in pre-main-sequence stars. Ultimately, the mass
functions of several star-forming regions with distinct physical environments
will be compared to see if significant differences do arise when comparing the
different star forming regions.