* 9417356
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Use of Cellulose Binding  and Degrading Enzymes for Surface Analysis and Structural   Modification of Cellulosic Fiber Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Karl-Erik Eriksson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 03/31/1998
* USD 11,616.00

9417356 Eriksson This award supports a two-year cooperative research project
between Dr. Karl-Erik Eriksson of the University of Georgia and Dr. Masahiro
Samejima of the University of Tokyo. The objective of this cooperative research
project is to construct a new enzymatic system for cellulose surface analysis.
The investigators intend to exploit two characteristics for cellulose surface
analysis: high specificity for substrate and high catalytic activity. It will
also be necessary to further characterize specific antibodies for
immunolocalization studies as well as to examine the practical application of
cellobiose dehydrogenases (CDH) to celluloses from a variety of industrial
processes. This proposal brings together research scientists from two countries
working on the biochemical properties of wood. Dr. Eriksson s group has
extensive knowledge and experience in biochemistry of cellulolytic enzymes
including CDH. The team led by Dr. Samejima has worked on enzymatic surface
analysis of cellulose and pulp. By combining these expertises, the two groups
can achieve a deeper understanding and more rapid progress than can either group
alone. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its
exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international
collaboration. ***