* 9417054
* Taphonomy and Paleoecological Significance of a Living      Fossil:  The Lingulid Brachiopod  Glottidia palmeri
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Karl Flessa, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1998
* USD 95,301.00

Flessa 9417054 The taphonomy and ecology of a living fossil, the lingulid
brachiopod Glottidia palmeri, will be examined. Lingulid brachiopods are common
and paleoecologically significant fossils in nearshore deposits ranging from the
Cambrian to the Recent. Their occurrence is often taken to indicate shallow--
water, variable salinity environments. Large populations of the lingulid
Glottidia inhabit the intertidal flats of the Colorado River delta. These
populations present a rare opportunity to examine the environmental factors
controlling this species, the significance of growth--banding in the shell, and
the post-mortem processes that affect the preservation and paleoenvironmental
interpretation of lingulid fossils. Samples will be collected from along two
shore-perpendicular transects: one from mudflats, the other from sandflats.
These data will be used to estimate the correspondence between live populations
and their shelly remains, and the effects of substrate on morphology and
taphonomy. Taphonomic analysis will reveal the extent to which taphonomic
features can be used as paleoenvironmental indicators. Field and laboratory
experiments will assess the patterns and rates of post-mortem alteration during
burial and transport. The environmental significance of disturbance--rings in
the shells will be evaluated both by monitoring individual growth and through
correlating banding patterns with meteorological and tidal records. Patterns of
seasonality or predation recorded in lingulid growth--banding can prove useful
in studies of fossil lingulids. This study will be the first comprehensive study
of the taphonomy of a representative of this common and geologically useful
group. Our results will affect existing interpretations of lingulid--bearing
rocks and will greatly enhance the paleoenvironmental utility of fossils of this
long-ranging order.