* 9417088
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Pinniped Evolution,       Systematics and Biogeography in the North Pacific
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Annalisa Berta, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 12/31/2000
* USD 25,814.00

9417088 Archibald This project represents a collaborative research effort by San
Diego State University, the Natural History Museum (Chiba) and the National
Science Museum (Tokyo) in Japan. The project will focus on morphological study
of well preserved skulls and limb elements of fossil pinnipeds (seals, sea lions
and walruses) from Japan in rock deposits that span the late Oligocene through
the Pleistocene (27-.5 million years ago). Of special interest are basal
pinnipeds ancestral to the major groups of living pinnipeds. These archaic
fossil pinnipeds from Japan are second only to those in the US in number and
diversity of species, making them of critical importance for studies of early
pinniped evolution. By comparative study of these specimens in Japan and the US,
the investigators wil be able to test current hypotheses of the evolutionary
relationships among pinnipeds and their biogeographic history in the North
Pacific. Project funding will enable a leading expert in the US and a graduate
student to study fossil pinnipeds housed in various museum collections in Japan
over the next three years. *** This project in systematic biology and
paleontology will enable the initiation of collaborative work between colleagues
in Japan and the US. This valuable collaboration represents a necessary first
step toward the development of a comprehensive assesssment of pinniped origins
and diversification in the North Pacific.