* 9417700
* Simple Models of the Earthquake Cycle Compared with         Seismological Observations
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1995,02/29/1996
* Bruce Shaw, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Whitcomb
* 02/29/1996
* USD 76,842.00

9417700 Shaw This research involves the development and characterization of
dynamical earthquake models which produce complex sequences of events from a
frictional instability. Earthquakes are complex in many ways. The slip in an
individual event, the distribution of sizes of events, when they occur, and
where they occur, are just some of the complexities to understand. A fundamental
open question is what is the source of the complexity. Recent work on simple
models has shown that a remarkable degree of complexity can be generated by the
self-organization of repeated ruptures on a fault. A particularly interesting
class of models are deterministic, dynamical models in which all the complexity
is generated by a frictional instability. There are two basic goals in this
research. One is to develop models of earthquake faults that produce realistic
behavior across the whole range of timescales in the earthquake cycle, from
rupture, to foreshocks and aftershocks, to intermediate term changes, and on to
steady state averages beyond the loading cycle. The second goal is to develop
better ways of quantifying the complex behavior that is seen in the models; this
helps to better understand what is happening in the models, to compare the
behavior produced by different models, and most importantly, to compare with the
behavior seen in the earth, and perhaps to suggest new ways of looking at the
data from the earth. This research is a component of the National Earthquake
Hazard Reduction Program. *** ??