* 9417459
* Electronic Structure of Semiconductor and Main Group Cluster
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Krishnan Balasubramanian, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 01/31/1998
* USD 139,003.00

Professor Krishnan Balasubramanian at the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Arizona State University, is supported by a grant from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program at NSF for theoretical studies
of the electronic structure of molecules and small clusters. Accurate ab initio
wavefunctions are being obtained for several systems, all of which contain semi-
conductor or other main group elements. The systems being studied fall into
three groups: (1) Mixed III-V, IV-V, and II-VI clusters with up to 9 atoms. (2)
Pure clusters with up to 8 atoms formed from group III, IV, and V elements. And,
(3) hydrides and halides of group III and V elements. In this work relativistic
effects are explicitly treated because they are needed in order to be able to
obtain accurate energetic and geometric properties when the systems studied
contain heavy atoms. Examples of heavy atoms treated in this work are gallium,
indium, lead, and selenium. Relativistic effective core potentials are used to
represent the electrons in the atomic cores in order to make calculations of the
wavefunctions tractable, especially for the larger clusters. In order to obtain
the required accuracy, relativistic complete active space self-consistent field
wavefunctions are further correlated using multi-reference configuration
interaction and relativistic configuration interaction methods. The work under
this grant is directed toward resolving questions about a wide range of
properties of semi-conductor and main group clusters containing heavy atoms.
Clusters constitute a vital bridge between molecules and solids. However, they
also exhibit interesting and technologically useful properties in their own
right. In this project, the systems studied have relevance for semi-conductor
processing and for chemical vapor deposition.