* 9417573
* Genetic and molecular characterization of proteins essential for DNA repair and recombination in Saccharomyces cervisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Robert Ramirez, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1995
* USD 35,000.00

9417573 Ramirez The primary objectives of this research starter grant are to
clone and characterize the genes REC1 and REC3 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae that
are thought function in the overlapping processes of mitotic recombination and
DNA repair. rec1- and rec3- strains have been shown to be defective in mitotic
recombination and possess temperature sensitive phenotypes rec 1- is a ts-lethal
at 39{SYMBOL 176 \f "Symbol"}, while both rec1- and rec3- are ts with respect to
mitotic recombination, X-ray sensitivity and sporulation at 36{SYMBOL 176 \f
"Symbol"}. Additionally, both these mutations define distinct genes which map to
chromosome 11. A yeast genomic library will be used to transform rec1- and rec3-
strains of S. cerevisiae in order to clone the corresponding wild-type genes by
complementation. Previous studies aimed at cloning the REC3 gene resulted in the
isolation of a suppressor of rec3-, RPD3. (RPD3 is thought to encode pleiotropic
transcriptional regulator encoded on chromosome XIV). Hence, we will focus our
efforts on characterizing clones which complement the rec1- and rec3- mutations
and which specifically hybridize to chromosome Vll DNA on a Southern blot of
electrophoretically separated whole chromosomes. To accelarate cloning of REC3,
we will also test a genetic clone that maps closely to the REC3 locus (i.e., a
clone containing genetic material adjacent to the AR02 gene) to determine if it
contains sequences which complement the rec3- defect. Once cloned, the REC1 and
REC3 clones will be sequenced. The resulting genetic sequence will be compared
to other sequences genetic sequence data bases to gain insight into the function
of the proteins encoded by these genes. Cloned REC1 and REC3 DNA will also be
used to create null mutations to provide definitive mapping information, to
determine lethality, and to assay gene expression by Northern hybridization.
Since we have found that RPD3 suppresses the rec3- defect, an additional objecti
ve of this proposal is to determine the possible role played by RPD3 in
recombination. This will be tested by testing the sensitivity of rpd- strains to
ionizing radiation, methyl methane sulfonate (MMS), and measuring rates of
recombination. %%% The information generated frorm, this basic research project
will contribute to our knowledge of the regulation and/or enzymology of
recombination and DNA repair in eukaryotes. ***