* 9417829
* PM10 Source Apportionment at McMurdo Station, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Douglas Lowenthal, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/1999
* USD 406,130.00

Abstract This study will attempt to determine the contributions of natural and
anthropogenic sources to particulate matter less than ten microns (PM10) aerosol
at McMurdo Station during the austral summer. The natural sources are expected
to include geological dust, much of what may be resuspended by activities at the
station, seasalt aerosol, and marine-biogenic sulfate. The contribution of Mt.
Erebus is expected to be small. The principal anthropogenic sources of PM10 are
expected to be combustion-elated emissions from six diesel generators, diesel
heat furnaces, and diesel- and gasoline-powered support vehicles. The emissions
from each of the major sources will be sampled and their trace element, ion, and
elemental and organic carbon composition characterized. Concentrations of the
chemical components will also be determined in 48-hour duration PM10 aerosol
samples collected continuously for two months in each of two consecutive summers
in central McMurdo and at one upwind site (8-Site). The individual source
contributions to PM10 will be determined by Chemical Mass Balance receptor
modeling using the ambient sample concentrations and the source composition
profiles. The results of this study will provide guidance for emission reduction
strategies at this and other Antarctic research stations.