* 9417276
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Indigenous Innovation     and Industrialization:  Organizational Learning in Cross-   National Perspective
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* William Lazonick, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 27,000.00

9417276 Lazonick This award supports a three-year cooperative research project
between Dr. William Lazonick of the University of Massachusetts-Lowell and Dr.
Kazuo Wada of the University of Tokyo. The objective of this cooperative
research project is to study indigenous innovation in materials, machines, and
intersectoral technology transfer as well as the role of national technology
policy in promoting and facilitating indigenous innovation. By comparing the
experiences of Great Britain, the United States, and Japan, the collaborators
will analyze the distinctive national characteristics of technology in the
transition from textiles to automobiles. This project expects to make the
analysis of successful industrial development in advanced economies relevant to
the experiences of less developed and developing economies. This proposal brings
together research scientists from two countries working on the biochemical
properties of wood. Dr. Eriksson s group has extensive knowledge and experience
in biochemistry of cellulolytic enzymes including CDH. The team led by Dr.
Samejima has worked on enzymatic surface analysis of cellulose and pulp. By
combining these expertises, the two groups can achieve a deeper understanding
and more rapid progress than can either group alone. Therefore, this proposal
fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of
scientific knowledge through an international collaboration. ***