* 9417020
* U.S.-Australia Workshop on Critical Issues in High          Performance Wear Resistant Films/Sydney, Australia/February 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1995
* Anthony Perry, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 07/31/1995
* USD 39,000.00

9417020 Perry This award will support the participation of twelve U. S.
investigators to take part in a workshop in the area of high performance, wear
resistant films. The meeting will be held in Sydney, Australia in February 1995.
The American coordinator is Dr. Anthony J. Perry, Director for Research and
Technology at ISM Technologies, Inc. located in San Diego, California. The
Australian organizer is Dr. Philip J. Martin, Research Scientist with the
Surface Engineering Group at the CSIRO National Measurement Laboratory in
Sydney. The workshop is being conducted under the U.S.-Australia Cooperative
Science Program and support in Australia is provided through the Department of
Industry, Science and Technology (DIST). Hard films made by Physical Vapor
Deposition (PVD) improve both wear and corrosion resistance of surfaces. The
critical issues are the preparation and treatment of the film-substrate
interface for maximum adhesion, the formation of dense, mechanically robust
films, and the measurement and control of film properties. The workshop will
bring together leading researchers in the significant areas of broad based PVD
studies. The U.S. participants to the workshop will bring expertise in the
measurement and control of film mechanical properties; the Australian side has
considerable expertise in PVD technology in sputtering and cathodic arc
evaporation. It is anticipated that workshop manuscripts will be published in
connection with the scientific journal Surface Coatings and Technology.