* 9417428
* Process Analysis and Fluxes for Electroslag Refining of     Intermetallics, Indo-U.S. Cooperative Project, Award in     Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* P Rao, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/1997
* USD 12,258.00

9417428 Rao Description: This project supports collaboration between Dr. Ramana
G. Reddy, Department of Chemical and Metallurgical Engineering at the University
of Nevada at Reno, and Dr. P. Krishna Rao, Department of Metallurgical
Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) in Bombay. The topic
relates to the factors controlling the properties of intermetallic aluminides
during processing from the primary metals. The properties of superalloys depend
to a large extent on the segregation phenomena associated with solidification.
Electroslag refining (ESR) is one method for controlling the parameters of the
melt and therefore the final product. The focus of this project is on
investigating the effect of ESR processing on the microstructure and tensile
properties of structure intermetallics. The scientists propose to: 1. evaluate,
collate, and generate the physico chemical data for molten slags for ESR of
intermetallic aluminides; and 2. assess the efficiency and reliability of
various existing mathematical models and where necessary develop new models to
predict the physico chemical properties of fluxes. The scientists at Reno will
work on data-base generation, and the development of mathematical models, while
scientists at Bombay will process the various intermetallic aluminides and study
the structural-property correlation. Scope: This project brings two
complementary capabilities, at the U. of Nevada, Reno, and at the IIT, Bombay,
to conduct a fundamental chemical engineering study, with the objective of
understanding the relationship between the slag conditions and properties of the
resulting alloys. The work is likely to lead to developing better models for
these relationships that can be used for design and processing of various
materials. The collaboration should be beneficial to the U.S. and India and
should advance scientific knowledge in the area of metallurgy in general. The
project meets INT's objectives well. ***