* 9417480
* U.S.-Taiwan Cooperative Research: Distribution Patterns of  Dissolved and Particulate Trace Elements in the East China  Sea
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Yuan-Hui Li, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 02/28/1999
* USD 50,205.00

9417480 Li This is a three year cooperative research project proposed by Drs.
Yuan -Hui Li and Christopher Measures, University of Hawaii, and Professors T.
M. Hsiung and Su-Cheng Pai, Taiwan National University. This proposal requests
funds to carry out oceanographic research to understand the seasonal
distribution patterns of the trace metals in the East China Sea and Kuroshio-
Current System. This study is a part of the international Joint Global Ocean
Flux (JGOF) Experiments. The goal of this study is to improve the understanding
of the sources, sinks, and transport processes of the trace elements in this
region as well as their contribution to the Western Pacific. The investigators
are highly regarded for their analytical abilities for oceanographic analysis
and their contribution to ocean research. The proposed collaboration is mutually
beneficial. The U.S. principal investigators will benefit from the access and
the ship and data support from the Taiwan oceanographic surveys in a unique part
of the Pacific Ocean where little or no trace element data are available, while
Taiwan scientists will gain data on trace metal distribution with which they can
greatly improve the understanding of the dynamics of regional seas. This is an
excellent project, which addresses an important problem in chemical
oceanography. This project is jointly supported by the NSF and the Taiwan
National Science Council (NSC), which provides major support for ship and
laboratory operations in Taiwan. The modest support from the NSF in this case is
extensively leveraged by the NSC.