* 9417306
* Copolymerization in Dispersed Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1997
* F. Joseph Schork, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1997
* USD 207,440.00

Abstract - Poehlein - 9417306 Emulsion and dispersion polymerization are free
radical processes that are used to produce polymeric dispersions with particle
diameters that can vary from less than 100 nanometers (nm) to more than 10
microns. Commercial products that involve these polymer dispersions can be found
in areas such as surface coating, adhesives, flocculants, bioactive materials,
analytical column packing, engineering plastic tougheners, and additives in
other products. A primary driving force for the increased utilization of
emulsion polymers has been environmentally motivated - replacement of organic
solvent based systems with those having water as the continuous phase. This
increased interest in polymeric dispersions or latexes has resulted in more
research aimed at understanding and controlling the complex phenomena that occur
in multiphase polymerization reactions. Recent work at Georgia Tech has involved
the study of emulsion copolymerization with comonomers which have significantly
different solubilities in the water phase. This work will be continued in order
to better understand the nature of the oligomeric radicals formed in the water
phase and how they influence the surface characteristics of the polymer
particles and the structure of the copolymer molecules formed. The preliminary
studies will be expanded by varying the size and concentration of seed
particles, the influence of chain transfer agents and the solvency of the
continuous phase for the monomer pairs. This work will be expanded into the area
of dispersion polymerization in an effort to quantify the reaction rates in both
phases and how these rates influence competitive particle growth and the mix of
copolymer molecules produced. Batch, semi-batch and continuous stirred-tank
reactors will be used. Another area of research is related to free radical graft
reactions. This will focus on the fundamentals of graft reaction kinetics in
solution and emulsion systems. Both oil- and water-soluble initiator s in
emulsion polymerization will be tried to examine the influence of non-uniform
radical distribution on grafting in latex particles.