* 9417836
* Collaborative Research:  A Molecular Isotope Perspective on the Processes of Organic Matter Preservation in Fossils
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Stephen Macko, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/1998
* USD 140,222.00

9417836 Macko Interpretations of the stable isotope record of residual organic
matter in fossils requires a fundamental appreciation of the formation and
transformation of the elemental pools of carbon and nitrogen during
biosynthesis, diagenesis and preservation. A series of experiments are proposed
to elucidate the effects of biosynthesis and diagenesis on the molecular and
stable isotope composition of organic matter in biogenic minerals and sediments.
Growth studies involving two species of planktonic foraminifera (Orbulina
universa and Globigerina bulloides) will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Howard Spero to compare the stable carbon and nitrogen isotope compositions of
amino acid constituents of the shell protein to those of the diet. In addition
to potentially identifying essential amino acids, the magnitude of isotope
fractionations associated with trophic interactions will be assessed. A
realistic assessment of biogenic signals from fossils requires an appraisal of
the limits of isotope fractionation that can occur during diagenesis and the
development of unambiguous criteria for evaluating the possible exchange of
components with the preserving matrix. Simulation experiments are planned to
evaluate the effects of diagenesis on the stable isotope composition of organic
matter in fossils and sediments. Specifically, attempts will be made to assess
the magnitudes of stable carbon and nitrogen isotope fractionations resulting
from hydrolysis and humification. With respect to preservation, a major concern
continues to be the ability to distinguish indigenous organic compounds from
exogenous overprints. The further development of gas
chromatography/combustion/isotope ratio mass spectrometry (GC/C/IRMS) for stable
nitrogen isotope analysis of amino acid enantiomers in fossils will provide an
independent method for verifying the stable carbon isotope analysis of amino
acid enantiomers, the development of GC/C/IRMS for stable nitrogen isotope
analysis is dependent upon e stablishing isotopically reproducible combustion
techniques capable of oxidation and reduction of halogenated derivatives of
amino acids. An important test of this method involves molecular stable carbon
and nitrogen isotope analysis of D- and L- enantiomers of individual amino acids
in Cretaceous age samples, which will include dinosaur eggs and associated
embryonic skeletal components. These rare samples are being provided from sites
in North America and China by Dr. Dale Russell and Dr. Jack Horner. If the
isotopic signals verify indigeneity, it may be possible to use molecular stable
isotopes to establish the identities and trophic levels of the adults that
produced the eggs. This study will also provide, to the best of our knowledge,
the first direct comparison of the distribution and stable isotope composition
of amino acid constituents of shell and bone from the same fossil organisms. An
additional sample set of Cretaceous age dinosaurs from the western Sahara is
also being provided by Dale Russell for a detailed investigation of organic
matter preservation and paleoecology.