* 9417209
* RUI:  Optical and Infrared Observations of Herbig-Haro      Objects
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/1995,01/31/2001
* Richard Schwartz, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 01/31/2001
* USD 108,518.00

9417209 Schwartz A comprehensive program of optical and infrared observations of
the shock wave structure of Herbig-Haro objects (stars) will be carried out. A
basic aim of the study is to understand the dynamics of high-velocity jets from
young stellar objects and the manner in which the high velocity material
transfers momentum and energy to the ambient molecular medium. The fundamental
hypothesis is that molecular hydrogen emission is produced by low-velocity
shocks via entrainment by high-velocity jet material and/or in the extended
wings of the bow shocks in the working surface of a jet penetrating into the
molecular medium. In both cases, molecular hydrogen is accelerated to
intermediate velocities between those found for optical emission lines in the
high-temperature Herbig-Haro shocks and in the more widespread carbon monoxide
(C0) outflows in which there is momentum coupling. A major unresolved issue
concerns the relation of the optical shocks, which involve shock velocities
greater than about 50 km per second, and the shocks which produce molecular
hydrogen emission which would require shock velocities less than about 30 km per
second. In many cases, the optical shocks appear to be coincident spatially with
the molecular shocks, yet it is unlikely that both the optical and the molecular
hydrogen emission arise from a common postshock gas. High spatial resolution
images of selected Herbig-Haro objects will be obtained in area of the spectrum
of the optical emission lines of Hydrogen alpha and SII and in the infrared
lines of molecular hydrogen and FeII . The FeII /(molecular hydrogen) line
intensity ratio can be used to infer the depletion of gas phase heavy elements
onto grains, and thus to determine whether the gas being shocked is jet gas or
ambient medium gas. The SII /(Hydrogen alpha) ratio is a measure of excitation
of the gas, and in general the emission from molecular hydrogen is expected to
be strongest in or near structures with the largest SII /(Hydrogen alpha)
intensity ratio. For two optically obscured Herbig-Haro outflows, the 1.64
micron wavelength line of FeII will be used to trace the "optical" component of
the shocks. The acquisition of high resolution spectral data in both the optical
and infrared portions of the spectrum will be used to examine the radial
velocities and velocity dispersions of the postshock gas. The data should
resolve the question of whether the low-excitation optical emission arises from
the same postshock gas as the emission from molecular hydrogen. The spatially-
resolved spectra will also permit a discrimination between magnetic precursor
and bow shock models. In the larger context of star formation, the
interpretations of the observations to be carried out will lend considerable
insight into the question of the origin of bipolar molecular outflows from young
stellar objects. Recent theoretical models suggest that high-velocity jets
provide the driving power for the more widespread low-velocity molecular
outflows seen in C0 emission. The study of low-excitation Herbig-Haro objects
and emission from molecular hydrogen found at the boundaries of the high and
low-velocity flows can be used to estimate the efficiency with which energy and
momentum are transferred to the ambient gas.