* 9417468
* Processing of Controlled-Microstructure Nanosized Dielectric and Electrostrictive Powders:   The Effect of Final Grain  Size on Phase Transitions and Dielectric Properties
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Toivo Kodas, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1998
* USD 262,408.00

9417468 Datye The primary objective of this research is to study the effects of
grain size on the phase transitions and dielectric properties of important
dielectric and electrostrictive materials including: barium titanate, lead
titanate, and lead magnesium niobate. The research is being performed jointly
between the Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Microengineered
Ceramics at the University of New Mexico and the Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for Ceramics at Rutgers University. Precursor powders, with
controlled microstructures and chemical purity and nanosized dimensions, are
being produced via a novel aerosol decomposition process at the University of
New Mexico. The powders are characterized using spectroscopy, microscopy, and
surface area techniques. Processing techniques being employed include dry
pressing, hot isostatic pressing, and doctor blade tape casting. Densification
behavior will be studied using dilatometry. The dielectric properties are being
characterized also. This joint effort is a natural collaboration , as it
utilizes the strengths of each institution, and results in more than the sum of
the output for each working separately. The research is very timely for the
electronic ceramics industry. The results of this research will be of use to
manufacturers of thin film multilayer electrostatic/piezoelectric devices.
Additional funding is provided to augment the ongoing research program and
provided for a membership in the Center with funds provided by the U.S.
Department of Air Force, Kirtland AFB. The Program Manager recommends the
University of New Mexico be awarded $75,000 for 36 months through a "TIE"
project with Rutgers University. An additional $29,448 is recommended for one
year with funds provided by the U.S. Department of Air Force, Kirtland, AFB.