* 9417589
* International Conference on BioIron(ICBI) April 16-21, 1995 in Asheville, North Carolina
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Elizabeth Theil, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 03/31/1996
* USD 3,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F |- 覺 C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l " 覺 " 覺 ! " # $ % & ' ( ) * F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; F G + ^_ PWV t u tB + G W RPj j D T V t F & * F W r F tB F 9
|9 D( u- ^ & G & G D: ~ " Z ^ & G & G + ^_ PSWV ^ ^ ? u h !j h + 7j h h ! ^ ^ ?
u Metabolic Biochemistry Panel Summary PRIVATE Edward DeMoll MCB 9418430 The PI
has presented data from a series of excellent preliminary studies on the
biosynthesis of biotin. This is a difficult research topic, but one of great
importance to the general field of micromolecular biosynthesis. The proposal
contains a very interesting series of experiments which should provide a
reasonable amount of new data on mechanisms of sulfur insertion into biotin. The
panel expressed some concern about the intense competition in this field and the
situation that the PI may find himself doing work already completed by others.
Nevertheless, the research plan is sound and clearly presented. The panel placed
the proposal into the "excellent" category and strongly recommended funding.
....()()))()() <Z : phoenix @ S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( Oh +' 0 $ H
l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Terry Lee McCrimmon Robert Uffen @ @ @ $ 覺 @
q Microsoft Word 6.0 4 e = e # D D D D D \ f D c p t t t t t t t j Z j E T 3 t t
t t t t t p t t t t t t . 6 t t t Metabolic Biochemistry Panel Summary PRIVATE
Edward DeMoll MCB 9418430 The PI has presented data from a series of excellent
preliminary studies on the biosynthesis of biotin. This is a difficult research
topic, but one of great importance to the general field of micromolecular
biosynthesis. The proposal contains a very interesting series of experiments
which should provide a reasonable amount of new data on mechanisms of sulfur
insertion into biotin. The panel expressed some concern about the intense
competition in this field and the situation that the PI may find himself doing
work already completed by others. Nevertheless, the research plan is sound and
clearly presented. The panel placed the proposal into the "excellent" category
and strongly recommended funding. ....()()))()() <Z : phoenix @ % & . / 0 1 " #
j