* 9417724
* U.S.-Australia Joint Workshop on Recent Advances in Atomic  and Molecular Physics/ Canberra, Australia / February 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1995
* Don Madison, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 12/31/1995
* USD 34,200.00

9417724 Madison This award will support the participation of ten U.S. scientists
to take part in a workshop in the area of Atomic, Molecular and Optical (AMO)
Physics. The workshop will be held in Canberra, Australia in mid-February 1995.
The American coordinator is Prof. Donald H. Madison from the Department of
Physics at the University of Missouri - Rolla. The Australian organizer is Dr.
Stephen J. Buckman from the Electron Physics Group at the Australian National
University in Canberra. The workshop is being conducted under the U.S.-Australia
Cooperative Science Program and support in Australia primarily is provided
through the Department of Industry, Science and Technology (DIST). The workshop
will bring together a wide diversity of expertise from both countries for the
purpose of discussing the current status and future directions for research in
the area of AMO physics. The expected outcome is the identification of important
problems that need to be solved and the formation of collaborations which will
address these problems. Among the topics to be considered at the workshop are
the following: Fundamental Scattering Processes, Laser Assisted Collisions and
Laser Spectroscopy, Cluster Spectroscopy and Collisions, Photoelectron
Spectroscopy and Surface/Solid Studies. The proceedings of the meeting will be
published in a special issue of the Australian Journal of Physics.