* 9417199
* U.S.-Japan Seminar:  Physics of Highly Confined and         Extremely Diluted Condensed Matter Systems: Characterizationand Spectroscopy/Sept 18-22, 1995/Kanagawa, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* William Yen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Randall Soderquist
* 03/31/1996
* USD 22,000.00

9417199 Yen This award supports the participation of eleven U.S. scientists in a
U.S.-Japan seminar on Highly Confined and Extremely Diluted Condensed Matter
Systems, to be held at Kanagawa, Japan from September 18-22, 1995. The co-
organizers ape Dr. William Yen of the University of Georgia and Professor Eiichi
Hanamura of the University of Tokyo. This seminar is focus on the theory,
characterization, spectroscopy of highly confined and extremely diluted
condensed matter systems. Topics to be covered include ultrasensitive
spectroscopies, single molecule/center spectroscopy, low dimensional systems and
nanostructures, and near field microscopies. The seminar will foster the type of
contact between Japanese and U.S. scientists that can be expected to have
significant influence on the future course of the field. The proposed
participants and observers have been selected for their past contributions and
current activity in the field and the meeting can be expected to produce
concrete plans for future cooperation and exchange. Therefore, this proposal
fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of
scientific knowledge through an international collaboration. ***