* 9418652
* Analysis of New Drill Core Samples from within the ChicxclubImpact Basin
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Virgil Sharpton, Lunar and Planetary Institute
* Continuing grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/1998
* USD 119,848.00

9418652 Sharpton Recent analyses of drill core samples and geophysical data have
demonstrated that the buried Chicxulub structure in northern Yucatan is the site
of a major asteroid or comet strike 65 million years ago at the time of the
Cretaceous-Tertiary (KT) mass extinctions. The crater produced by this event is
believed to be between 165 km and 280 km in diameter. As such, it is one of the
largest impact structures recognized on Earth and its study offers important
contributions to the understanding of large-body impact and to disciplines
ranging from research of carbonate platforms to the evolution of the continental
crust. Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) has undertaken a shallow
drilling program to recover continuous core samples of the basin fill deposits
and underlying impact breccias. More than 1000 m of core have been recovered
from five wells located along the flanks of the basin. These samples will permit
a more precise estimate of the size and shape of the basin, and will constrain
the rate and nature of its infilling through the Cenozoic. Samples of the
underlying breccias are critical for estimating the types and proportions of
rocks involved in this impact event and evaluating its environmental effects.
These samples also provide an important resource for additional investigations
and will be available to the international science community. This project
focuses on two scientific goals: (1) Derive the basic Cenozoic stratigraphic and
paleoenvironmental framework for the Chicxulub basin based on these new core
samples, augmenting the existing information in Pemex cores and well logs. This
information will provide important new insights into the shape of the Chicxulub
basin and the geological and paleontological evolution of the southern Gulf of
Mexico and Yucatan Platform. (2) Evaluate impact breccias from two core
localities in terms of lithological characteristics, depths, evidence of
reworking, et c. Each of these sites corresponds to a proposed basin rim
location. Consequently, how deep these breccias are located below the present
surface and what they are composed of will provide tests for current basin
models including size and shape of the final basin and the original excavation
crater. These breccias will also aid in constraining the proportions of target
materials excavated and heated in the Chicxulub impact event and help constrain
the magnitudes of potential killing mechanisms such as ocean acidification,
global cooling, or greenhouse warming due to vaporization of sulfates or
carbonates. ***