* 9418183
* Changes in Paleosol Morphology and Geochemistry Associated  with Mid-Paleozoic Afforestation and Decline in Atmospheric pCO2
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Claudia Mora, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/1999
* USD 185,647.00

9418183 Mora The proposed research investigates changes in paleosol and
pedogenic carbonate morphology and geochemistry preserved during the Siluro-
Devonian time period, a period of rapid evolution and diversification of
terrestrial ecosystems. Land plant evolution led to progressively more robust
plant size and deeper rooting capabilities and more widespread afforestation of
the land surface. The development and increasing abundance of vascular land
plants may have contributed to increased weathering rates and draw down of
atmospheric pCO2 from very high levels in the middle Paleozoic to near-present
day levels in the Permo-Carboniferous. The proposed research will evaluate the
hypothesis that afforestation, increased weathering profiles and also
contributed to changes in the stable isotope composition of pedogenic carbonate.
The proposed study will emphasize morphological and geochemical analysis of
Siluro-Devonian paleosols from ten stratigraphic units (chiefly red-beds)
exposed in outcrop in the U.S. and maritime Canada Appalachians. Detailed macro-
and micromorphological characterization of the paleosols, estimation of paleosol
thickness, mass balance evaluation of soil major and trace element geochemistry
and stable isotopic analyses of pedogenic carbonates phases will be combined
with existing paleontological information for these units to characterize the
"pedological signature" of afforestation of the land surface by vascular plants.
The results will permit a detailed evaluation of atmospheric pCO2 during this
period of profound change using Cerling's soil carbonate paleobarometer. The
results will contribute to our understanding of the distribution and
preservation of paleosols and pedogenic carbonate deposits and their usefulness
(or limitations) as monitors of paleoenvironments and paleoclimate. The results
are relevant to models which predict the response of the Earth's lithosphere and
biosphere to significant changes in atmospheric pCO2.