* 9418750
* In Vitro and In Vivo Functions of the XET-Related TCH4      Protein
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/2002
* Janet Braam, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Sharman D. O'Neill
* 01/31/2002
* USD 616,522.00

9418750 Braam The cell wall is a fundamental structure in plant cells that
controls cellular shape and integrity and plays a role in signal transduction.
Yet the involvement of cell wall modifications in plant morphogenesis remains
largely unknown. Proteins that modify cell wall polysaccharides would be
expected to regulate cell wall structure and thus likely play critical roles in
plant morphogenesis. Recently, an Arabidopsis gene, TCH4, has been shown to be
significantly related to xyloglucan endotransglycosylase (XET) enzymes. Because
the TCH4 gene is strongly and rapidly upregulated in expression in response to
environmental stimuli, the possibility exists that the physilogical relevance of
this regulation of gene expression is to elicit cell wall modifications and thus
the developmental changes that occur following environmental stimulation. The
focus of the work supported is to investigate the function(s) of the TCH4 gene
product and to ascertain the roles of this protein in cell wall modifications
and plant development. Purified TCH4 protein will be assayed for XET and related
enzyme activities. Because it has been proposed that XET may cause cell wall
loosening and cell expansion, TCH4 will be tested for the ability to cause
extension of isolated plant hypocotyl segments. Transgenic plants that over-
express or under-express the TCH4 gene will be generated to determine the
physiological and developmental effects of altering TCH4 expression in vivo.
Antibodies specific for the TCH4 gene product will be used to localize the
protein in plant tissues during development, and to determine its subcellular
location. Finally, because TCH4 is a member of a closely related gene family,
similar detailed analyses of the functions and regulation of the other family
members will be initiated.