* 9418018
* U.S.-Australia Joint Workshop:  Recruitment and Population  Dynamics of Coral Reef Fishes/Townsville, Australia/July    1995
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Mark Hixon, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 03/31/1996
* USD 26,120.00

9418018 Hixon This award will support the participation of ten American marine
ecologists at a workshop entitled "The Recruitment and Population Dynamics of
Coral Reef Fishes" to be held near Townsville, Queensland, Australia, July 10
through 14, 1995. The American organizer is Dr. Mark A. Hixon from the
Department of Zoology at Oregon State University. The Australian principal
organizer is Dr. Geoffrey P. Jones from the Department of Marine Biology at the
James Cook University of North Queensland. Both the United States and Australia
have become increasingly concerned about the health of their coral-reef
resources. Coral-reef fishes have become recognized as ideal model systems for
furthering insight into the dynamics of marine fish populations. The idea that
populations of coral-reef fishes are recruitment limited by larval supply has
become both popular and increasingly controversial. Researchers from both
countries have become polarized in their thinking about recruitment limitation,
resulting in a conceptual stalemate that seems to be inhibiting scientific
progress. By bringing together top investigators from both countries, including
a selected few from Canada, Japan, France and the United Kingdom, the workshop
will seek to begin the resolution of this controversy. Among the topics to be
considered are appropriate spatial scales for reef fish studies, competition
effects on survivorship, predation and density-dependence, recruitment
limitation, and the management and conservation of reef fisheries. Australian
support for this workshop is provided by the Australian Department of Industry,
Science and Technology (DIST).