* 9418765
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Advanced Computing and Communication
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1994,02/28/2001
* Kishor Trivedi, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 02/28/2001
* USD 1,148,054.00

9418765 Trivedi The North Carolina State University Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center for Advanced Computing and Communication is becoming
a multi-university Center with the addition of a research site at Duke
University. Four companies are becoming part of the Center inconjunction with
Duke University becoming a research site. The research agenda of the new multi-
site Center will address high- speed networking, reliable and fault-tolerant
systems, digital communication systems, distributed systems, and algorithms and
digital image processing algorithms. Additional funding to augment the ongoing
research program and to obtain a membership in the Center is being provided by
the U.S. Department of Army and National Security Agency. The researchers are
well qualified to perform the Center's research program. The Center is being co-
funded with Dr. Yechelzkel Zalcstein in the Division of Computer and Computation
Research (CCR). The Program Manager recommends Duke University be awarded:
$100,000 for the first year of a five-year continuing award (cost shared with
the I/UCRC Program and the CCR Division); $30,023 for one year with funds
provided by the U.S. Department of Army; and $30,074 for one year with funds
provided by the National Security Agency. Near the end of each 12-month period
the Program Manager and/or the Division Director of the Engineering Education
Center Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of renewal
criteria requirements, including the following: 1) the extent to which the
industry/university interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which the
support base is developing; and 3) the extent to which a robust research program
is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend
support for the next period od this continuing award.