* 9418671
* Sediment Transport by Glaciers on Unconsolidated Beds: A    Laboratory Study of Entrainment Mechanisms and Bed          Lubrication
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Neal Iverson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1998
* USD 94,643.00

9418671 Iverson Under certain conditions water-saturated sediment may, in
effect, lubricate glacier beds. Such sediment, therefore, may have contributed
to fast glacier flow and ice sheet instability during the Pleistocene. There is
at present insufficient understanding of entrainment mechanisms to define the
conditions under which subglacial sediment either persists as a lubricating
layer, or is eroded. Similarly, the flow mechanism of glaciers on unconsolidated
beds is not well known. Although flow is usually assumed to arise as a result of
bed deformation, continuous measurements of bed deformation beneath some modern
glaciers suggest that under sufficiently low effective pressures, the bed does
not deform, and motion, instead, is focused at the glacier sole. To study both
sediment entrainment and the coupling between glaciers and unconsolidated beds,
a series of experiments is proposed with an existing apparatus that allows
hypotheses to be rigorously tested under unusually well-controlled conditions. A
sediment bed will be slid at a steady speed beneath a fixed block of temperate
ice. One goal will be to study intrusion of ice into the sediment pore space by
regelation. Regelation of ice through porous media has been studied successfully
in previous experiments with the apparatus and may be the primary mechanism by
which glaciers entrain basal debris. The principal uncertainty is the effect of
sliding, which may impede intrusion. Intrusion rates well therefore be measured
as a function of sliding speed. Post-experimental measurements of stable
isotopes in debris-laden ice will be compared with isotopic data from modern
glaciers. A second goal will be to develop an empirical sliding law for ice
motion over sediment. In particular, the shear stress that ice exerts on the
sediment bed will be measured as a function of effective pressure and sliding
speed. The range of conditions under which sliding is favored over bed
deformation, therefore, will be elucidated. Post-exper imental observations will
also allow the relative importance of ploughing and sliding to be assessed under
a range of conditions.