* 9418155
* Isolation of DIMBOA Biosynthetic Genes from Maize
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Mary-Dell Chilton, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* A Berry
* 01/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9418155 Chilton The long-term goal of this project is to permit manipulation of
genes for biosynthesis of DIMBOA and DIBOA, pesticidal metabolites of maize, to
enhance protection of maize and possibly other crops. To undertake such
manipulation, all genes in the pathway, especially regulatory genes, will be
identified and cloned. Screening of M2 seed from ems-mutagenized pollen has
already identified two mutations in enzymes of the pathway and one regulatory
gene. The regulatory gene is being tagged by transposon mutagenesis in
preparation for cloning. Such a regulatory gene could be of direct use in maize
breeding. Screening of ems- mutagenized maize will continue. Mutants, inducers,
repressors or varying expression during development will enable isolation of
"high DIMBOA" and "low DIMBOA" mRNA to be used in cDNA cloning. Genes encoding
at least three steps involving cytochrome P-450 oxygenases will be cloned by a
PCR-based strategy using a redundant primer deduced from the conserved haem
binding site of P450s. Transposon tagging will also be used to facilitate
isolation of genes of the two pathway steps not involving cytochrome P450.
Cloning of pathway and regulatory genes will lead to knowledge permitting
alteration of expression of genes that affect the level, timing and plant parts
in which DIMBOA is produced. This should enable better protection of maize and
reduction in use of synthetic pesticides. %%% DIMBOA is a low molecular weight
metabolite synthesized at the time of germination of corn seed. It protects the
young seedling from predation by most insects, bacteria and fungi. The internal
concentration of this natural pesticide decreases in the seedling after the
second week so that DIMBOA is no longer capable of deterring attack by predators
and pathogens such as corn smut, stalk rot, corn rootworm, European corn borer
and corn earworm. It is during the period of declining DIMBOA synthesis in the
plant that application of external, Synth etic fungicides and insecticides is
required to give high grain yield. This project will identify and isolate the
genes controlling biosynthesis of DIBMOA using mutants blocked in various steps
of the biosynthetic pathway as well as DIMBOA-deficient mutants and DIMBOA-
overproducing mutants. Characterization of the genes controlling DIMBOA
synthesis may permit development of strategies to alter the concentration of
DIMBOA, the location of DIMBOA within the plant, or the life-stage during which
DIMBOA concentration is high in order to better protect the corn crop with its
own internal defense, and to reduce the amount of synthetic chemicals sprayed in
the field. ***