* 9418715
* Desmin-Membrane Interactions in Skeletal Muscle
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Michael Klymkowsky, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1997
* USD 130,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9418715 Kymkowsky In vertebrate embryos, blocks of skeletal
muscle cells are attached to one another through a specialized junction, known
as the intersomite junction. This junction is structurally and functionally
similar to the junction that connects muscle to tendon and bone in adult
animals. Desmin-type intermediate filaments are structural components of muscle
cells and are found concentrated at the intersomite junction. Studies from our
lab indicate that desmin filaments play a critical role in maintaining the
attachment of myofibrils to the muscle cell membrane at the intersomite
junction. Although it is clear that desmin can interact with the muscle cell
membrane, the molecules involved in this interaction are unknown. In the course
of previous NSF funded work, we used the frog Xenopus to study the organization
of desmin. We determined the N-terminal head region of desmin mediates the
interaction between desmin and the muscle cell membrane. In the studies proposed
here we will attempt to identify muscle membrane proteins that bind desmin. We
will use the recently devised, and high ly sensitive, yeast two-hybrid system.
In these studies, the head domain of desmin will be used to screen a cDNA
library enriched in muscle components. cDNA isolated in this screen will be
characterized to determine whether they are in fact expressed in the muscle
cells of the early embryo. Proteins that they encode will be studies to
determine their localization and function. %%% To carry out their mechanical
functions intermediate filaments generally must interact with membranes. Yet,
the molecular details of intermediate filament-membrane interactions are poorly
understood. By identifying proteins that mediate the interaction of desmin
filaments with muscle cell membranes, we will be able to define, at the
molecular level, interactions critical to normal muscle cell organization and
function. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( -
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9418715 Shirley Parker Shirley Parker @ E @ @ E @
F # Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; ; e 3 e j j j j j j j @ 1 " q T 7 @ j @ j j j j ~ j j
j j : 9418715 Kymkowsky In vertebrate embryos, blocks of skeletal muscle cells
are attached to one another through a specialized junction, known as the
intersomite junction. This junction is structurally and functionally similar to
the junction that connects muscle to tendon and bone in adult animals. Desmin-
type intermediate filaments are structural components of muscle cells and are
found concentrated at the intersomite junction. Studies from our lab indicate
that desmin filaments play a critical role in maintaining the attachment of
myofibrils to the muscle cell mem