* 9418662
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Collagen Stability andInteractions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Barbara Brodsky, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 08/31/1998
* USD 25,300.00

94118662 Brodsky This award will support travel expenses and communication
costs, over a three year period, to enable Dr. Barbara Brodsky from the
Department of Biochemistry at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in
Piscataway, New Jersey, to conduct cooperative research with Dr. John A. M.
Ramshaw of the CSIRO Department of Biomolecular Engineering in Parkville,
Victoria, Australia. The work will focus on defining the role specific amino
acids found in collagen have in the biological function of the protein. The
collagen triple-helix is the main protein in all connective tissues, and
collagen containing materials are becoming important as biomaterials, as well as
in the more traditional leather and gelatin industries. The principal
investigators are collaborating on a model peptide approach to determine the
effect of specific sequences on triple-helix stability and dynamics, to identify
the structural features of functional regions in collagen, and to design
collagen-like peptides which can form ordered arrays. The interests, expertise
and facilities available through this collaboration are complementary to the
proposed project. The visit by Dr. Ramshaw to the laboratory in New Jersey is
funded by the Australian Department of Industry, Science and Technology (DIST)
under the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program.