* 9418442
* Antarctic Marine Archaebacteria; Biological Properties and  Ecological Significance
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Edward DeLong, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/1998
* USD 344,823.00

Delong 9418442 Archaebacteria are an evolutionarily distinct group of
prokaryotes. Until very recently, archaebacteria were thought to thrive only in
a few disparate niches, consisting of either very hot, very salty, or strictly
anaerobic environments. Recent studies show that pelagic marine archaebacteria
can constitute a major fraction (&gt;30%) of Antarctic prokaryote biomass in
coastal waters off Palmer Station, Antarctica. Since surface waters off Palmer
Station have yielded the highest biomass estimates of pelagic archaebacteria to
date, this area is uniquely suited for studing these unusual microorganisms. The
main objective of the proposed work is to characterize the ecological
significance, distribution and aboundance, and the metabolic and physiological
activities, of pelagic marine archaebacteria in coastal waters off Anvers
Island, Antarctica. Molecular biological techniques will be used to quantify the
spatial and temporal abundance and variability of Antarctic marine
archaebacterial species. Highly sensitive, semiautomated methods will be
developed to quantify archaebacterial group and species-specific ribosomal RNA
and DNA in field samples. To better understand their physiological activities,
methods employing "kingdom-specific" metabolic inhibitors will be used to
estimate the contribution of pelagic archaebacteria to total prokaryotic
heterotrophic activity. The project will provide information on the seasonal and
spatial variability of pelagic Antarctic archaebacteria, which can comprise a
major fraction of Antarctic coastal prokarytoic biomass. Finally, this project
will also enhance understanding of the biogeochemical activities and ecological
roles of these abundant "archaeoplankton" in coastal Antarctic waters, and may
provide clues as to their specific adaptations to the unique Antarctic
environment.