* 9418458
* Geochemical Investigation of Paleocene-Eocene Seafloor      Volcanism in the Oregon Coast Range:  Products of the       Yellowstone Hot Spot?
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Douglas Pyle, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 01/31/1997
* USD 120,900.00

9418458 Pyle Recent geophysical data suggest the Oregon Coast Range reaches
thicknesses as great as 30 km and its seismic structure is similar to oceanic
plateau, flood basalt provinces. Preliminary He analyses of olivine from an OCR
picrite indicate a deep mantle plume source. The 3He/4He ratios of an OCR
picrite crushed in vacuo (R/Ra &gt; 13.0) overlaps values found for Snake River
Plain lavas and more recent products of the Yellowstone hotspot. Fusion
experiments on this sample prove that the high 3He/4He ratio is not cosmogenic,
and is a signature of the mantle source of the picrite. Voluminous volcanism and
high 3He/4He ratios are intriguing evidence that the Yellowstone hospot
contributed to OCR volcanism, and therefore, has been active since at least 64
Ma. To further test this hypothesis, we propose a combined Sr, Nd, Pb, Ar, He,
and O isotopic study of the OCR basalts. We will focus on volcanic rocks from
the Roseburg and Siletz River formations to: 1) determine the mantle source
composition for these OCR basalts and evaluate their relationship to the
Yellowstone plume; 2) constrain the age and duration of volcanism within the
OCR. We will also complete a detailed major and trace element study of the OCR
to evaluate regional melting conditions (depth and amount) to understand the
spatial distributions of possible tectonic settings.