* 9418147
* Calibration of Hydrologic Models Using Multiobjectives      and Visualization Techiques
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Hoshin Gupta, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/1998
* USD 224,420.00

9418147 Sorooshian The reliance on land surface hydrologic models as tools in
the study of hydroclimatology is increasing as hydrologists and climatologists
examine emerging problems and exploit new data sources. However, hydrologic
models can only be as reliable as model assumptions, inputs, and parameter
estimates. Field measurements, prior information, and calibration are three
techniques used in parameter estimation. While the use of field measurements is
gaining in importance, experience has shown that as a practical matter,
virtually all models require calibration of at least some parameters. However,
extensive experience with model calibration has indicated that it is very often
not possible to find a preferred (best) solution. That is, for a given model and
calibration data, there are usually sizable regions of the parameter space that
appear to give roughly equivalent results. This can gives rise to questions
about the reliability and realism of the model, and the confidence in its
predictions. The primary objective of this research is to develop techniques for
calibrating hydrologic models that improve the prospects for finding preferred
solutions. Major objectives are to: 1. Recognize the inherently multi-objective
nature of the hydrologic model calibration problem and pose the calibration
procedure in the framework of multiple objectives. 2. Explore innovative ways of
using multi-criteria, data sub-sets (that emphasize different hydrologic
processes or different aspect of model performance), measures of information
content and global search algorithms in identifying the non-inferior solution
space and preferred solutions. 3. On test cases, determine if a satisfactory and
reliable estimate of the non-inferior solution space can be identified, from
which a preferred parameter estimate (or set of estimates) can be selected.
Develop techniques for estimating confidence intervals on paramete rs and
simulated variable, taking into account the non-inferior solution space and data
errors. Gain insights into the roles that data error, model error, and parameter
interaction play in producing non-inferior solutions. 4. Determine, for test
cases, how preferred solutions can be reliably, effectively and efficiently
obtained through a systematic computer based exploration of the non-inferior
solution space. Implement a systematic workstation based calibration stratigy
and compare it with existing single-objective strategies. This research will
focus its attention on the emerging generation of land surface hydrologic models
being considered as viable land-surface soil-vegetation-atmosphere transfer
schemes (SVATS); such models are receiving widespread attention among
hydrologists and hydrolmeteorologists but the calibration issues surrounding
them have yet to receive systematic attention. It is expected that the proposed
techniques will help hydrologists build more reliable and more realistic models.
In terms of general scientific knowledge, it is expected that the research will
result in insights into problems of hydrologic model identification can
calibration, particularly in the area of reliability and uniqueness.