* 9418424
* Collaborative Research:  Global Phytogeography of the Early/Late Carboniferous Boundary Based on Spores and Pollen
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1995,02/29/2000
* Anne Raymond, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/29/2000
* USD 142,000.00

9418424 Raymond Paleophytogeography, the study of the distribution of ancient
land plants, helps us to understand the nature of ancient climate change and how
climate change affects land-plant diversity. The data for paleophytogeography
studies come from two sources: macrofloral assemblages (accumulations of fossil
leaves, stems, seeds and other plant parts) and spore-pollen assemblages.
Compared to macrofloral assemblages, spore-pollen assemblages are easier to
assign to narrow intervals of geologic time, have higher generic and species
diversity, and may derive from a wider range of habitats (particularly more arid
habitats). These factors suggest that spore-pollen data should yield detailed
and accurate phytogeographies; however studies of spore-pollen and macrofloral
phytogeography for the same interval seldom produce congruent results. This
proposal seeks funding to compile a mid-Carboniferous (333 to 315 Ma) spore-
pollen database, identify and apply appropriate multivariate statistical
techniques (including the Raup-Crick probabilistic similarity index, cluster
analysis, and ordination techniques such as multidimensional scaling and
reciprocal averaging analysis) for the phytogeographic analysis of spore-pollen
data, and to complete phytogeographic studies of the mid-Carboniferous
Eumorphoceras-, Homoceras-, Reticuloceras-, and Cancelloceras (G1)-goniatite
zones (Namurian A through C). Completion of this work will require detailed
knowledge of North American spore-pollen assemblages during the mid-
Carboniferous. Thus, spore-pollen assemblages from the mid-Carboniferous of
Kentucky, Alabama, Utah, and perhaps Nevada will be collected, studied, and
described as a part of this project. This will result in an improved spore-
pollen biostratigraphic zonation for North America during the mid-Carboniferous,
and improved global correlation for this interval. The study interval includes
the Early/Late Caroniferous boundary and coincides with the Laurussia-Gondwana
collision as well as glacial onset in the Southern Hemisphere, high-latitude
cooling in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, and perhaps mid-latitude and
equatorial climate change as well. The results will establish the nature and
timing of equatorial and mid-latitude climate change, yield insight into the
development of ever-wet, ever-warm equatorial and dry mid-latitude floral
communities as a result of glacial onset and/or continental collision, and
document the effect of glaciation and continental collision on land-plant
diversity.