* 9418474
* Role of Intermediate Filaments in Particle Motion in Fish   Melanophores
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Vladimir Rodionov, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1998
* USD 259,780.00

Boisy 9418474 The cytoplasm of cells is organized by means of a dynamic
filamentous framework called the cytoskeleton. This framework may be likened to
a rail network along which move many kinds of cellular "cargo." The "cargo"
moves along the rail network after loading onto transport vehicles equivalent to
"flatbeds" or "tanker cars" and these are moved along the rail network by
engines of various kinds. The problem in understanding the organization of the
cytoplasm is to figure out the molecular workings of this "rail network." The
network in cells is composed of three kinds of filamentous "rails" actin
filaments, microtubules, and intermediate filaments. Some of the motors and
"cargo" for actin filaments and microtubules but the role of intermediate
filaments remain a mystery. Special cells in the skin of fish provide a
particularly favorably system in which to investigate the role of these
intermediate filaments. These cells display spectacular cytoplasmic traffic;
thousands of granules of pigment can be induced to move rapidly and
synchronously either inwards towards the center of the cell or outwards toward
the periphery in response to a hormonal stimulus. This system will be used to
test whether intermediate filaments participate in the movement of granules. %%%
This study is important because will address a fundamental mystery about he
organization of the cytoplasm and the traffic which takes place within it. This
study will be the first to investigate the potential role of intermediate
filaments in the translocation and specific positioning of cellular components.
Such process necessarily entail molecular motors and have the potential to
affect numerous cellular functions including uptake and secretion of materials
from cells, positioning of organelles and segregation of genetic material at the
time of cell division. ***