* 9418632
* Synthesis, Organization and Function of Ribonucleic Acid
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Robert Perry, Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* Charles D. Liarakos
* 01/31/1996
* USD 160,000.00

9418632 Perry The overall goal of this research is to elucidate molecular
mechanisms that govern gene expression in eukaryotic cells. The proposed studies
are aimed at understanding the role of an interesting DNA-binding protein, CHD1,
in the determination of higher-order chromatin structure and the regulation of
gene activity. CHD1 possesses certain structural features (a chromodomain and an
ATPase/helicase domain), which relate it to other groups of chromatin-associated
proteins that have been implicated in transcriptional regulation. A broad
spectrum of genetic and biochemical techniques will be used, including DNA
transfection and microinjection experiments in a variety of cultured cells,
immunofluorescence analyses, protein purification by column chromatography, gene
cloning and sequencing, DNA-, RNA- and immuno-blotting, primer extension and
nucleaseprotection assays, electrophoretic-mobility shift and DNA footprint
analyses, and the production of wild-type and mutant proteins in bacteria. The
studies will be carried out with mammalian cells, Drosophila and yeast. The
results of these studies should contribute substantially to our knowledge of
gene regulation by defining factors that determine the accessibility of genes to
the transcriptional apparatus and that help mediate cell-cycle dependent changes
in chromatin condensation. Although an impressive body of facts pertaining to
gene regulation has accumulated over the past several years, the general
problems being addressed here remain largely unsolved. %%% The overall goal of
this research is to elucidate molecular mechanisms that govern gene expression
in eukaryotic cells. The proposed studies are aimed at understanding the role of
an interesting DNA-binding protein, CHD1, in the determination of higher-order
chromatin structure and the regulation of gene activity, CHD1 possesses certain
structural features which relate it to other groups of chromatin-associated
proteins that have been implicated in transcriptional regulation. A broad
spectrum of genetic and biochemical investigative techniques will be used and
studies will be carried out with mammalian cells, Drosophila and yeast. Although
an impressive body of facts pertaining to gene regulation has accumulated over
the past several years, the general problems being addressed here remain largely
unsolved. The results of these studies should contribute substantially to our
knowledge of gene regulation by defining factors that determine the
accessibility of genes to the transcriptional apparatus and that help mediate
cell-cycle dependent changes in chromatin structure. *** ??