* 9418205
* Instruments for Fluorescence and Video-Enhanced Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Wendy Boss, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 06/30/1997
* USD 47,943.00

This proposal requests funds for equipment for fluorescence and video-enhanced
microscopy to include a cooled charged coupled device (CCD) camera and imaging
system for detecting low intensity fluorescence, a fluorescence microscope
equipped with infinity corrected and differential interference contrast optics,
an image processing system and Newvicon camera for video-enhanced microscopy,
and a micromanipulator and piezoelectric microinjector for use with plant cells.
This is a joint proposal by 7 investigator (5 major users, Wendy F. Boss,
Rebecca S. Boston, Mark Conkling, Dominique Robertson, Ron Sederoff and Ross
Whetten, and 2 minor users, Tim Petty and Kelly Tatchell) from four departments
and two colleges. To our knowledge there is no other cooled CCD camera on campus
and there is no comparable equipment for high resolution video-enhanced
microscopy in the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences or the College of
Forestry Resources. The principle investigators study basic cellular processes
and signal transduction using a combination of molecular, genetic, biochemical,
and microscopic techniques. The research projects include signal transduction
(Boss), protein trafficking and packaging to storage vesicles in maize (Boston),
root-specific gene expression and nematode resistance (Conkling), viral
pathogenesis (Robertson and Petty), cell division and cell cycle control
(Tatchell), and lignin biosynthesis, fungal disease resistance and genetic
mapping in loblolly pine (Sederoff and Whetten). For the above studies we need
to visualize fluorescent proteins within living cells, to monitor changes in
protein distribution and cellular morphology over time, and to resolve
fluorescent markers on metaphase chromosomes. Our research is currently limited
by the sensitivity and resolution of existing microscopic equipment. The Botany
Department has made a commitment to the facility by providing space and
technical support. The equipment will be under the s upervision of Dr. Wendy F.
Boss and Mr. Dana Moxley, and it will be housed in a central location. The
requested equipment will contribute significantly to our ongoing efforts to
strengthen cell biology at North Carolina State University.