* 9418608
* The Organic Matrix Associated With Calcium Oxalate          Formation In Vitis Labrusca
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Mary Webb, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1999
* USD 245,000.00

Webb MCB-9418608 The major form of biomineralization in plants is crystal
formation in the plant vacuole. These crystals may have a function in mineral
sequestration, plant defense, and structural protection of plant tissues.
Vacuolar crystals form in specific cell types, idioblasts, under precise
developmental and environmental control. The major thrust of this proposal is to
determine the protein components of the organic matrix, the cellular matrix
which may function by providing a template for mineral deposition, by nucleating
crystal growth, by forming the chamber in which mineralization occurs, or by
influencing the cellular environment in which the crystals form. In grape
leaves, a vacuolar membrane encloses each individual calcium oxalate crystal.
The membrane is part of the organic matrix. This work will identify and
characterize the proteins on this membrane and the genes which encode these
proteins. The cellular disposition and abundance of these proteins in crystal
idioblasts and surrounding cells will be determined with electron and light
microscopy. To complement studies on the nature of these membrane components,
the developmental context of crystal formation will be followed. In this way,
the key components of the membrane contribution to the organic matrix can be
identified in relation the initiation and growth of crystals. %%%
Biomineralization, the biologically controlled formation of mineral deposits, is
crucial to the survival of many organisms. The formation of bones, teeth, and
shells in animals are important forms of biomineralization whose functions are
well-recognized. Information about the organic matrix provided for crystal
growth in biological organisms is being applied to materials science, where
organic macromolecules identified in biomineralization systems can be used to
manipulate the construction of thin films and other crystalline materials.
Research may identify novel calcium-binding proteins, crystal nucleating s
ubstances, or other molecules that promote or inhibit crystal growth, with
potentially wide application to medicine, ecology, engineering, and ceramics.
%%%