* 9418011
* Effects of Reactive Flow & Faults in Carbonate-Hosted Lead- Zinc Ore Formations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Grant Garven, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/1998
* USD 108,138.00

Garven 9418011 This proposal seeks to increase our basic understanding of the
role of large-scale groundwater flow in geologic processes such as stratabound
ore formation in carbonate rocks. Ancient limestone-dolostone aquifers in North
America contain significant ore deposits of lead, zinc, barite, and fluorite
that appear to have origins related to the migration of deep groundwater over
10's and 100's of kilometers. A large ore district has been the focus of
exploration and intensive geologic research over the past two decades: The Ozark
Dome in southeast Missouri. Although much has been revealed about the geologic
characteristics and conditions of ore formation in this setting, much
controversy still surrounds issues such as the geochemical reactions causing ore
mineralization, the actual pathways for brine migration (aquifers or faults),
and the mechanisms causing migration of the ore-forming fluids. Geological and
geochemical data are now abundant for this carbonate-hosted ore district. Recent
work aimed at understanding hydrogeologic processes at the basin-scale has shown
that the ores in Missouri were probably formed by deep groundwater moving updip
through foreland basins and rifts adjacent to the Ozark Dome (Garven et al.,
1993), but the actual flow patterns have yet to be mapped at smaller scales
(L<10km). Many geochemical models have been conjectured for ore deposition in
the Southeast Missouri district, yet no mechanisms have been tested in a
framework that includes the effects of fluid flow and heat transport. A primary
objective of this proposal is to use recently developed hydrogeologic-
geochemical modeling tools to explore and compare the paleohydrogeology of ore
formation in the Southeast Missouri. Prior NSF support of the Hydrogeology
Program at Johns Hopkins University has resulted in the development of a new
three-dimensional finite element code for modeling coupled groundwater and heat
transport in sedimentary systems. Additional research at JHU has resulted i n
the development of a new two-dimensional, reactive flow computer code that can
be used to simulate groundwater chemistry, patterns of rock alteration, and ore
mineralization over geologic time. The proposal project will apply theses tools
to test conceptual models of ore formation in Southeast Missouri.