* 9418357
* Metacenter Alliance to Expand Industrial and Scientific     Parallel Processing
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Charles Bender, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Richard Hirsh
* 09/30/1998
* USD 840,794.00

9418357 Bender The aim of this proposal is to develop a comprehensive technology
transfer program for integrating scalable parallel computing into US and
strategic academic research. Industry has very little knowledge of, or
experience with, parallel computing and even in academia, parallel computing
knowledge and expertise if limited. The Metacenter Regional Alliance formed by
this proposal will demonstrate the advantages of parallel processing and how to
take advantage of this technology. The Alliance will: - develop and/or convert
key industrial and scientific applications to parallel and heterogeneous
computing environments in collaboration with industrial partners and academic
users. - take advantage of the similarities of Alliance computing resources and
collaborate on code conversion and development projects to ease the burden of
implementing parallel and heterogeneous computing systems. The Alliance centers
have similar Cray Y-MP/C90 and T3D systems of differing configurations that will
allow users to better match applications needs with metacenter resources. The
T3D Showcase Applications will be used as a clear demonstration of the value of
parallel computing for potential industrial users. - the Alliance will evaluate
Infrastructure Development needs in terms of the T3D and other parallel
environments, data storage strategies for parallel computing, and identify
industrial applications for conversion during years two and three. The results
of infrastructure development planning will be shared with other HPCC users. The
alliance-wide focus on Cray T3D and vector architectures simplifies the sharing
of software, expertise and training materials and the development of a well-
focused, critical mass of expertise.