* 9418581
* Tracing the Origins of Stereochemical and Metabolic         Diversity in Secondary Metabolism in Streptomycetes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Marilyn Speedie, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 02/28/1998
* USD 309,395.00

Reynolds 9418581 Streptomyces collinus produces cylohexanecarboxylic acid (CHC)
from shikimic acid and adds this unit to the side chain of the antifungal agent
ansatrienin. Streptomyces hygroscopicus is thought to produce a
3(R),4(R)-dihydroxy-1(R)-cyclohexanecarboxylic acid (DHCHC) from shikimic acid
and to use this compound as the biosynthetic starter unit for the formation of
the novel immunosuppressant, FK520. The long term aims of this research are to
both investigate and compare these two pathways. Preliminary in vivo results
indicate that the initial steps of both pathways follow the same sequence of
enzymes catalyzed reactions but that the stereochemical course of the reduction
steps is different. The unusual secondary metabolic pathways from shikimic acid
to CHC and DHCHC therefore present an interesting example of both metabolic
similarity and stereochemical diversity. In this research project enoyl CoA
reductases involved in catalyzing the reduction steps in both the CHC and CHCHC
pathway will be analyzed from a chemical, biochemical, stereochemical and
genetic perspective. Homology between these enzymes will indicate if they have
evolved by divergent evolution from a common ancestor. This finding would be
unusual based on the observation of the stereochemical diversity (there is no
precedent of homologous enoyl CoA reductases catalyzing reactions with different
stereochemical courses). Alternatively these reductases might demonstrate no
homology indicating an independent evolution of two similar unusual pathways in
Streptomyces. %%% Soil bacteria often produce a vast array of secondary
metabolites, complex organic molecules that have pharmaceutical relevance but
that serve no apparent function in bacteria. How and why bacteria came to
produce these metabolites has been the subject of much research and discussion.
Initial evidence has indicated that many of the biochemical pathways which
produce these are related on an evolutionary basis. This resear ch project
concerns two different soil bacteria. Streptomyces collinus converts shikimic
acid to cyclohexanecarboxylic acid in order to produce the secondary metabolic
ansatrienin (an antifungal agent). Streptomyces hygroscopicus converts shikimic
acid to dihydroxycyclohexanecarboxylic acid in order to produce the secondary
metabolite immunomycin (an immunosuppressant). These two conversions of shikimic
acid are similar and would be expected to be related on an evolutionary basis.
However initial evidence has suggested that in the two bacteria the proteins
that catalyze these conversion do so with different stereochemical outcomes (one
is "left handed" an the other "right handed"). This project will determine if
these proteins do have a different handedness and if they are related. The
discovery that the proteins are related would be unusual because of this
handedness difference. The discovery that the proteins are unrelated would also
be unusual because it would indicate that the similar conversions of shikimic
acid have arisen by convergent rather than divergent evolution. ***