* 9418779
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies on Nonlinear Partial         Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Henghui Zou, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1997
* USD 35,000.00

9418779 Zou This award supports mathematical research on problems arising in two
areas of nonlinear partial differential equations. The first is related to the
analysis of the asymptotic behavior and classification of positive solutions of
semilinear equations in n-dimensional space, focusing on the Lane-Emden
equation. The problem has been studied exhaustively in various special cases.
Extensions and generalizations of this work will also be carried out. Uniqueness
of positive solutions, especially in the case of radial solutions will also be
taken up. A new direction of research concerns existence and non-existence
questions for semilinear systems such as the Fujita system. More applied studies
will consider the thermistor problem, analyzing electrical resistors whose
resistance increases rapidly with increasing temperature. Finally, work will be
done on the existence problem for ground states for quasilinear elliptic
quations and the Dirichlet problem for the Monge-Amper Equation Partial
differential equations form a basis for mathematical modeling of the physical
world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much to create the equations
as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative information about the
solutions. This may include answers to questions about uniqueness, smoothness
and growth. In addition, analysis often develops methods for approximation of
solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these approximations. ***