* 9418363
* Assessment of Barkhausen Effect Measurements for Evaluation of Groound Steel Components
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* David Jiles, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jay Lee
* 08/31/1997
* USD 55,000.00

9418363 Jiles This is a "TIE" project on the topic of "Assessment of Barkhausen
Effect Measurement for Evaluation of Ground Steel Components," to be conducted
by the Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Grinding at the
University of Connecticut and Iowa State University's Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center for Non-Destructive Evaluation. The proposed
activity is to conduct research to study and evaluate the grinding damage to
components by using the magnetic Barkhausen effect measurements. The Center for
Grinding Research at the University of Connecticut will be responsible for
acquisition of specimens, X-ray characterization and surface grinding. The
Center for Nondestructive Evaluation at Iowa State University will be
responsible for performing the Barkhausen effect characterization of the
material, computer analysis of the signals from the material, identification of
relevant Barkhausen signal parameters for evaluation of grinding damages, and
correlation of results with X-ray diffraction data. This project is being cost
shared with the Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Grinding at
the University of Connecticut. The Program Director recommends Iowa State
University be awarded $50,000 for 24 months to conduct a "TIE" project with the
University of Connecticut.