* 9418271
* Regulating Stem Cell Fate and Proliferation in the          Drosophila Male Germline
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Stephen DiNardo, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1997
* USD 330,000.00

Stephen DiNardo IBN 9418271 Cells within certain lineages must be continually
replenished throughout the life of an organism. This is accomplished through the
establishment and maintenance of stem cells. The mechanisms that instruct stem
cell fate and that regulate the proliferation of their daughter cells are poorly
understood. The overall objective of this proposal is to investigate how stem
cells are established and maintained, using the model of Drosophila
spermatogenesis that provides a unique opportunity to combine experimental and
genetic approaches. The experimental manipulations first proposed will attempt
to answer two questions: does cell signaling instruct stem cell fate? and are
the number of daughter cell divisions internally programmed or controlled by
neighboring cells? The first will be addressed by ablating the male hub cells,
using a diptheria toxin inducible system, to determine whether the maintenance
of the germline stem cell fate is governed by the signals emanating from these
somatic cells. Heterospecific transplantation experiments, using two species
that differ in the number of stem cell divisions, will determine if counting is
intrinsic to daughter germ cells, or imposed by signals from the two somatic
cells that surround them. The genetic approaches proposed will identify further
mutations that interfere with these decisions. To identify genes that cause
under- or over-proliferation of germ cells, or that cause discrete changes in
the number of mitotic divisions, a powerful genetic screen, using the FLP/FRT
recombinase system, is proposed. Molecular markers will be used to determine
whether the primary defect in the mutants selected is in the production,
maintenace or division of stem cells, or, alternatively, in the capacity of the
daughter cells to divide. ***