* 9418986
* Tephrochronology Applied to Late Cenozoic Paleoclimate and  Geomorphic Evolution of the Central Transantarctic Mountains
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1996
* David Marchant, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/1996
* USD 48,242.00

This award supports a program to study the geomorphic evolution of the Dry
Valleys region of the Transantarctic Mountains. The isotopic ages and areal
distribution of volcanic ash deposits will be used to constrain the chronology
and rates of landform development and to help quantify the age of geomorphic
surfaces. The depositional setting and degree of weathering of the ash will also
help to constrain regional paleoclimatic conditions during and after deposition
of the volcanic ash. This work will focus on the Quartermain Mountains, Asgaard
Range, Olympus Range, and McKelvey Valley because these regions are known to
contain some volcanic ash deposits and because they contain a variety of
geomorphic settings over a substantial elevation range. This project will
attempt to test assumptions that underlie the hypothesis that the Dry Valleys
region represents a relict, semi- arid landscape that formed prior to build up
of the continental ice sheets during middle Miocene time and that subsequent
slope modification has been limited to minor glacial scouring concentrated at
valley heads, glacier confluences, and deep- valley troughs. Among these
assumptions are 1) that present geomorphic processes are ineffective denudation
agents, 2) that widespread land surfaces within tectonically uniform blocks
reflect base-level changes at the Transantarctic Mountains front, and 3) that
geomorphic landforms of the Dry Valleys that superficially resemble box canyons,
escarpments, mesas, and buttes of desert regions in the American southwest
formed by denudation processes now operating in the Colorado Plateau. The
isotopic age information generated by this project will provide constraints for
models of geomorphic evolution in cold- desert regions and will have
implications for models of landscape development and uplift history of the
Transantarctic Mountains. If the hypothesis of ancient semi-arid erosion
followed by minor glacial incision proves correct for the Dry Valleys re gion,
then changes in base level, as defined by isotopically dated land surfaces in
the Valleys, will provide a chronology of late Cenozoic mountain evolution and
uplift independent of thermochronological studies that have been completed. This
is important because the thermochronology studies, although well suited for
determining long-term uplift rates, are not well suited to distinguishing early
from late Cenozoic uplift. The volcanic ash data base developed in the course of
this study will also be useful for studies of the McMurdo volcanic province.