* 9418168
* Isotopic Studies of Deccan and Parh Group Basalts, and      East Tethyan and Old Western Indian Ocean Seafloor
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* John Mahoney, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/1997
* USD 129,800.00

9418168 Mahoney This project will (1) continue successful geochemical work
related to the Deccan Traps of India, and (2) investigate the origins of the
vast but enigmatic Indian Ocean mantle domain. Recent models attribute the
Deccan event to impact of the Reunion plume head beneath a fast-moving Greater
India; however, a study of alkalic intrusions north of the Deccan by Basu et al.
1993 suggests that the Reunion hotspot existed at least 3 m.y. before the main
Deccan eruptions. Propose to analyze a collection of Parh basalts for Nd, Pb,
and Sr isotopes and ICP-MS trace elements, in order to establish whether they
are indeed early Reunion hotspot products. Recent investigations have shown that
modern Indian Ocean MORB, has a Pb-Nd-Sr isotopic signature quite distinct from
that of Pacific and North Atlantic MORB. The earlier history of this immense
mantle domain is uncertain, however, and whether it originated and grew with the
breakup of Gondwana and the opening of the Indian Ocean, or is an older feature
inherited from the East Tethyan Ocean asthenosphere is unknown. Propose to
analyze Pb, Nd, and Sr isotopes trace elements and , where necessary, major
elements from DSDP sites in the western Indian Ocean, and magmatic units of East
Tethyan seafloor preserved in the Masirah, Yarlung-Zangpo, and Baluchistan
ophiolites in order to answer this question.