* 9418257
* Protein Import into Mitochondria
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Keith Verner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/1999
* USD 284,935.00

9418257 Verner This proposal addresses the topic of cotranslational import of
proteins into mitochondria. This is a question of fundamental importance, since
the "textbook" view is that protein import into mitochondria occurs via post-
translation import (release of peptide from polysome unattached to the targeted
membrane). This view has resulted from high profile research which places
perhaps an unwarranted degree of reliance on in vitro import reactions vs the in
vivo situation. This high profile research has shown that post translational
import can occur in vitro, whether it does occur in vivo, to the exclusion of
the co-translational mechanisms, is the question addressed by this proposal. The
experiments proposed examine the properties of mitochondrial precursor proteins
that may influence the coupling of their synthesis and import and explore the
function of cytosolic chaperone proteins, as well as other cytosolic components
in the import reaction. In experiments related to the structure of precursor
proteins, gene fusion technology will be employed to generate various artificial
proteins that will be studied in both in vitro and in vivo import reacitons. The
effect of mitochondrial presequences and the relative stability of overall
precursor structure will be examined in order to determine the characteristics
of precursor proteins that influence their ability to be imported by either a
cotranslational or posttranslational mechanism. In addition, in vitro import
reactions will be performed to evaluate the involvement of other cytosolic
components in mitochondrial biogenesis. Such components will be identified and
isolated using standard biochemical procedures. %%% Results obtained from the
proposed studies are anticipated to add significantly to our understanding of
protein import into mitochondria and other organelles. The bulk of the proposed
experiments are designed to explore the integration of mitochondrial biogenesis
with other cellular phenomena such as cytosolic protein synthesis, translation
rates, and interactions between precursor proieins and cytosolic components.
This is an important step in viewing the import process in the context of the
overall complexity of the living cytosol and will be complementary to other work
in the field in which the process tends to be studied in great detail but often
in isolation of other cellular reactions. ***