* 9418465
* Paleoseismicity and Seismotectonics in the Puget Sound      Region from Geologic and Geophysical Studies of Puget       Sound and Nearby Lakes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Robert Karlin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Cecily J. Wolfe
* 02/28/1999
* USD 243,295.00

9418465 Karlin This research is to conduct geological, geophysical, and
geotechnical studies of Puget Sound, Lake Washington, and other lakes in the
Puget Lowland to map the submarine expression of large faults, map the
distribution of subaqueous landslides,and obtain sedimentary records of
earthquake history during the Holocene. In Puget Sound, seismic reflection
profiling, side-scan swath surveying, and coring operations will be conducted to
examine the Seattle Fault system for evidence of recent movement and trace its
submarine expression through Lake Sammamish, Lake Washington, Puget Sound to
Hood Canal. Zones of subaqueous slumping will be mapped, dated and analyzed to
determine if they are of seismogenic origin. On selected submarine landslides in
Lake Washington, existing geotechnical information will be combined with
geophysical mapping and core analysis to model minimum accelerations (hence,
earthquake intensities) needed to trigger slope failure. The sedimentary
earthquake record obtained from Lake Washington will be verified and extended by
examining anomalous disturbances in sedimentary sequences in other lakes in the
region. This work should help in estimates of seismic risk in the Seattle-
Bellevue-Kirkland-Everett-Tacoma area. This research is a component of the
National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program. *** ??