* 9418108
* Mineral Transformations in Low-Grade Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1995,01/31/2000
* Donald Peacor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2000
* USD 291,670.00

9418108 Peacor Propose to continue to study processes of transformation in fine-
grained pelitic rocks and other rocks dominated by clay minerals over the range
of diagenesis through low-grade metamorphism. The textural, chemical, and
structural characteristics of mineral assemblages are being investigated with
emphasis on transmission and analytical electron microscopy but utilizing a full
range of techniques including SEM and XRD, and in a context involving
collaboration with specialists in rock deformation, metamorphic petrology,
stable and radiogenic isotope analysis and low-temperature geochemistry. Samples
are selected from continuous sequences chosen to represent critical features and
which have been well-characterized by a wide range of field and laboratory
studies. Comparison of observations within and between a variety of prograde
sequences permits processes of mineral transformations, deformation, and crystal
growth to be defined, especially insofar as solids record evidence of
crystal/fluid interactions. Specific topics include: (1) Nature of smectite,
I/S, and illite: Stacking relations (2) Mechanisms for the transformation of
smectite of illite. (3) Variations in reaction mechanisms as a function of rock
type. (4) Mechanisms of crystal growth in both burial diagenetic and low-grade
metamorphic regimes (5) Quantitative relation between structure and texture as
related to cause of changes in illite and chlorite crystallinity. (6) Origins of
interlayer cation composition of smectite. These and other topics will be
studied using sequences of samples from prograde pelitic sequences in the
following localities: Texas Gulf Coast, Southern Uplands of Scotland, Welsh
sedimentary basin, South Island of New Zealand, Nankai Trench, Franciscan
Formation of California, Iberian Massif of Spain, and the Ketama Unit of the
Rift Chain of Morocco. All sequences are from well-characterized sequences that
permit characterization of processes over a range of types of pelites and over
the full range of diagenesis and low-grade metamorphism, leading to
documentation of trends and processes. Focusing especially on the roles of
fluids and stress, as the collective data appear to show that all processes are
consistent with Ostwald step-like transitions from metastable states toward
stable equilibrium, as mediated by fluids, and increasingly by deformation
induced by tectonic stress with increasing grade, with subsequent implications
for the use of clay minerals as indicators of reaction progress rather than as
accurate geothermometers. ??