* 9418559
* Characterization of Heparanase in CHO Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1999
* Karen J. Bame, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 12/31/1999
* USD 338,000.00

Bame 9418559 Cell associated heparan sulfate proteoglycans have been implicated
in a number of processes, including cell adhesion, growth and transformation.
The regulation of these activities will be determined. Initially, cell surface
heparan sulfate proteoglycans are internalized, the glycosaminoglycans is
removed from the protein core and cleaved into small chains by heparanases.
These small chains are secreted or transported to other sites in the cell where
they have been implicated in regulating proteoglycan functions or other cellular
processes. To determine how the metabolism of proteoglycans regulates, it is
important to understand how many heparanases are involved in heparan sulfate
proteoglycan catabolism, how the enzymes recognize and cleave the heparan
sulfate substrate, and the functions of the short chains produced by the enzyme
reaction. To determine the number of enzymes involved, heparanase activities
will be purified from Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, using enzyme assays
that differentiate between a heparanse activity that degrades free heparan
sulfate chains and heparanase activity that cleaves glycosaminoglycans off core
proteins. The recognition sequence cleaved by the purified heparanase(s) will be
analyzed to establish the modifications important for the enzymes(s) to bind to
and cleave the glycosaminoglycan chain, while the size of the heparan sulfate
formed in reactions will be obtained to determine if the glycosaminoglycan is
cleaved randomly or progressively. The short heparan sulfate chains in CHO cells
will be purified and characterized to determine whether heparanases generate
populations of glycosaminoglycans enriched in specific modifications or
locations inside cells, and to determine their ability to bind molecules that
interact with heparan sulfate to determine if heparanases produce short chains
that in turn regulate proteoglycan functions. %%% Heparan sulfate proteoglycans,
found inside cells or at cell surfaces, are composed of one or more g
lycosaminoglycan, or sugar, chains attached to a protein. They have been
implicated in cell processes, including adhesion, growth and differentiation.
Little is known about how they work. It appears that heparan sulfate
proteoglycans are degraded inside cells by enzymes called heparanases.
Heparanase-dependent release the heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans produced
from larger proteins are then degraded to short oligosaccharides. Some of these
short heparan sulfate oligosaccharide chains are secreted from cells and affect
the binding of proteins to the cell surface. The aims of this project are to (1)
purify heparanases from Chinese hamster ovary cells, (2) to characterize how the
enzymes work to cleave the heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans, and (3) determine
if the short heparan sulfate chains produced by the heparanases regulate binding
of growth factors at the surface of cells. ***