* 9418460
* Reconstitution of the EGF Receptor
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* David Rintoul, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 01/31/1999
* USD 274,920.00

; R o o t E n t r y F V @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t ( O b j e c t
P o o l V V &amp; ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9418460 Rintoul The activity of many mammalian hormones
depends upon an initial interaction of the hormone with a receptor on the
surface of the target cell. This interaction usually results in the production
of multiple intercellular signals, which the produce the hormonal effects
characteristic of the particular hormone and the particular target cell.
Although much is know about the mode of action of these intercellular signals,
relatively little is known about the molecular details involved in the primary
hormonal stimulation of cell surface receptor. This is primarily due to the
difficulty of working with these receptor molecular in there native location,
the hydrophobic cell surface membrane. Our aim is to determine how binding of a
hormone to the outside of a cell can result in the activation of multiple
signaling pathways on the inside of that cell. The system used in this proposal
has served as model analysis. %%% This proposal addresses a basic problem in
biology, that is how a cell recognizes specific substances around it. This
requires a very precise recognition mechanism permitti ng the cell to
distinguish between different types of nutrients. In addition, cells must
recognize and respond to a variety of different external stimuli. Without such a
mechanism of recognition a cell would starve or be killed. This proposal
examines the mechanism of cellular recognition. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h S u m m
a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( % R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9418460 Shirley
Parker Shirley Parker @ P V @ @ P V @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; ; e 3 e ( j j j
j j j j l 1 . N T 7 l j l j j j j ~ j j j j f 9418460 Rintoul The activity of
many mammalian hormones depends upon an initial interaction of the hormone with
a receptor on the surface of the target cell. This interaction usually results
in the production of multiple intercellular signals, which the produce the
hormonal effects characteristic of the particular hormone and the particular
target cell. Although much is know about the mode of action of these
intercellular signals, relatively little is known about the molecular details
involved in the primary hormonal stimulation of cell surface receptor. This is
primarily due to the difficulty of working with these receptor molecular in
there native location, the hydrophobic cell surface membrane. Our aim is to
determine how binding of a hormone to the outside of a cell can result in the
activation of multiple signaling pathways on the inside of that cell. The system
used in this proposal has served as model analysis. %%% This proposal addresses
a basic problem in biology, that is how a cell recognizes specific substances
around it. This requires a very precise