* 9418532
* On-line X-ray Scattering for Emulsion Polymerization        Monitoring (Self-Sufficient Partnership with Industry/Univ. Cooperative Research Center for Process Analytical Chemistry
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* James Callis, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 07/31/1997
* USD 430,143.00

9418532 Kowalski The Industry/University Cooperative Research for Process
Analytical Chemistry at the University of Washington studies mechanisms and
instruments for the control of chemical and biological processes. The Center
continues to meet the renewal criteria of the Industry/University Cooperative
Research Centers Program. The reviewers were asked to review the Center under
the criteria for evaluation of I/UCRCs, as well as a specific research project
on an interdisciplinary effort to develop new methodologies for monitoring and
control of the processing and quality of emulsion polymerization based on small
angle x-ray scattering. This award provides funding for one year under the
"Self-Sufficient Partnership for Research" Program to the University of
Washington I/UCRC for Process Analytical Chemistry. Additional funding is
provided by the U.S. Department of Energy's Battelle, Pacific Northwest
Laboratory to augment ongoing research and to obtain a membership in the Center.
The Program Manager recommends the University of Washington be awarded $40,000
for one year. An additional $35,000 is recommended for one year with funds
provided by the U.S. Department of Energy's Battelle, Pacific Northwest
Laboratory.