* 9418741
* Applications of Real-Space Refinement for Macromolecular    Structure Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Michael Chapman, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 03/31/1999
* USD 325,981.00

Computational methods will be developed for the determination, refinement and
interpretation of macromolecular structures by X-ray crystallography and
electron microscopy. Crystallographic structure determination involves the
manual building of atomic model into an electron density map, using interactive
computer programs, followed by automatic refinement of the model to the
diffraction amplitudes. The crystallographic applications will bridge the
transition between model building and automatic reciprocal-space refinement, a
transition that is a bottle-neck and a common source of major errors in
crystallographic structure determination. Using new techniques of restrained
real-space refinement, the fit of the model to the electron density will be
optimized before the phases are abandoned for conventional reciprocal-space
refinement Such local refinement, in turn allows the phases and map to be
improved, completing an iterative cycle for a new method of model improvement
that is free from the feedback bias of omit-maps. Thus the new methods will have
broad scientific impact since they will be built for computer platforms common
to the structural biology laboratories. The new methods will increase the number
of macromolecular structure determinations that can be completed, improve the
quality, decrease the chance of errors, and decrease the resources that are
required. Thus, this work will help further our understanding of the function of
individual macromolecules, and of their interactions in the macromolecular
assemblies that are central to many cellular processes. This award is supported
by the Computational Biology Activity and the Biophysics programs.