* 9418963
* Dissertation Research:  Archaeology of the Viru Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Richard Burger, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1996
* USD 11,750.00

Burger Under the direction of Dr. Richard Burger, Mr. Thomas Zoubek will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation at
the site of Huaca El Gallo/Huaca La Gallina which is located in the Viru Valley
on the northern coast of Peru. The site contains two large stone-faced platform
mounds, two sunken circular courts and extensive habitational remains. At least
one unlooted cemetery is associated with the mounds and domestic structures. The
site itself dates to the Formative period, between 1800 and 50 BC and therefore
documents the rise of complex society in Peru. In the planned fieldwork, Mr.
Zoubek and his colleagues will construct a precise map of the site. They will
then excavate a representative sample of each type of household and several
domestic structures will be dug in their entirety. Refuse areas will also be
sought out for excavation in order to establish stratigraphic sequences. Burials
and undisturbed tombs will also be examined. The cultural and skeletal, as well
as floral and faunal materials recovered will be analyzed. The archaeological
situation of the coast of Peru is interesting for several reasons. First the
Andes represents one of the few regions of the world where highly complex
stratified societies appear to have independently evolved. During the Initial
period large ceremonial structures were built and maintained. Secondly, the
region is important because there are indications that, in some parts of the
Peruvian coast at least, this development took place in a relatively egalitarian
social context. Archaeologists generally believe that political centralization
as indicated in monumental construction either results from or is intimately
related to the emergence of status inequality; the Peruvian case however may
disprove this hypothesis. Relatively little is known about household
organization at such sites since archaeological work has concentrated on the
more imposing monumental structures. Mr. Zoubek's work will focus on the former
and provide direct insight into social organization. This research is important
for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
will increase understanding of how complex societies develop and will also
contribute to the training of a promising young scientist.