* 9418119
* Homeotic Genes and Other Genes Involved in Organizing the   D.melanogaster Tail Segments
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* David Kuhn, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1998
* USD 280,000.00

9418119 Kuhn It is proposed to establish by immunocytochemistry the precise
embryonic expression patterns for genes required in the tail region of
Drosophila melangaster. A hierarchy of gene function will be established by
examining how null mutants for the different genes affect the distribution
patterns of genes expressed in different regions of the tail. The normal
embryonic segment/parasegment distribution patterns for the genes will be
compared to the expression patterns of the same genes in the larval genital disc
in order to determine the extent to which each embryonic tail segment
contributes to the sexually dimorphic genital disc. Clonal analysis will be used
to define the segment borders in the genital disc and in the adult genitalia.
Finally, the adult transformations caused by mutant genes with homeotic
phenotypes will be examined to establish how each gene contributes to the
identity of the adult tail region. Since null mutants for all of these genes are
early lethals, the homeotic transformations will be studied by mitotic
recombination in clones of mutant cells. %%% Drosophila melanogaster provides a
superb animal model for studying the gene network required to take the animal
from a single cell to a differentiated multicellular organism. The goal of this
study is to determine how the early acting pair rule genes, segment polarity
genes, homeotic selector genes and other genes with homeotic phenotypes
contribute to formation of the tail segments (defined as abdominal segments A8
through A11). Whereas the segmental organization of the thorax and anterior
abdomen is morphologically delineated in the Drosophila larva and adult, tail
segments lack such well-defined boundaries. Thus, the organization of the tail
region has been difficult to decipher. Results from these studies will help us
understand how the Drosophila tail segments form and how the segments have been
genetically modified through evolutionary time into the specialized female and
male genitalia. The lesson s learned in Drosophila may provide some insights
into how some of these same genes developmentally interact in the tail region of
more complex organisms where they are also expressed. ***