* 9418243
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Density Functional     Theory in Reaction Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Scott Gronert, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 03/31/1996
* USD 14,868.00

9418243 Gronert This award will support the travel expenses for Dr. Scott
Gronert and a student research associate to enable them to spend a month
conducting cooperative research with Professor Leo Radom and his research group
at the Research School of Chemistry, the Australian National University, in
Canberra. The collaborative work will focus on the use of the density functional
theory as applied to various reaction systems and in particular reaction
pathways for proton transfer and radical addition reactions in the gas phase. In
recent years, density functional theory (DFT) has emerged as a very promising
methodology that has been extensively tested for very small molecular systems,
but not for larger molecular systems or for the proposed proton transfer and
radical reactions. The combined resources of the American and Australian groups
are required to complete the project. The opportunity to work with the Radom
group will allow for a valuable exchange of ideas and methodologies. During the
visit by the Americans to Canberra, data will be exchanged, computational
approaches will be tested extensively, and decisions will be made as to the best
DFT methods for completing the studies. The collaboration will provide an
excellent educational experience for the student research associate and will
expose the American investigators to valuable new techniques in theoretical
chemistry.