* 9418318
* Molecular Interactions Regulating Cell Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1998
* David Cafiso, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1998
* USD 309,200.00

9418318 Cafiso Proteins that can equilibrate between the cytosol and the
membrane surface are critical to cell signaling, and charge density at the
membrane interface plays a major role in determining this equilibrium. However,
little is known at a molecular level regarding the membrane binding of these
proteins, and it has not been possible to account for the electrostatic
contributions to the binding using simple electrostatic theories. Neuromodulin
and MARCKS (the Myristoylated Alanine Rich C-Kinase Substrate) are believed to
play key roles as calmodulin buffers in the central nervous system. They bind
calmodulin as well as membrane surfaces, and this binding is eliminated when
they are phosphorylated by protein kinase C. A goal of this work is to obtain
structural and kinetic information on a remarkable set of charged peptides
derived from neuromodulin and MARCKS which exhibit all the important properties
of their parent proteins. This information will be used to test more
sophisticated electrostatic theories, to test the role of these proteins as
calmodulin buffers, and to identify structural paradigms for proteins that
interact in a purely electrostatic fashion with membrane surfaces. This work
will make extensive use of site-directed spin-labeling and EPR spectroscopy.
Another goal of the work is to investigate structural deformations that occur in
calmodulin in the absence and presence of substrates. This work will make use of
NMR and paramagnetic enhancements of nuclear relaxation which should provide
distances weighted by a sixth root average. The modes of binding of peptides
from MARCKS and neuromodulin which associate with calmodulin in a Ca++ dependent
and Ca++ independent fashion, respectively, will also be examined. Proline
appears with an unusually high frequency in the transmembrane segments of
membrane proteins, and a final objective of this proposal will be to evaluate
the role of proline in controlling the flexibility or deformability o f
hydrophobic helices. %%% The control of cell growth and metabolism is an
extremely important process for the proper functioning of all organisms,
especially higher organisms such as plants and animals. In a number of cases,
the pathways (or protein components) that mediate this control are well
established. At a molecular level, however, little is known regarding the
interactions between the macromolecules mediating the control of cell growth and
metabolism. The objective of the work is to understand several fundamental
molecular interactions that are critical for cell control. The understanding of
this control at a molecular level is important for several reasons. First, it
will provide insight into how biological systems have evolved and exploited
physical properties of their molecular components. Second it will provide
information on the specific interactions that mediate cell control. Although it
is not a primary objective of the research, knowledge of such specific
interactions will ultimately be important in designing new drugs to treat
diseases that are associated with cell control such as viral infection and
cancer. ***