* 9418181
* Conformational Coupling and the Basis for Metal Ion         Specificity in Superoxide Dismutase
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Anne-Frances Miller, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1997
* USD 305,000.00

9418181 Miller The research will employ Fe and Mn-containing superoxide
dismutase (SOD) as a model system and exploit the unique ability of nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) to directly observe protein groups and
monitor structure in solution. The objectives are to elucidate the
conformational interplay between the metal ion site and the protein of SOD upon
substrate analog binding to the metal ion, and to determine why FeSOD protein is
inactive with Mn bound instead of Fe, and MnSOD protein is inactive with Fe
bound instead of Mn. Isotope edited NMR will be used in conjunction with amino
acid-specific isotopic labeling to produce drastically simplified spectra
showing signals of labeled amino acids only. Comparisons of spectra of SOD with
and without the substrate analog azide bound will identify amino acids affected
by azide binding and indicate by what mechanisms the protein is conformationally
responsive to events at the metal ion. By monitoring amino acids at the
interfaces between domains or subunits, it will be possible to determine whether
the conformation change involves potentially general mechanisms for
conformational change including (1) relative motions of domains bridged by the
metal ion, (2) relative motions of subunits and (3) propagation of
conformational effects via hydrogen bonding networks. These studies build on the
known structure for SOD and exploit the unique ability of NMR to directly
observe protons, provide information on their participation in hydrogen bonds
and provide qualitative and quantitative information on both structure and
dynamics of proteins in solution unconstrained by crystal packing. The work will
also determine why SODs containing the wrong metal ion are inactive, by
evaluating their competence for individual elements of catalysis including each
of the half reactions, the reduction midpoint potential, proton donation,
substrate analog binding and active site structure, thus specifying the chemical
reaso n for catalytic incompetence. Site-directed and random mutagenesis will be
used to convert MnSOD protein into a FeSOD. Characterization of these SODs will
reveal what amino acid changes are important, the extent to which these amino
acid changes support activity with the wrong metal, and at what cost to activity
with the correct metal. %%% Metalloenzymes combine the reactivity of metal
centers with the exquisite specificity and control of enzymes. The Fe-containing
superoxide dismutases (FeSODs) and the homologous Mn-containing superoxide
dismutases (MnSODs) are metalloenzymes that catalyze the conversion of
superoxide to dioxygen and hydrogen peroxide. SOD is relatively small, very
stable and soluble but also embodies two central features of metalloenzyme
catalysis: the metal site and the protein are believed to affect each other's
structure, and each type of SOD, while able to bind either Fe or Mn, is only
active with one. Thus, the structure and activity of the enzyme reflect
interactions between the protein and the metal ion, and these interactions are
metal ion specific. The goal of the research is (1) to determine how much of the
protein is affected by binding of small molecules to the metal ion, and (2) to
describe the protein structural change in terms of relative movement of the
modules that make up the protein structure. The work will also determine why
MnSOD protein is not active with Fe bound and FeSOD protein is not active with
Mn bound. This new understanding of the protein-metal cooperation that is
necessary for metalloenzyme catalytic activity will advance ongoing efforts to
design or modify metalloenzymes to catalyze useful reactions in drug synthesis,
waste detoxification and chemical sensors. ***