* 9418785
* Molecular Studies of the Mammalian Programmed Cell Death    Gene Ice-3
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1996
* Junying Yuan, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1996
* USD 229,944.00

Junying Yuan IBN #9418785 The overall objective of this ambitious project is
the molecular characterization of the vertebrate programmed cell death gene
Ice-3, a homolog of the nematode C. elegans cell death gene ced-3 and mammalian
cell death gene interleukin 1-beta converting enzyme (ICE). Naturally occurring
cell death is an integral part of normal development and homeostasis. In the
nematode C elegans, a genetic pathway of programmed cell death has been
identified. Genetic mosaic analysis showed the ced-3 is most likely acting
within dying cells to cause cell death. ICE is a vertebrate homolog of ced-3.
Overexpression of ICE in mammalian fibroblasts causes cells to undergo
programmed cell death. A family of vertebrate homologs of the C.elegans ced-3
gene has been identified by this laboratory. Ice- 3 is one of the most
interesting homologs because it appears to encode both an activator and an
inhibitor of cell death. The mRNA of Ice-3 is alternatively spliced into two
different forms: Ice-3L, and Ice-3S. When expressed in Rat-1 cells, Ice-3L
causes cells to die, while Ice-3S has the ability to prevent Rat-1 cell death
induced by serum deprivation. A model is proposed in which ICE and ICE-3 act in
parallel to control cell death. This model will be tested in a variety of
experiments. Biochemical and enzymatic properties of the ICE-3 protein will be
studied to reveal how ICE-3 acts to induce cell death. The developmental pattern
of Ice-3 expression will be examined. Attempts will be made to isolate the
activator, inhibitor and substrate of ICE-3 to identify upstream and downstream
elements of Ice-3. Antibodies against ICE-3 will be generated and used to
determine when and where the ICE-3 protein is made. ICE-3 protein made by E.
coli or baculovirus will be used to study the enzymatic properties of ICE-3,
with particular attention paid to the different potential roles of Ice-3L vs.
Ice-3S. The yeast two hybrid system will also be used to isolate the genes that
may encode proteins interacting with the ICE-3 protein. Through these studies,
it is hoped to gain an understanding of the mechanism and function of Ice-3 in
controlling programmed cell death. ***