* 9418303
* Accretion of Extraterrestrial Matter to the Earth:  The     Sedimentary Record
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Frank Kyte, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/1999
* USD 235,000.00

Kyte 9418303 It is proposed to continue the broad-based research program which
is designed to make significant advances in the understanding of the chemical
and mineralogical record of extraterrestrial matter to the Earth, as recorded in
terrestrial sediments. We propose research into the mineralogy and geochemistry
of debris from three distinct impact events. (1) In the next three years our
principal objective will be a renewed investigation of a unique deposit that we
discovered. It records an asteroid impact into a deep-ocean basin during the
late Pliocene. Will join a German polar research expedition in Spring 1995 that
will engage in a geophysical and geological exploration of the region in which
the impact occurred. Sediment cores recovered that contain debris from the
impact will be the subject of mineralogical and geochemical analyses to learn
about the physical and chemical evolution of this impact event as well as to use
it as an analog to Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary deposits. (2) We will also
investigate the detailed geochemistry of an early Archean (-3.4 Ga) spherule bed
which may record a major asteroid impact as well as a major change in the
tectonic evolution of the Barberton Greenstone Belt. We will concentrate on
determining whether there is geochemical evidence to support the hypothesis that
gradations across the spherule bed reflect chemical and thermal evolution of an
impact-generated vapor cloud. (3) Additionally we will characterize the
abundance, distribution, and composition of Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary impact
debris in sediments from the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. This will approximately
double the portion of the Earth's surface studied in this way greatly improve
our model of the evolution and distribution of impact debris relative to the
Chicxulub structure. (4) We also anticipate that we will be requested to provide
Ir analyses for other researchers. As our schedule permits, we will assist in
such problems, if appropriate.