* 9418561
* Quantitative Studies of Coupled Fluid Flow, Rock            Deformation, Heat Transfer and Mass Transport in            Deforming Geologic Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Shemin Ge, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/1999
* USD 166,000.00

9418561 Ge Fluid flow, rock deformation , heat transfer, and ;mass transport are
coupled processes in deforming geologic systems. The coupled effects among these
factors have been recognized for their importance in thrust faulting, ore
formation, metamorphism, and lubrication of faults during earthquakes. One or
more of the coupling processes are often simplified or overlooked. A fully
coupled numerical model will be developed and applied to study and physical
interaction processes in two geologic settings: sedimentary basins and
accretionary prisms. As new features, heat and mass transport are coupled with
tectonic deformation, hydraulic permeability is considered a functions of stress
and time, and tectonic loading is simulated as a gradual process rather than an
instantaneous event. There are two main objectives of this study. The first is
to construct a generic model to solve the coupled equations of deformation ,
fluid flow, heat transfer, and mass transport in geologic medial. The second is
to apply the model to study two geologic systems: a sedimentary foreland basin,
the Arkoma Basin in Arkansas, and an accretionary prism, the Barbados
Accretionary Complex. This research will improve current understanding of the
processes involving heat and mass transport in fluids during the history of the
tectonic evolution. The application to the sedimentary basin provides a
quantitative connection between tectonic events, fluid migration, and ore
deposition. The application to the accretionary prism will contribute to the on-
going efforts to explain the thermal and chemical anomalies observed in the
Ocean Drilling Programs. The work combines analytical scaling, numerical
modeling, and case studies. Scaling analysis of the governing equations
identifies the relative importance of different coupling mechanisms under
simplified conditions. The numerical modeling provides detail solution to the
coupled processes under more complicated and realistic geologic conditions. The
generic simulations will be designed to test sensitivities of hydrologic,
mechanical, and thermal parameters.