* 9418466
* The Polar T3 Syndrome:  Metabolic and Cognitive             Manifestations, Their Hormonal Regulation and Impact Upon   Performance
* O/D,OPP
* 06/15/1995,05/31/2000
* Lester Reed, Henry M Jackson Fdn for Advmt of Military Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/2000
* USD 292,818.00

9418466 Reed People who live and work in Antarctica for longer than four to five
months develop a characteristic constellation of symptoms and hormonal changes
called the Polar T3 Syndrome. These people have previously been described as
having a 40 percent increase in energy requirement, frequent mood disorders,
doubling of the production, utilization, and tissue stores of the most active
thyroid hormone, triiodothyronine (T3), a decline in central nervous system
thyroxine (T4), and acquisition of physiologic cold adaptation. These apparent
discordant and compartmentalized tissue responses will be studied over a four-
year period utilizing a multidisciplinary approach carried out by experienced
polar physiologists, endocrinologists and psychologists. The possible cognitive
and metabolic changes in performance from declines in central nervous system T4
and elevations in skeletal muscle T3 content will be studed. Placebo-controlled
T4 replacement directed at the central nervous system deficit will be carried
out and measured with cognitive instruments. T3 content within the
cardiovascular system will be evaluated by utilizing submaximal exercise testing
to differentiate resting from activity mediated energy use contributions by the
skeletal muscles. Additionally, tissue samples of skeletal muscle will provide
information regarding the genetic coding for T3 responsive proteins to help
better characterize the thyroid status of these muscles. Moderate energy
restriction will be used along with T4 supplementation to study the dependence
of T3 production, distribution and tissue stores upon both pituitary generation
of thyrotropin and energy intake. Analysis will be carried out using each
subject's baseline determined in the predeployment situation of California and
compared with periods and standardized measures obtained during the antarctic
summer and winter. It is proposed that a correction of the low T4 state in the
central nervous system can be managed w ith T4 supplementation without
dramatically changing energy requirements as suggested by previous human studies
using cold air chamber experiments. If this thesis is correct, then
characteristic declines in mood and memory during winter seasons in circumpolar
regions may be attenuated by T4 supplementation without disadvantageous effects
upon their energy metabolism. Additionally, this project will expand information
regarding the ultimate regulation and maintenance of the increased T3 production
which is a central determinant of the Polar T3 Syndrome.