* 9418058
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Study of Phase Transition Dynamics by Coherent Phonon Excitation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Keith Nelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 03/31/1999
* USD 22,864.00

9418058 Nelson This award supports a three-year cooperative research project
between Dr. Keith Nelson of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Dr.
Toshirou Tagi of Hokkaido University. The collaborators will investigate lattice
vibrations in crystals near phase transitions, acoustic waves in glass-forming
liquids and polymers, and acoustic waves in polymers and other thin films. The
study of phase transitions and liquid-glass transitions is intended to advance
our fundamental understanding of structural rearrangements in condensed matter.
The study of thin films can provide important information about adhesion of
films to substrates, and also has immediate applications to noninvasive
characterization of films in microelectronics and other industries. The U.S.
group, led by Dr. Nelson, has developed picosecond and femtosecond time-domain
light scattering methods for study of acoustic and optic phonons in condensed
matter. Of particular interest for the Japanese group, led by Dr. Yagi, is the
use of femtosecond time-resolved methods for the study of phase transitions in
an important class of crystals whose nonlinear optical properties are widely
exploited in practical devices. The mutual benefits of the collaboration will be
two-way technology transfer for the significant enhancement of both groups
experimental capabilities, intellectual exchange concerning the related topics
of interest to both groups, and collaborative experimental results on structural
phase transitions in two important classes of materials. ***