* 9418093
* Permian and Triassic Palynostratigraphy of the Central      Transantarctic Mountains
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Rosemary Askin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/1999
* USD 144,979.00

This award supports a project to establish a palynostratigraphic framework for
the Permian to Triassic sedimentary rocks of the central Transantarctic
Mountains. This will help provide a chronostratigraphic reference for Antarctic
studies. Palynomorph data can also add to knowledge of the composition of the
Permian and Triassic floras and has important biogeographic and paleoclimatic
implications. This research will give a clearer picture of the timing and nature
of southern high latitude biotic and climatic changes which are vital for
understanding causes and effects of the end- Permian global biotic crisis and
mass extinctions. This work will concentrate on the Shackleton Glacier area and
includes one field season to collect samples and two years of laboratory work.
Existing rock collections as well as samples collected by other geologists
working in the Shackleton Glacier region will also be utilized to obtain as
complete a stratigraphic section as possible. Correlations will be made with
other parts of Gondwana and palynological data will be integrated with other
fossil and lithologic data to establish a sound, process related stratigraphic
framework. Field work will focus on the post-glacial sedimentary units of the
Victoria Group (Beacon Supergroup): the Mackellar, Fairchild, Fremouw, and Falla
Formations, and their equivalents. Except for marginally brackish, inland-sea
Mackellar beds, the succession consists of fluvial and lacustrine deposits.
Palynomorphs in these rocks are almost entirely spores and pollen from land
plants, with occasional acritarchs. The zonation will build upon and formalize
the preliminary zonation established previously for southern Victoria Land.
Fossil spore and pollen assemblages can indicate their parent plants and thus
reflect at least part of the indigenous vegetation. This information can be
added to other plant fossil (leaves, wood, et cetera) and paleosol data for
paleoclimatic interpretations. Certain p alynomorph taxa (and assemblages) have
specific biogeographical or environmental implications. Furthermore,
stratigraphic and geographic distribution patterns of the palynomorphs yield
information on evolutionary trends and rates, provincialism of the floras, and
dispersal pathways.