* 9418815
* Modulatory Neuropeptides in Aplysia
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1999
* Philip Lloyd, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Roy L. White
* 04/30/1999
* USD 331,010.00

9418815 The long range goal of this research is to gain insight into mechanisms
underlying the modulation of synaptic transmission. It is now clear that many
neurons contain more than one transmitter and it is important to determine how
multiple transmitters released from the terminals of single neurons interact on
presynaptic and postsynaptic targets. Specifically, neuropeptide transmitters
appear to commonly coexist along with conventional transmitters. The relatively
simple nervous system of Aplysia has a number of advantages that make it
particularly useful as a model system for these studies. One goal of this grant
is to explore the manner in which neuropeptides that are released from motor
neurons interact tio modulate the effectiveness of other transmitters released
from the same neuron. A second goal is to investigate the effects of a biogenic
amine, serotonin, released from purely modulatory neurons which have
neuromuscular terminals. The neuropeptides and serotonin have been shown to be
potent modulators of neuromuscular transmission. These studies have implications
for vertebrate skeletal neuromuscular junctions where peptide cotransmitters
have also been found. A third goal is to characterize the release of these
peptide cotransmitters from identified neurons in primary culture. This highly
reduced preparation permits detailed analyses of factors which regulate peptide
release. Understanding fundamental neural processes such as the modulation of
synaptic transmission at these neuromuscular synapses could provide a more
general understanding of synapses which release multiple transmitters as well as
have relevance to disorders of movement.