* 9418142
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: A Multi-Wavelength     Study of Southern Sefert Galaxies: Mapping Circumnuclear    Star Formation
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1995,10/31/2000
* Curtis Struck, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 10/31/2000
* USD 25,000.00

9418142 Appleton This award will support the travel and communications
expenses, over a two year period, to enable Dr. Philip Appleton and Mark
Bransford, a doctoral student working with Dr. Appleton, of the Department of
Physics and Astronomy at Iowa State University, to conduct research with Dr.
Raymond Norris, Acting Director of the Australia Telescope National Facility,
and Charlene Heisler of the Anglo-Australian Observatory. The cooperative
research will focus on the study of radio emission and star formation
distribution in a sample of Seyfert galaxies. This collaborative project
involves astronomical observations and numerical modeling utilizing a sample of
galaxies containing Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN's) which are observed from the
southern hemisphere. The observational side of the project requires the use of
the unique Australia Telescope National Facility (ATNF) aperture-synthesis radio
telescope, which became operational three years ago, and the Anglo-Australian
Telescope (AAT). The ATNF is the only radio telescope in the southern hemisphere
capable of providing the detailed images of galaxies required. The special
instrumentation available for infrared imaging at the AAT is also unique in the
southern hemisphere. In order to gain an understanding of the possible causal
pelationship between starburst and AGN activity, high dynamic range radio maps,
at three frequencies, will be obtained at ATNF. Near infrared observations at
AAT will concentrate on the distribution and strengths of key spectra lines
which will be used to distinguish between narrow-line emission and those
associated with the AGN spectra characteristic of star formation regions. These
star formation regions will then be compared in detail with the radio and
optical morphologies of the galaxies to search for causal connections which
might link star formation with non-thermal AGN processes. The Australian
collaborators are requesting support from the Department of Indus try, Science
and Technology (DIST) to fund their travel to Iowa State University to make use
of the special numerical modeling program being conducted on galaxies in the
Department of Physics and Astronomy.