* 9418523
* Neoproterozoic Paleogeography and Global Climate:           Paleomagnetic and Magnetostratigraphic Constraints
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Joseph Kirschvink, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1998
* USD 109,863.00

Kirschvink 9418523 The Neoproterozoic interval of Earth history is remarkable in
many respects: not only did the planet suffer perhaps its worst glaciation, but
an explosive radiation of metazoan fauna followed shortly thereafter. At the
same time, a supercontinent may have dispersed as Gondwana amalgamated. Despite
the importance of understanding these events in terms of Earth's dynamic
evolution, existing constraints of Late Proterozoic paleogeography are rather
poor. Although the many existing reconstructions which have been proposed for
this time rely largely on the same paleomagnetic database, they differ greatly
because the data are commonly suspect, and different workers choose different
paleopoles to constrain their models. In particular, the Vendian position of
Australia, Laurentia, Baltica, and Africa, have been the subject of heated
recent debate. Resolution of these problems require new, high-quality,
paleomagnetic data of Late Proterozoic rocks from these continental blocks, with
unambiguous determinations of primary magnetization and geological ages. Also
under debate are the timing and severity of the Late Precambrian glaciations.
Neoproterozoic glacial deposits are found on virtually every present continent,
and this can be explained by either a global icehouse state with synchronous
glacial episodes, or by rapid drift of the continents in and out of the polar
regions of a cool but not frigid Earth. Precise dating of the various glacial
units is the most obvious way to test the two alternatives, but this is hampered
by the limited Vendian fossil record and the general inability to determine
isotopic ages directly from the glacial units. Although such studies have been
attempted previously, many neglected to include geological field tests on the
primary magnetization, crucial for rocks of this age. We propose to conduct
intensive paleomagnetic studies of sedimentary successions on four Vendian
continents: East Gondwana (Australia), Laurentia, Baltica, and Africa ( Kalahari
craton). Our sampling strategy will emphasize field tests for primary magnetic
remanence as well as stratigraphy continuity and consistency. This project will
thus extend the Late Proterozoic portion of the study, "Low-Latitude Glaciations
in the Precambrian...", to include magnetostratigraphy and interbasinal
correlation. This should provide reliable paleomagnetic poles for Vendian time
and also lead to a well-calibrated, multidisciplinary stratigraphic timescale
for this pivotal interval of Earth history.