* 9418518
* U.S. -Australia Cooperative Research:  GraVis, A Level-basedGraph Visualizer
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Panagiotis Metaxas, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 03/31/1997
* USD 10,930.00

9418518 Metaxas This award will support expenses to enable Dr. Panagiotis
Metaxas from the Computer Science Department at Wellesley College to travel to
Australia, once each year over a two year period, to conduct cooperative
research with Dr. Adonios Symvonis of the Basser Department of Computer Science
at the University of Sydney. The study will focus on the development of an
interactive system for visualizing the execution of graph algorithms to be
entitled "GraVis". Existing visualization systems do not allow user interaction
in any significant manner. The systems are static in the sense that the users
cannot manipulate the observed algorithms without considerable reprogramming and
a thorough knowledge of the system. The collaborative activity will be
restricted to graph algorithms. The proposed GraVis system will permit
interactivity in that the user will be able to dynamically alter both the
algorithm and the data to receive visual feedback from the changes. The project
brings together the complementary skills of the investigators, the American in
the area of visualization and graph theory and the Australian with expertise in
packet routing algorithms for interconnection networks. The visits to Australia
will also provide the opportunity for Dr. Metaxas to establish links with the
strong Australian graph drawing community, an area which is of considerable
importance to scientific visualization.