* 9418594
* The irrB and irrI Gene Products of Deinococcus radiodurans  RI
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1998
* John Battista, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 12/31/1998
* USD 336,000.00

9418594 Battista Members of the family Deinococcaceae are distinguished by their
extraordinary resistance to the lethal and mutagenic effects of many DNA
damaging agents including mitomycin C, ultraviolet (UV) light, and ionizing
radiation. For example, an exponential phase culture of Deinococcus radiodurans
R1, will withstand 5000 Gray (500 krad) of ( radiation without loss of
viability. The capacity to survive such massive insults to their genetic
integrity suggests that the Deinococcaceae have evolved distinctive mechanisms
of DNA damage tolerance and available evidence argues that efficient DNA repair
is an integral part of this tolerance. The enzymology of the deinococci's DNA
repair processes is poorly understood, however. It is the long term objective of
this project to develop a comprehensive explanation for the deinococci's
remarkable resistance to ionizing radiation. Satisfying this objective will
entail identifying the types of proteins involved in the repair of ionizing
radiation-induced DNA damage, establishing how they interact with each other and
determining how they are regulated. This research initiates the characterization
of two recently isolated ionizing radiation sensitive mutants of Deinococcus
radiodurans R1 with the intention of determining the nature of the defect in
each mutant strain. This objective will be pursued through completion of the
following stages: (1) Sequence the irrB and irrI loci and use this information
to determine how their expression is regulated and how the Irrb and IrrI gene
products influence the activity of the D. radiodurans repair protein,
endonuclease (. (2) Evaluate each mutant strain for the ability to recognize and
repair ionizing and ultraviolet radiation induced DNA damage by determining a)
if cell extracts from these strains can bind DNA damage and b) if these strains
can repair damaged transforming DNA. (3) Evaluate each mutant for its effect on
the extensive DNA degradation observed post-irradiation. For each mutant, it wil
l be determined: a) whether DNA damage is exported from the cell into the growth
medium, b) what the size of the exported fragments are c) if the kinetics of
damage export differs from wild type export during the first and second phases
of DNA degradation, and d) if degradation terminates when repair should be
complete. %%% Active oxygen species, in particular hydroxyl radicals, are the
agents that mediate the majority of ionizing radiation-induced cellular damage
in aerobic aqueous environments. It is, therefore, expected that the study of
the deinococci will yield general insights into how the lethal effects of
oxidative cellular damage is best avoided. ***