* 9418210
* (GRGC) Coll Research:    Paleofloral and Stratigraphic      Analysis and Eocene-Oligocene Climate Change in a Single    Continental Section in North-Central Oregon
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Gary Smith, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 09/30/1997
* USD 30,288.00

9418210 Smith Climate change near the Eocene-Oligocene boundary was one of the
most significant environmental changes of the Phanerozoic. The nature of this
geologically abrupt global cooling, and hypotheses for its cause, have come
largely from study of continuous marine stratigraphic records. In order to
understand the dynamics of global climate change, it is essential to better
understand the nature of the early Oligocene climatic deterioration on
continents. To date, the interpretation of climate change at the time in North
America has been based on scattered, and in some cases poorly dated, paleo-
floras. Ambiguities remain, therefore, on age relationships of these
climatically-sensitive floras and the extent to which differences between them
represent true temporal change rather than variations in altitude and other
environmental parameters between floral sites. We will study a sequence of
fossil floras preserved in a single stratigraphic sequence, in north-central
Oregon, where reconnaissance work suggests a record of the entire climate
change. Detailed collection, study, and interpretation of these floras will be
complemented by geologic mapping, sedimentological, and stratigraphic study to
assure the stratigraphic framework of strata containing the fossils and the
depositional environments (and thus environmental or taphonomic biases)
represented by beds enclosing the floras. The paleofloras are hosted in
volcaniclastic sediment interlayered with tuffs and lava flows that will be
dated by 40Ar/39Ar method in order to constrain the chronology of the
climatically- driven floral change in central Oregon.