* 9418132
* (GRGC) Support of Travel to XIV Congress International      Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA), August 1995,         Berlin, Germany
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* A. F. Spilhaus, Jr., American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 04/30/1996
* USD 12,000.00

9418132 Spilhaus Pressing national concerns with Global Change and the
mitigation of natural hazards are leading to increased importance for research
on the environments of the recent geological past. International collaboration
has become essential for the analysis of important scientific problems related
to these issues. This project will support the participation of about 50 key
U.S. researchers, including new-career scholars, at the XIV Congress of the
international Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA) in Berlin, Germany, August
2-10, 1995. Owing to its strong multidisciplinary tradition, INQUA has direct
relevance to seven programs within NSF. The scientific contacts achieved at this
meeting and the related scientific field excursions will be invaluable for
enhancing understanding of the dynamic earth system at a critical point. The
habitability of the planet depends of this understanding and its application to
real Earth problems within the coming decade or so. A similar travel grant
program supported attendance by 32 U.S. Quaternary scientists (including ten
delegates) at INQUA XIII in Beijing in 1991. The U.S. with a total attendance of
108 scientists made a strong showing, especially in the areas of paleoclimatic
modeling, oceanography and paleoecology. Numerous favorable written reports
(available for scrutiny on demand) by the scientists whose travel was subsidized
clearly attest to the long- term value of such international meetings and the
scientific contacts they foster.