* 9418301
* The Copper-Gold Association in Porphyry and Epithermal      Systems:   Variations in Time-Space and Geochemical         Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Marco Einaudi, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* William Hart
* 03/31/1998
* USD 244,000.00

9418301 Einaudi The link between acid-sulfate alteration and gold deposition in
the epithermal environment, and between epithermal- and porphyry-type
alteration-mineralization will be studied in the Potrerillos district, Chile.
Documentation of porphyry- epithermal transitions is difficult because most
districts lack exposure of the deep plutonic source region. The district was
chosen because of excellent exposures of these many ore-types and because in
many localities they are superimposed, allowing determination of relative age.
Absolute timing of igneous and hydrothermal events will be documented by high
precision Ar-Ar age dating in the context of mapped cross-cutting relations.
Geochemical factors affecting fluid evolution and the partitioning of Cu and Au
between different environments, will be assessed by detailed field mapping and
core logging, and by petrographic, analytical, and fluid inclusion studies in
conjunction with data on phase equilibria. Deposits known as "Cordilleran base-
metal lodes", are superimposed on, and genetically linked to, porphyry copper
deposits. Less well known are the analogous lode deposits, also porphyry-
related, that occur in carbonate wall rocks. This deposit type, and its link to
proximal skarn and to distal quartz-pyrite-gold replacement deposits will be
studies in the Superior district, Arizona by similar methods. Results of this
research will contribute to the understanding of sources and physiochemical
evolution of crustal fluids linked to subvolcanic environments.