* 9418400
* Molecular Analysis of Abscission Zone Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Rod Wing, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jess K. Zimmerman
* 12/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

Abscission is an almost universal phenomenon by which plants shed organs. In
terms of ecology and adaptation, it allows flexibility in dealing with stresses,
injuries, and failure of pollination. It accommodates fruit and seed dispersal
and seasonal dormancy. Economically it becomes important in terms of leaf
removal, flower/young fruit removal, and mature fruit harvest. There are
agricultural situations where it would be desirable to either promote or reduce
leaf, flower/young fruit or mature fruit abscission. Abscission can be divided
into three stages. First, the development of a region where abscission will
occur --- the abscission zone (AZ); second, the actual separation of the organ
from the plant; and third, the formation of a protective layer of cells on the
proximal end of the zone. Although the process of cell separation between cells
of fully developed AZs has been well investigated, the process by which certain
cells differentiate as an abscission zone is not well understood. Experiments
described in this proposal will examine the molecular and cellular mechanisms
involved in the process by which an AZ forms on tomato pedicels. The long term
goals of this program are to establish a model system that can be utilized to
study the gene regulation and cell biology of abscission zone development.
Tomato is an ideal system with which to set up such a model system. The PI hopes
to determine the role of the jointless gene in the abscission process and relate
the pattern of expression of this gene with the development of abscission zones
in chimeric plants.