* 9418077
* Exocytotic Signalling Through Sperm Receptors for Eggs
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1995,08/31/1998
* David Miller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1998
* USD 315,000.00

David J. Miller IBN 9418077 University of Illinois-Champaign Exocytotic
Signalling Through Sperm Receptors for Eggs The overall goal of these studies is
to gain a clearer understanding of the process of fertilization at a molecular
levelwhich will result in a greater ability to increase or decrease
fertilization rates. In order to manipulate this process,it is imperative that
we identify receptors on sperm and eggs that interact to allow sperm to bind to
eggs. These studies build upon previous work that has identified a receptor on
mammalian sperm that binds an egg coat glycoprotein. ZP3 is a glycoprotein found
in the egg coat that binds to beta 1,4-galacotosyltransferase (GalTase) that is
found on the surface of sperm. Following binding, ZP3 causes sperm to release
the acrosome, an enzyme-filled vesicle whose contents digest a pathway for sperm
through the egg coat. The acrosome reaction is required for fertilization.
However, the mechanisms by which ZP3 induces the acrosome reaction are not
understood. The lack of progress has been primarily due to a gap in our
knowledge of ZP3 receptors and signal transduction molecules. With the recent
discovery that sperm GalTase serves as a specific receptor for ZP3, signaling
events following binding may now be studied more rationally. Importantly, recent
evidence suggests that aggregation of sperm GalTase by ZP3 elicits the release
of the sperm acrosome. Thus GalTase may act not only to bind ZP3, but also as a
receptor to initiate signaling mechanisms leading to the acrosome reaction.
Because it is difficult to study signaling during the acrosome reaction in
sperm, an analogous model system will be used that can be made to express
GalTase, Xenopus laevis oocytes. Both sperm and oocytes release vesicles
(acrosome or cortical granules) in response to appropriate activators. For a
variety of technical reasons, vesicle release in Xenopus oocytes is easier to
study. In these experiments it is proposed to: 1). confirm that GalTase binding
in sperm results in signal transduction and release of the sperm acrosome, 2).
determine if Xenopus oocytes expressing murine GalTase on their surface
specifically bind ZP3, 3). ascertain if GalTase initiates signaling events in
Xenopus oocytes, causing release of vesicles, and 4). determine which
cytoplasmic amino acid residues in GalTase are required for GalTase-induced egg
vesicle release and to investigate which signaling molecules they activate.
Collectively, these specific aims will determine if GalTase is simply a non-
signaling adhesion molecule or if, like some other adhesion molecules, it also
transmits a signal intracellularly. These studies will identify important
signals during vesicle release. These aims will also determine the feasibility
of studying acrosome release using a new and innovative system. This system
should allow a clearer understanding of how a sperm receptor for the egg
receives a cue from the zona pellucida and initiates the process of the acrosome
release. ***