* 9418699
* Regulation of GlnR (the glnRA repressor) in Bacillus        subtilis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Harold Schreier, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 304,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F u e_L C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t S O b j e c
t P o o l u e_L u e_L 4 @ ; < = > ? @ A B C D E F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; 9418699 Schreier The molecular mechanism of
regulation of glutamine synthetase (GS) synthesis in Bacillus subtilis will be
studied. GS is essential for introducing ammonium ions into the mainstream of
nitrogen metabolism. In B. subtilis, regulation of GS occurs primarily at the
level of transcription, and control appears to be unique among the numerous
bacterial regulatory systems studied to date. It has been established that GS
itself is involved in control, but the role the enzyme plays in this capacity is
unknown. In addition, GS expression is negatively affected by a transcriptional
regulatory protein called GlnR. Encoded by glnR, which precedes the GS
structural gene, glnA in a dicistronic operon, GlnR inhibits transcription by
binding to two operators adjacent to and within the glnRA promoter; how GlnR
activity is regulated is not known. The proposed research will determine the
mechanisms involved in regulating transcription from the glnRA promoter and
including the following objectives: (a) since GlnR appears to be affected by
glutamate and several (-keto acids, experiments will be per formed to
characterize these interactions both biochemically and physiologically; (b) the
relationship between GS and GlnR will be examined; (c) mutant phenotypes in GS
and GlnR will be also characterized both biochemically in in vitro, as well as
in in vivo studies. %%% This is an award to continue studies on the regulation
of nitrogen metabolism in Bacillus subtilis, which is a spore-forming bacterium
important to the biotechnology industry. Work has focused on the pathway
involved in ammonia assimilation and experiments have been performed to
characterize the factors involved in controlling synthesis of glutamine
synthetase (GS). GS is a critical enzyme in metabolism since it operated to
support the incorporation of ammonia by GS into the cell. This results in the
production of glutamine, an amino acid central to metabolism. In addition to
providing nitrogen for approximately 80% of the nitrogen-containing compounds in
the cell, glutamine bridges carbon and nitrogen metabolism through a variety of
pathways. Because B. subtilis is also able to reverse this process and change
many nitrogen-containing compounds back to ammonia and simple non-nitrogenous
carbon components, the route of ammonia assimilation and release is important in
understanding how the organism grows. Studies have shown that the control of GS
production in B. subtilis occurs in a manner unique among bacteria. The enzyme
appears to act in concert with a regulatory protein called GlnR to influence its
own formation. Nothing is known about how GS and GlnR interact or about the
nature of the signals that they respond to. Consequently, experiments will be
designed to focus on these issues. *** Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Schreier, Harold J. Robert Uffen Shelley A. Graves
@ Y S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( : K @ ^L @ g ^_L @ _ Microsoft Word
6.0 4 ; e = e S j j j j j j j 1 ' ) ) ) # L l T D j j j j j ' ~ j j j j '
9418699 Schreier The molecular mechanism of regulation