* 9418704
* Collaborative Research: (GRGC) Testing the Hypothesis of a  Cretaceous Supertropical Climate Zone in the Caribbean      Province
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Erle Kauffman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 01/31/1997
* USD 95,551.00

9418704 Kauffman This proposal focuses on testing the stability of cretaceous
climates in the Caribbean Province by analyzing integrated high- resolution
stratigraphic, sedimentologic , paleobiologic and geochemical data, in
conjunction with climate simulations, to test the hypothesis of a warmer and
more saline core tropical climate zone - Supertethys (Kauffman and Johnson,
1988) - and to define its temporal and spatial characteristics. Tests will be
made along two north-south transects spanning the entire cretaceous paleotropics
and its margins, plotted on the Caribbean plate reconstructions of Pindell and
Barrett (1990), and will utilize a series of three time slices representing
different stages of Cretaceous climate-ocean history (Late Albian, Early
Turonian, Early Maastrichtian). These time slices will span the interval for
which paleobiogeographic and reef diversity data (Johnson, 1993; 1994, in press)
propose two episodes of development and an intervening period of collapse of
Supertethys. One transect will extend from New Mexico through west Texas,
Mexico, Central American and western Venezuela (Fig.1); the second will extend
from Oklahoma through central Texas, and Greater Antilles, Trinidad, the Dutch,
West Indies, and eastern Venezuela to northern Brazil (Fig.1). For each time
slice, detailed facies analyses of shallow water platform sequences will be used
to independently determine areas of net evaporation, upwelling , etc. Stable
isotope analyses of unaltered rudisted bivalve shell material, early marine
cements, and foraminifer tests where available, will allow definition of
relative sea surface (photic zone) temperature/salinity, and characterization of
north to south thermal gradients. Paleobiological data along the transects will
include species and generic dispersion maps, taxonomic and ecologic analyses of
community composition and structure, statistically predicted latitudinal
diversity gradients, and ana lyses of paleobiogeographic dispersion, dispersal
pathways, and the taxonomic composition and boundary characteristics of
paleobiogeographic units. A partial stratigraphic and paleobiologic data base
exists for each transect and time slice, enhancing the efficiency of the
proposed research. Integration of these data sets for each time slice will allow
identification, and where present, characterization of the supertropical
Caribbean climate zone (Supertethys), its dynamic evolution during the
Cretaceous greenhouse interval, its effect on the evolution, diversification,
and extinction of tropical organisms/ecosystems, the structure and chemistry of
tropical Cretaceous seas, and the evolution of Cretaceous paleoclimates. These
data will be directly applied to testing and modifying Cretaceous climate
simulations generated using the Semtner-Chervin eddy-resolving ocean general
circulation model (Semtner and Chervin, 1988) and the GENESIS atmospheric
general circulation model (Pollard and Thompson 1993a,b) for these same time
intervals.