* 9418450
* Characterization of the Drosophila Four-Jointed Gene
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Flora Katz, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/1997
* USD 180,000.00

9418450 Katz The adult form is built on a scaffold of information laid down in
three axes during development: the anterior-posterior, dorsal-ventral, and
proximal-distal (PD) axes. The PD axis is used in the formation of the limbs, to
set distance from the trunk. When molecules needed to initiate or interpret this
axis are abnormal or absent, the limbs fail to form or are grossly distorted in
morphology. In the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, we are just beginning to
understand how PD axes are established at specific positions in the embryo, but
virtually nothing is known about how the individual cells in the developing limb
read this axis in order to elaborate segments with different lengths and
identities. However, molecules must exist that can respond to this axis, set
boundaries, and control growth regionally during limb morphogenesis. The four-
jointed (fj) gene appears to have some of the properties expected for molecules
involved in these latter events. It is expressed at prospective segment
boundaries in the developing leg, its absence results in partial loss and fusion
of segments, and it interacts with a group of genes that are required for growth
control in the limbs. The molecular characterization of a suggests it encodes a
cell surface molecule. The present proposal is concerned with further exploring
the biochemical, developmental, and functional properties of this molecule, and
revealing the biochemical pathway in which it participates. By looking for
interactions with genes that produce similar abnormalities when they are mutant,
we have recently shown that mutations in the abelson gene, which can mutate to a
cancerous (oncogenic) form in humans, interacts with , fj mutations in
Drosophila, suggesting these genes might share a common pathway. Since very
little is known about the normal function of the abelson protein, our studies
may also contribute to a better understanding of this important molecule. The
richness of the genetic interactions already uncovered suggest thes e studies
may reveal a new pathway of genes involved in limb development. As it has become
apparent that molecules involved in setting the PD axis in flies are also
involved in initiating the limb bud in vertebrates, demonstrating a remarkable
conservation in strategy and function, molecules involved in the readout and
realization of this axis may also be conserved. The exploration of, fj function
may therefore not only provide insight into how a fly builds a leg, but may also
provide clues to more general and fundamental morphogenetic mechanisms.