* 9418189
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  (GRGC) Holocene Lacustrine Records of Decade- to Century-Scale Variation in Monsoon            Precipitation, Northwestern India
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Lisa Ely, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/1999
* USD 135,315.00

Ely 9418189 The principal objective of this project is to document and
understand decade- to century-scale paleoclimatic variations in the monsoon
region of northwestern India, using detailed sedimentary records from three lake
in northwestern India. The finely- laminated sediments in these lakes preserve
an exceptional record of high-resolution lake-level variations over the last
10,000 to 13,000 years, possibly the most complete and detailed Holocene
paleoclimatic record within the Indian Monsoon region. The lakes lie in the
arid/semiarid Thar Desert at the boundary of the region dominated by summer
monsoon rainfall (Singh et al., 1990), and are thus particularly sensitive to
fluctuations in the strength of the monsoon. Analysis of these lacustrine
records will address how the decadal-scale variations in the monsoon respond to
longer-term shifts in the monsoon paleoclimate, providing a high-resolution
record that covers a sufficiently long time scale to fully capture the natural
range of variability in the monsoon system, information that is essential for
understanding near-term future climatic variations in the monsoon region. This
is a collaborative project between researchers at Central Washington University
and the of University of Arizona (see accompanying proposal). The methodology
involves reconstructine decade- to century-scale changes in lake levels,
salinity, and sediment influx in three shallow, closed-basin lakes through a
combination of (1) detailed stratigraphy and sedimentology of finely laminated
sediments, (2) evaporite and clay mineralogy, and (3) radiocarbon dating.
Potential application of microfauna, trace elements, stable isotopes and pollen
toward this problem will be explored and tested, but will not be a main focus of
the study. These data, along with modern data on precipitation, water-table
elevations , evaporation, and temperature, will be used to construct
hydrological lake-budget models and quantify the changes in hydro logic and
climatic parameters necessary to produce the lake fluctuations. The analyses
will concentrate on the high-resolution variations preserved in the primary
stratigraphy during extended periods of high, low , and transitional lake-level
conditions. We will emphasize specific periods of interest, including (a)
internals of high variability and changing conditions, such as wet-dry
transitions, (b) short-lived, shallow lakes in the late Holocene that reflect
minor climatic fluctuations and/or extreme events in the last 4000 years and (c)
periods of particularly high (e.g. 4000-6000 BP) or low lake levels. Analysis of
the high- resolution paleohydrological variations will add a new dimension to
broader-scale reconstructions of Holocene paleoclimates in monsoonal regions of
India, Asia and Africa.