* 9418164
* Infrared Spectroscopic Studies of the Photosynthetic Oxygen-Evolving Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Bridgette Barry, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1999
* USD 357,800.00

9418164 Barry The technique of infrared spectroscopy will be used to investigate
the relationship between structure and function in the photosynthetic oxygen-
evolving complex, photosystem II. These experiments will focus on the manganese-
containing catalytic site and on the 33 kDa manganese-stabilizing extrinsic
protein. The oxidation of water is a four electron event. The manganese-
containing catalytic site of the photosystem II reaction center accumulates
these four oxidizing equivalents and cycles through a series of five "S states."
Vibrational spectroscopy will be used to obtain information concerning the
structural changes that occur in the manganese cluster and in the reaction
center upon photooxidation. Infrared spectroscopy will also be employed in order
to investigate the structure and functional role of the 33 kDa protein. This
proposal has three objectives: A) to use difference infrared spectroscopy to
measure and to identify the structural changes that occur upon oxidation of the
photosystem II manganese cluster; B) to test the hypothesis that secondary
structure changes occur in the 33 kDa protein when this extrinsic subunits binds
to the photosystem II reaction center; C) to use difference infrared
spectroscopy to determine if removal of the 33 kDa protein influences the
structural changes that accompany oxidation of the manganese cluster. %%%
Photosynthesis in plants involves the conversion of light energy into chemical
energy. This process is carried out be the multi- step transfer of electrons in
membrane associated proteins. Through this transfer of electrons, a relatively
stable separation of charge is built up across the membrane. This charge
separation is the energy storage event and is driven by the energy of light. The
ultimate donor of electrons is water; the process of removal of electrons from
water results in the liberation of oxygen. This oxygen production is critical
for the maintenance of human life on earth. This propo sal will fund studies of
the membrane associated protein that is responsible for the production of
oxygen. Oxygen producing chemistry occurs at a cluster of four manganese atoms.
Through the use of vibrational spectroscopy, we will obtain new information
concerning the structure and binding site of the manganese cluster, as well as
concerning the chemistry that occurs at this metal cluster. Vibrational
spectroscopy is the ideal technique to use to investigate these processes, since
it is exquisitely sensitive to small structural alterations. ***