* 9418226
* An Experimental Study of Reaction - Coupled Flow and        Mass Transport in Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Frank Schwartz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1999
* USD 190,000.00

This experimental study investigates coupled processes of flow and reactive mass
in porous media. Of interest are reactive transport processes that involve
coupling both through density effects and heterogeneous chemical reactions that
may alter the hydraulic character of the medium. The goal of this study is to
contribute fundamental knowledge concerning reaction-coupled mass transport. Two
and Three-dimensional experiments with flow tanks will be used to elucidate the
time-space evolution of reaction fronts and fluid chemistry in porous media, and
to interpret the nature of the feedbacks that exist between density-driven flow,
and reactive mass transport. The experiments will involve pumping a dilute
Fe(CIO4) 3 solution through a mixture of quartz sand and a small quantity of
crushed calcite. The initial acidity of the solution will promote calcite
dissolution and lead to the precipitation of ferric oxyhydroxide. The resultant
pore plugging will result in patterning in hydraulic conductivity and reroute
fluid flow through the tanks. These patterns can be documented photog raphically
in two-dimensional experiments. The three-dimensional experiments are
technically more challenging and require that reaction fronts be described with
both in situ hydraulic conductivity measurements and electrical measurements
with a permanently installed electrode array. This research builds on our
studies of instabilities in variable density flows, and will contribute new
knowledge in the emerging area of coupled processes and practical problems of
contaminant support.