* 9418833
* Factors Controlling the Abundance of 13C in Algal and       Sedimentary Biomarkers from the Amundsen and Bellingshausen Seas, Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Arndt Schimmelmann, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 12/31/1996
* USD 204,371.00

9418833 Hayes This project deals with the general question of the interpretation
of paleoceanographic information that is encoded in the organic debris of sea
floor muds and sediment cores, that is, what is the relationship between the
sedimentary carbon and nitrogen isotopes of organic molecules and contemporary
oceanographic conditions. Specifically the linkages among types of algae,
conditions of their growth, and the concentration of organic and inorganic
nutrients will be examined through the analysis of seawater and sediment samples
obtained from the Bellinghausen and Amundsen Seas in early 1994. Particular
emphasis will be placed on the relationship between the Carbon-13 content of
specific species of algae, and the concentrations of nitrate, phosphate, and
dissolved carbon dioxide in the water column. The seas surrounding Antarctica
are important in this context because of their presumptive importance in
regulating global climate patterns. On the global scale, measurements of
sedimentary Carbon-13 are made routinely in the context of biogeochemical
cycling studies. However the association of Carbon-13 isotopic variability with
particular processes or phenomena that appear statistically valid in one region
are generally found not to be valid in others, implying that small-scale
relationships cannot simply be generalized to large-scale relationships. The
advantage of analyzing this particular data set lies in the fact that a large
body of ancillary information was obtained on the cruise, and therefore the
strong potential exists to tie together existing, but less complete, data sets
in addition to elucidating temperature effects on underlying biochemical
processes, and defining specifically antarctic processes. ***