* 9418096
* Mechanisms of Competition and Coexistence in Freshwater     Algae and Bacteria
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* James Grover, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 01/31/1999
* USD 124,941.00

9418096 Grover Different species of organisms compete for the resources needed
for growth. Theoretically, such competition can lead to extinction of all
species but the best competitor. Algae and bacteria in freshwater habitats often
compete for dissolved phosphorus, an essential nutrient, but are observed to
coexist in most habitats, despite the superior competitive ability of bacteria.
The mechanisms that allow this coexistence are currently unknown, and this study
will use laboratory investigations to explore them. This will be done by growing
algae and bacteria together under defined conditions, identifying the organisms
that coexist, and determining their properties that allow coexistence. Working
hypotheses to be examined in these studies include (1) the possibility that lack
of a sufficient supply of dissolved organic carbon, required by bacteria but not
algae, limits the ability of bacteria to consume phosphorus, (2) the possibility
that algae and bacteria specialize on chemically distinct forms of phosphorus,
(3) the possibility that when phosphorus supply varies, algae are best able to
store phosphorus acquired at elevated concentrations, while bacteria are best
able to acquire phosphorus at low background concentrations, and (4) the
possibility that protozoa eating bacteria, but not algae, limit the growth of
bacteria, thus allowing algae to acquire phosphorus. Excessive algal growth is a
common water quality problem, and such excessive growth is often related to the
phosphorus supply that a body of water receives. Understanding the competitive
balance between algae and bacteria in acquiring this phosphorus will help
provide a scientific basis for management of water quality.