* 9418086
* Protein Interactions During Replication of a Plant          Rhabodovirus
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Andrew Jackson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1998
* USD 424,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F l; C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l l; l; 8 9 : ; < = > ? @ A F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9418086 Jackson This proposal addresses the intracellular
location of viral proteins involved in replication and packaging the plant
rhabdovirus, sonchus yellow net virus (SYNV), and the biochemistry of the events
occurring during replication of the virus in the plant nucleus and subsequent
budding from the nuclear membrane. This is a continuing study from one of the
few labs in the world studying this important class of enveloped virus in plants
at the cellular and molecular level. The biology of SYNV challenges the
paradigms of animal rhabdovirus biology. Unlike the animal rhabdovirus,
Vesicular Stomatitis Virus (VSV), which replicates in cytoplasm and buds from
the cell membrane, thereby serving as a model for secretory membrane traffic,
SYNV replicates in the nucleus and buds from the nuclear membrane . This
proposal will study these differences, including examining the nature of a gene
product, sc4, not found in animal rhabdoviruses. The nuclear targeting of this
product, which lacks a transmembrane domain, is of particular interest. The
nature of the nuclear targeting domains of th e other proteins is of interest in
order to lay a firm groundwork for this system. Since replication occurs in the
nucleus, potentially novel aspects of the replication complex of SYNV will be
explored through the analysis of protein-protein interaction of transcription-
active proteins and the comparison of the transcriptionally inactive core
particles from purified virus with transcriptionally active nuclear complexes.
%%% Information on plant Rhabdovirusues is limited in comparison to their animal
counterparts. Yet, as has been shown in the case of other groups that encompass
both animal and plant viruses, such as the picorna- and sindbis-like virus
groups, and the Bunyaviridae, the study in parallel members of both kingdoms has
often led to a much more rapid development of our understanding of replication
of these viruses. Investigations into targeting the components of this virus
into the nucleus are also timely because the mechanism of targeting select
proteins into the lumen of the nucleus and of integration of proteins into the
nuclear membrane of plant and animal cells is unclear. There is the potential
here for developing model proteins to examine targeting to the inner nuclear
envelope, an area where there is very little knowledge. The plant rhabdoviruses
could also provide a valuable system to examine nuclear/cytoplasmic flow of
protein and the intracellular flow of virion-containing vesicles in plants. ***
; Oh +' 0 S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 7 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Lawrence R. Griffing Una Solomon @ g @ @ @
Microsoft Word 6.0 4 e = e p p p p p p p C 1 Õ % t T 3 C p C p p p p Õ p p p p Õ
7 9418086 Jackson This proposal addresses the intracellular lo