* 9418657
* (GRGC) Isotope Sedimentology of 40ka Time-Series From       Iberian Sites as a Test of Abrupt Arid/Himid Switching      Within the Mediterranean Climate Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Kerry Kelts, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/1999
* USD 118,302.00

9418657 Kelts The western Mediterranean paleoclimate during the last 40ka
remains controversial in terms of comparing structure and timing of events with
higher latitudes. This proposal targets the development of high resolution
sediment and isotope stratigraphies from 3 sites of the eastern Iberian
peninsula. Its objectives are to move toward a time-series approach to testing
for the coherency of abrupt humid/arid transitions including potential moisture
impacts from Heinrich events or Dansgaard-Oschger cycles over a region
transitional between Europe and Africa. The project is a unique collaborative
opportunity with Spanish colleagues from Barcelona who will provide supporting
paleoecological analyses and the access to high-quality, long, continuous
lacustrine cores. These cores have adequate dating to prove they contain records
back &gt;40ka BP. These 3 sites: La Paul de Bubal (central Pyrenees), Lake
Banyoles (eastern Pyrenees) in the north and Lake Salines in southeast Spain,
form a transect across moisture gradients. Each core contains abundant, good
authigenic and biogenic carbonate phases which faithfully archive isotope
signatures of the past aqueous dynamics. The results will be interpreted within
the context of changing climatic patterns which determine effective moisture.
The project will also test new strategies for the interpretation of carbon and
oxygen isotopic ratios. Because of the inherent difficulties of interpreting
stable isotopes from dynamic continental areas, this project depends on the
careful integration of several proxies (sediment, Geochemical, magnetic, isotope
and pollen) as well micro-scale facies analyses and sample characterization.
Supplementary AMS radiocarbon and Th/U dating will be applied to increase
precision across event transitions.