* 9418745
* Sixth International Conference on Juvenile Hormone,         September 10-15, 1995, Woods Hole, Masssachusetts
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Noelle Granger, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Stacia A. Sower
* 03/31/1996
* USD 5,160.00

9418745 Granger Funds are requested to support a scientific conference entitled
"Sixth International Conference on the Juvenile Hormones" to be held September
10-15, 1995 in Woods Hole, Massachusetts. The purpose of the meeting is the
presentation and discussion of recent developments in the endocrinology of the
juvenile hormones (JH) which regulate growth, development, and reproduction in
the insects. The following topics will be discussed: 1) the evolution of
juvenile hormones; 2) JH biosynthesis and metabolism; 3) regulation of transport
by JH; 4) regulation of JH production; 5) JH receptors on cells; 6) mode of
action and JH-regulated genes; 7) the role of JH in reproduction; 8) new
technology in JH research; and 9) recent developments in applied research. In
addition to feature lectures, there will be shorter talks and poster sessions.
The proceedings of the meeting will be published in a double volume of Archives
of Insect Biochemistry and Physiology. This is traditionally a small meeting,
with its 80-100 participants coming from the United States, Canada, Europe,
Israel, India, China and Japan. Principal speakers to head each session are
chosen from the registrants, with additional speakers and poster presenters
chosen on the basis of submitted abstracts. Participation of students and post-
doctoral fellows has always been encouraged. This conference is unique in its
focus and draws scientists working in many different basic and applied
scientific disciplines for discussions of the research progress in very
important aspects of insect growth and development. ***