* 9419727
* The Role of Earthworms in Conservation and Loss of Carbon   and Nitrogen From Agroecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Benjamin Stinner, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 02/28/1999
* USD 655,000.00

PI-PARMELEE, EDWARDS, STINNER, and GROFFMAN: Recent research indicates that
earthworms are significant organisms in affecting key transformations of carbon
and nitrogen in agroecosystems. Earthworms can increase the cycling of carbon
and nitrogen by interacting with the microbial community and by altering soil
structural properties. Deqpite increasing evidence that earthworms have a major
role in nutrient cycling processes in agroecosystems, little research has
addressed the role of earthworms on ecosystem-level flux of nutrients in the
field. Established enclosures will be used where earthworm populations have been
either reduced, left un-manipulated, or increased. The research will address the
question of what are the ecosystem-level effects of earthworms on the
conservation and loss of carbon and nitrogen in agroecosystems. This research is
important because it will, for the first time, examine how a specific group of
soil invertebrates can control the balance between storage and loss of nutrients
in ecosystems. The research will develop a model approach for investigating the
effects of key organisms on ecosystem-level flux by combining studies of
biological, chemical, and physical processes. The research also is relevant to
basic ecosystem questions concerning nutrient cycling processes, and will
provide essential data to evaluate sustainability in agroecosystems because of
the focus on storage and loss of nutrients.