* 9419604
* High-Speed, Monolayer Sensitivity Scanning Microcalorimetry for Solid-Solid Interface and Surface Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1995
* Leslie Allen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 10/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9419604 Allen Research will be carried out to explore and study a new approach
to scanning calorimetry. The proposed approach is potentially a very powerful
method for directly obtaining quantitative values for small enthalpy of
reactions at interfaces, surfaces and near surface regions. We expect to achieve
sensitivity equivalent to the enthalpy of submonolayer desorption, to
demonstrate the utility of the method for the measurement of extremely small
amounts of heat generated during solid/solid reactions and surface processes as
well as low enthalpy of internal microcrystalline processes. We will measure the
kinetics of interface reactions such as the nucleation of silicides at buried
interfaces, and begin a study of near surface processes, such as point defect
annihilation and coalescence of vacancies in silicon following ion implantation.
%%% The primary goal of this program is to develop a high sensitivity
microcalorimeter based on modern thin film techniques, and to demonstrate its
useful in gaining fundamental materials science information on surface science
phenomena such as the enthalpy of surface reconstruction, phase transformations,
and individual microscopic properties of surface chemistry processes such as the
decomposition of adsorbed species during atomic layer epitaxy. An important
feature of the program is the training of graduate and undergraduate students in
a fundamentally and technologically significant area of materials and processing
research. This research will contribute to improving the general perform ance of
advanced devices and integrated circuits used in computing, information
processing, and tele communica tions. ***