* 9419353
* A New Structure-Based Approach to Generation Control and    Frequency Regulation in Response to Slow Load Variations
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1996
* Marija Ilic, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Chanan Singh
* 03/31/1996
* USD 77,875.00

9419353 Ilic This project uses an already conceived structure-based modeling
approach which does not require the assumption on weak interconnections, and it
also naturally lends itself to inclusion of devices which control the line flows
directly. The salient features of this approach which allow for such significant
generalization of the present approaches are briefly summarized in this
Proposal, and are further supported by several publications. Conceptually, the
proposed approach allows for extracting minimum order models directly relevant
for various levels of a very large scale dynamical system, much in the spirit of
the Coordination Theory for multivariable systems. The modeling and control
concepts developed recently by the PI and her team offer simple ways of
supporting this mainly qualitative theory in terms of explicit, low order models
directly relevant for specific levels of a complex system. Using vertical
separation principle under the assumption of stable and fast dynamics at the
lowest level, relatively low- order-discrete-time models are extracted at both
secondary (subsystem) and tertiary (interconnected) system levels. A direct
mapping between these models and the physical processes captured are illustrated
in this Proposal as applied to the real power generation control problem for
frequency regulation in a multi-utility environment. The main objective of this
project is to apply this approach towards further development of a systematic
framework for next generation Load Frequency Control (LRC) / Automatic
Generation Control (AGC) of the electric power systems. Particular emphasis is
on accommodating the open access operating mode evolving among the utilities in
the United States. ***