* 9419807
* Basal Lamina Determinants of Luteovirus Transmission:  Role in Evolution of Virus-Vector Specificity
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Diana Cox-Foster, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/1999
* USD 180,000.00

9419807 Cox-Foster Luteoviruses are small RNA viurses that infect all major food
crops causing severe economic losses worldwide, yet they receive relatively
little attention. To be transmitted by the insect vector, the aphid, the virus
must enter the circulatory system through the gut and enter the salivary gland.
The work in this proposal builds on the observation made by the principal
investigators that the extracellular glycoprotein matrix of the basal lamina
surrounding the aphid salivary gland regulates, in part, luteovirus transmission
and vector specificity. The first objective of the work is to determine whether
species-specific components of the basal lamina associate with transmissible
viruses, but not with nontransmissible ones. The second objective is to identify
specific surface domains on the virion protein capsid that interact with the
basal lamina and function as virus-specific recognition sites permitting virus
attachment and pentration into the salivary gland. Since almost nothing is known
about virion penetration of the extracellular matrix components which comprise
the basal lamina, the proposed work may give fundamental insight into the
mechanism by which large protein aggregates, such as virions, actively move
across these semipermeable barriers which would otherwise exclude them on the
basis of size. %%% If the underlying hypothesis on basement membrane recognition
is correct, the research is likely to make a major impact on our understanding
of luteovirus biology and basement membrane fucntion. It would, furthermore,
likely lead to new strategies to interfere with luteovirus life cycle, impacting
on a significant agricultural problem. ***