* 9419167
* Feeding Lateral Line Sensory Ecology of Lake Baikal Sculpins
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* John Janssen, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 06/30/1997
* USD 47,000.00

9419167 Fish use special sensory organs called lateral line systems to detect
water motion and pressure changes produced by underwater sounds. The sensory
receptors, called neuromasts, are usually sheltered in canals but sometimes
exposed on the surface. The canals are thought to filter low frequency noise,
like that produced by water motion from stream flow or active swimming, and
improve the ability of fish in noisy environments to detect signals produced by
other swimming animals. Lake Baikal in Siberia is the world's deepest and oldest
freshwater lake. Its fish fauna is dominated by sculpins which have evolved
unusual lateral line systems that include mostly superficial neuromasts except
for a few species with neuromasts primarily in canals. The abundance of species
with mostly superficial neuromasts is a unique feature of this ancient lake, and
provide a special opportunity for the study of canal function. The lake has 29
species of closely-related sculpins, most of which live in the quiet and dark
depths, but some of which come to the surface to feed at night. This research
will examine the search behavior and ability to detect prey of the Baikal
sculpins, and test the hypothesis that sheltering neuromasts in canals is an
adaptation to foraging in noisy environments. Fish responses to prey will be
videotaped in noisy and quiet environments, and reaction distances will be used
as an index to prey sensitivity. Anatomy of the lateral line organs will be
documented using plastic casts of the canal systems and scanning electron
microscopy to count hair cells. The research will determine the functional and
adaptive significance of lateral line architecture. It may ultimately lead to an
understanding of the design of canal structure in filtering noise and increasing
sensitivity to certain underwater signals.