* 9419789
* Acquisition of a Instant Imager Electronic Autoradiography System
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1997
* Richard Fine, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 01/31/1997
* USD 33,064.00

This proposal is a request for a Packard InstantImager Electronic
Autoradiography System which electronically locates and measures radioactivity
directly on gels, blots, thin layer chromatography, tissue slices, or any other
flat samples up to 20 X 24 cm2. This instrument will directly measure in real
time disintegrations eliminating the need for either X-ray film or storage
phosphor screens. The Boston University biochemistry department is a large
multifaceted teaching and research department. Most members perform basic
research in molecular and/or cellular biochemistry. Usually this research
requires radiolabeling techniques in order to detect small amounts of
biologically relevant molecules. Radiolabeled proteins, RNA, DNA and lipids are
often separated by gel electrophoresis or thin layer chromatography and
visualized by autoradiography using X-ray film. X-ray film autoradiography has
distinct disadvantages such as low sensitivity and small linear range making
quantitative analysis difficult and laborious. Typically, samples need to be
exposed overnight or longer. Often multiple exposures are necessary in order to
detect both high and low abundant molecules on the same gel. Most researchers,
when quantitation is critical, remove radiolabeled material from solid supports
in order to measure disintegration using a scintillation counter after
visualization by X-ray film. Recent advances in technology are making alternate
instruments available to locate and directly measure radioactivity on flat
samples with more sensitivity in far less time. The instrument will help
research efforts and will be used in several courses as an instrument to teach
essentials regarding radioactivity measurements.