* 9419041
* Multiple High-resolution Records of Geomagnetic Field       Reversals from Plio-Pleistocene Sediments in Confidence     Hills, Death Valley, California
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Joseph Kirschvink, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/1997
* USD 99,441.00

Kirschvink 9419041 Recent high-resolution studies of geomagnetic reversals have
generated heated debate concerning whether or not their transitional Virtual
Geomagnetic Pole positions (VGPs) fall along two preferred longitudinal bands,
one centered over the Americas and an antipodal one over Australasia. If these
preferred bands are indeed real, it would suggest control of the transitional
field geometry by geological structures at the core/mantle boundary. However,
alternative interpretations of these data include the suggestion that the
banding is an artifact of the process through which the sediments acquire their
remanent magnetization, and/or an artifact of the non-random distribution of
sampling sites. Resolution of these questions will require the detailed study of
additional high-resolution records of geomagnetic reversals, particularly from
sites located within the preferred longitudinal bands where data are scarce.
Work conducted previously on the Plio-Pleistocene lake sediments in the
Confidence Hills of southern Death Valley, California, has provided multiple,
high-resolution records of the top and bottom reversals of the Olduvai event. In
addition, tectonic deformation of the strata make it easy to distinguish the
present field direction form the characteristic directions, and allow a classic
paleomagnetic 'fold test' to be conducted on the transitional directions. These
results demonstrate that the two reversals are quite different -- the lower
Olduvai is consistent with confinement of the intermediate VGP directions to the
Australasian regions whereas VGPs from the upper Olduvai lie 90 degrees away
from these bands. The PI will extend this detailed study and comparison to
reversals associated with the Reunion and Jaramillo subchrons. This is the only
way in which a sufficient quantity of fully reliable data can be acquired, and
should provide a critical test of the longitudinal confinement hypothesis. ****