* 9419619
* Tyrosine Phosphorylation and Cell Signalling Conference, May 3-7, 1995 in Cold Spring Harbor, NY
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Nicholas Tonks, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 03/31/1996
* USD 6,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F t @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t # O b j e c t
P o o l `Zt `Zt & ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9419619 Tonks This is s request for support of a conference on
Tyrosine Phosphorylation and cell Signalling. The phosphorylation of proteins on
tyrosyl residues is know to be essential in the control of fundamental cellular
processes including growth and proliferation, differentiation, cytoskeletal
function and the cell cycle. There is currently activity in characterizing the
structure, regulation and function of both protein tyrosine kinase and protein
tyrosine phosphatases, which govern by their coordination the levels of cellular
phosotyrosine. The objective of this meeting is to provide a format to integrate
the study of these tyrosine kinases and phosphatases to see how they contribute
to the biological systems. The sessions will be based on physiological processes
and cellular functions rather than categories of enzymes, to provide a
biological context. With the exception of the keynote address, all speakers will
be selected from submitted abstracts. This will allow emphasis to be placed on
encouraging graduate students, postdocts and young independent investigators to
present the talks . This will also facilitate the presentation of the most
recent results. %%% Meetings like this are important for encouraging interaction
among scientists working in similar or related fields. A meeting like this also
provides opportunity for young scientists to present their work and also to meet
others in the field. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n
( % R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9419619 Una Solomon Una Solomon @ WAt @ @ WAt
@ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; ; e 3 e # j j j j j j j m 1 / O T 1 m j m j j j j ~ j j
j j g 9419619 Tonks This is s request for support of a conference on Tyrosine
Phosphorylation and cell Signalling. The phosphorylation of proteins on tyrosyl
residues is know to be essential in the control of fundamental cellular
processes including growth and proliferation, differentiation, cytoskeletal
function and the cell cycle. There is currently activity in characterizing the
structure, regulation and function of both protein tyrosine kinase and protein
tyrosine phosphatases, which govern by their coordination the levels of cellular
phosotyrosine. The objective of this meeting is to provide a format to integrate
the study of these tyrosine kinases and phosphatases to see how they contribute
to the biological systems. The sessions will be based on physiological processes
and cellular functions rather than categories of enzymes, to provide a
biological context. With the exception of the keynote address, all speakers will
be selected from submitted abstracts. This will allow emphasis to be placed on
encouraging graduate students, postdocts and young independent inv