* 9419112
* Optical Systems and Optoelectronic Packaging Based on Batch-Processed Microactuated Technologies
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Kam Yin Lau, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 12/31/1996
* USD 160,000.00

9419112 Lau A revolutionary, yet practical, approach to optoelectronic packaging
which abandons traditional methods based upon permanent, precise placement of
optical components inside the module will be investigated. In the new approach,
microactuators are included inside the adaptively-packaged module to provide for
continuous optimization of the alignment of optical components. The control
signals fed back to the microactuators are derived from monitoring one or more
key performance parameters of the system. In addition to the obvious benefit of
this design, this new approach actually reduces the manufacturing cost because
it replaces the active monitoring/alignment procedure now performed on each
module individually on the manufacturing floor (often manually), by batch-
manufacturing procedures. The precise alignment needed for high-performance
modules will be accomplished automatically in the field under electronic servo
control. The work represents a joint effort between the optoelectronics group
and the sensors and actuators group at the University of California at Berkeley.
The goals of this projects are: (1) development of silicon surface-micromachined
technology for fabrication of alignment structures which possess the motion
range, accuracy, and optical properties needed for adaptive optoelectronic
packaging; (2) rigorous testing of these structures in regard to their optical
properties, mechanical integrity, and environmental robustness; (3)
demonstration of a simple optoelectronic module, specifically a pigtailed laser
module, as a tool investigate issues related to adaptive packaging; (4)
demonstration of high-performance, high-functionality optical subsystem, namely,
a continuously-tunable narrow -linewidth external-cavity diode-laser, for
investigation of the ultimate potential and limits of adaptive optoelectronic
packaging. Successful development of this technology will lead to a great
reduction in production costs of sophisticated and high-functionality optoelect
ronic components and subsystems, presently available only as high cost, and
sometimes laboratory-bound, bench-top instruments. This development is essential
in order for optical and optoelectronic systems to make wide and lasting impact
on the communication and computing infrastructures. ***