* 9419487
* A DNA Sequencing Facility for Interdisciplinary Biological  Research
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1997
* Willem Vermaas, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1997
* USD 93,711.00

DNA sequence determinations are of fundamental importance for studies in many
areas of the biosciences. including functional biochemistry, cell and molecular
biology, population genetics, and molecular systematics. The purpose of this
proposal is to streamline DNA sequencing at Arizona State University by seeking
funds to establish a DNA sequencing facility. The major piece of equipment for
this facility will be an automated DNA sequencer, which currently is not
available at our University and which is requested in this proposal. About 20
groups at Arizona State University routinely use DNA sequencing in their
research, and a large number of graduate students, undergraduates, postdoctoral
fellows, staff, and faculty will benefit from the establishment of a DNA
sequencing facility with an automated sequencer. The sequencer requested
utilizes an infrared laser diode to excite fluorophor-labeled DNA that is size-
separated by gel electrophoresis. Fluorescence from the fluorophor is detected,
and simultaneous scanning of four sequencing lanes over time can provide a DNA
sequence of 800 nucleotides or more with over 99% accuracy in a highly cost-
effective manner. With the equipment requested, 22 samples can be sequenced
simultaneously. Apart from providing a 30% cost-share in purchasing this
equipment, the University also will create a staff-level position for an
individual to run the DNA sequencing facility and will bear most of the
personnel cost involved. A Ph.D.-level research scientist (already on staff)
will supervise the facility. Nominal user fees (about $5 per sequence) will be
charged to cover the cost of chemicals, the DNA sequencer service contract, and
a small part (about 20%) of the technician's salary. This facility will provide
a highly effective and economic mechanism to obtain and analyze DNA sequence
information. An additional benefit is that DNA sequencing becomes accessible to
a large number of graduate students who work in research areas (for examp le,
systematics and population biology) that would benefit from DNA analysis, but
for whom DNA sequencing facilities currently are not readily available. Also,
many undergraduate projects, which usually preclude use of radioactivity, could
include DNA sequencing. Another significant advantage of acquisition of an
automated DNA sequencer is that when DNA sequencing becomes more efficient,
students will be able to gather and analyze sequence information more
expediently, leaving more room for emphasis on training in other important
areas.