* 9419644
* Dissertation Research:  The Environment as as Political     Resource:  Land Reform on the Masoala Penisula, Madagascar
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Jean Ensminger, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/1996
* USD 16,410.00

This project involves the dissertation research of a student of cultural
anthropology from Washington University, St. Louis. The project is to study the
evolving process by which tribal farmers in a rural area of Madagascar defend
their claims to farmland in a forested area where the federal government and
international NGOs hope to establish a wildlife preserve. Using ethnographic
techniques of intensive interviewing about life histories and family histories,
coupled with a survey of an entire representative village and a set of intensive
interviews on land conflicts, the student will test the proposition that
wealthier villagers, who will tend to have been earlier settlers and control
more land, can more successfully contest the government's definition of rights
to land and affect the evolving social norms in their communities. This research
is important because land reform, the protection of forested areas, and the
migration of poor farmers to new agricultural zones are global processes taking
place all over the developing world. Advances in our understanding of how land
use rights become established and accepted by local communities will help
planners design more effective programs to defend wildlife areas from
encroachment. In addition this project will train a scholar in the culture and
ecology of this part of the world.