* 9419340
* Essential Features of the Peptidyl Transferase Center in theYeast Mitochondrial Ribosome
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1999
* Thomas Mason, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 03/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

Mason 9419340 The forrnation of peptide bonds in the peptidyl transferase center
(PTC) of the large nbosomal subunit is the primary catalytic activity of all
ribosomes. An important objective in the field of ribosome research is to
understand the structure and catalytic mechanism of the PTC. The sequence and
structure of the large subunit ribosomal RNA (LSU rRNA) in the PTC are very
highly conserved in nature, and there is abundant evidence supporting the
possibility that rRNA acts as a ribozyme in catalyzing the PT reaction. Current
thinking favors a structural role for the r proteins in maintaining the
conformation of active sites in the rRNA, although a catalytic role for r
proteins has not been ruled out completely. Using the yeast mitochondrial
ribosome as an experimental system, the current project has focused on the
molecular genetic analysis of mitochondrial homologues of four bacterial PTC
proteins (L2, L3, L16 and L27) and an rRNA ribose methyltransferase (Pet56p)
that catalyzes the formation of 2' O methylguanosine at a universally conserved
G nucleotide in the PTC of LSU rRNAs. The importance of modified nucleotides in
rRNA is suggested by models of the E. coli ribosome in which the majority of the
approximately 24 modified nucleotides are clustered around the mE~NA tRNA
peptide complex in the functional center of the ribosome. Three of the
modifications in the 23S rRNA of E. coli are ribose methylations at highly
conserved nucleotides in the PTC of domain V. The retention of three modified
nucleotides in the otherwise minimally modified mitochondrial LSU rRNA points to
a fundamental role for these particular modifications in ribosome assembly or
function or both. Indeed, pet56 mutants fail to assemble 54S ribosomal subunits.
A largely molecular genetic approach will be used to study the functional
requirement for Gm2251 in yeast mitochondrial ribosomes. A strategy based on
functional complementation of E. coli mutants by yeast PET56 will be used to i
dentify the gene for the bacterial homologue of Pet56p. These studies will
provide new information about the structure, function and assembly ofthe
principal catalytic center ofthe ribosome. %%% Linking amino acids through
peptide bonds is the fundamental reaction of biological protein synthesis. This
reaction takes place in the peptidyl transferase center (PTC) of the large
ribosomal subunit and is thought to occur by the same catalytic mechanism in all
cells. An important objective is to understand the respective roles ofthe
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and ribosomal proteins in the structure and catalytic
activity of the PTC. Current thinking favors a structural role for the ribosomal
proteins in maintaining the catalytic active sites in the rRNA, but there is
only a rudimentary understanding of the underlying molecular architecture. There
is a functional requirement for nucleotide modification in the PTC. Recent
results have shown that the addition of a methyl (CH3) group to the sugar of a
specific G nucleotide is an essential step in the formation of the PTC in yeast
mitochondrial ribosomes. This G nucleotide is conserved in all ofthe known LSU
rRNAs. The well studied E. coli ribosome contains ca. 24 modified nucleotides,
all clustered around the the functional center of the ribosome. In contrast, the
yeast mitochondrial ribosome has only three modified nucleotides, each identical
to one of the modifications in the PTC of E. coli LSU rRNA. The presence of only
three modified nucleotides in a functional LSU rRNA underscores the potential
importance of these particular modifications. The major objective of this
research is to understand why the addition of a single methyl group is so
crucial in a huge macromolecular complex containing a >3,000 nucleotide long
rRNA and approximately 40 ibosomal proteins. Overall, these studies will provide
new information about the principal catalytic center ofthe ribosome. ***