* 9419770
* Collaborative Research: Calcareous Nannofossil              Biostratigraphy and Paleoenvironmental History of Cape Roberts Cores
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1995,12/31/2001
* David Watkins, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 12/31/2001
* USD 50,364.00

Abstract This award supports basic characterization of calcareous nannofossils
as part of the development of the biostratigraphic framework for drill core
recovered by the Cape Roberts Project (CRP). This is a major program within the
international Antarctic earth science community, designed to sample the
stratigraphic record that spans the time interval 30 to 100 million years ago,
by drilling four sites on the flank of the Victoria Land basin. This award is to
support the drilling program by providing rapid age and paleoenvironmental
information through the study of calcareous nannofossils. This research will
systematically sample the recovered sedimentary cores and analyze their
calcareous nannofossil content at the Crary Science and Engineering Center
(CSEC) at McMurdo Station, Antarctica. The preparation of an Initial Reports
volume at the end of each of the two drilling seasons will include the results
of this work as part of the initial characterization of the cores. The
calcareous nannofossil biostratigraphic record spans the entire interval to be
cored by the CRP. Recent work on calcareous nannofossils from ocean drilling
sites around Antarctica has yielded a refined zonation for the Paleogene and
Upper Cretaceous of the Southern Ocean that will provide a high-resmlution
biostratigraphic framework for hemipelagic and pelagic sediments recovered by
Cape Roberts drilling. This research, when combined with data from other fossil
groups, magnetostratigraphic data, and other age-dating methods, will provide
integrated age control that is essential for other geological investigations. In
addition, calcareous nannofossils are excellent paleoenvironmental indicators
for surface water temperature and productivity. Statistical analysis of
quantitative population census data will be used to infer paleoenvironmental
variations during the Paleogene and Cretaceous. These data, in combination with
data from other fossil groups and sedimentological studies, will be useful for
assessing climatic change through the critical period of 30-100 million years
before present.