* 9419287
* A Novel Signal Peptide-Based Protein Translocation System   in the Thylakoids of Chloroplasts
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Kenneth Cline, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

9419287 Cline "Signal peptide" targeting sequences mediate protein translocation
across several evolutionarily related membranes, ranging from the endoplasmic
reticulum of eukaryotes to the cell membrane of bacteria. This proposal is
concerned with the characterization of the novel protein transport machinery
found in chloroplast thylakoids which is unique in that translocation is driven
only by a pH gradient. Because proteins targeted to the thylakoid lumen are
synthesized outside the chloroplast in the cytosol, there are two membrane
systems which much be passed, the outer double membrane system and the the
thylakoid membrane itself. The signal which targets the proteins past the outer
double membrane system is cleaved from the protein, revealing the second part of
the signal peptide which then interacts with the thylakoid protein transport
machinery, or translocase. The objectives of the proposal are to purify the
translocase, identify the pore complex associated with the translocase, assess
the use of this pore by proteins which can use other translocases not driven
solely by a pH gradient and vice versa, determine the location of the machinery
on the thylakoid membrane system, and explore the possibility that such
translocases might occur in E. coli. %%% Contemporary signal peptide-based
transport systems have evolved from an archetypal mechanism. Yet each system has
unique methods for targeting, initial insertion, and chain translocation, which
are reflected by specific components and translocation requirements. In this
context, it is expected that one thylakoid system, with its singular dependence
on a pH gradient, has evolved a simpler, possibly more efficient mechanism for
translocation. Results of this study should provide insight into the mechanism
of pH gradient-driven translocation mechanisms. It will also provide tools to
explore the relationship between envelope and thylakoids during the early
developmental stages of thylakoid forma tion. The work proposed will have impact
on our knowledge of the mechnanism and evolution of protein translocation across
membranes in general. ***