* 9419824
* Acquisition of a Cryo-Electron Microscopy System
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1997
* Guido Zampighi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 04/30/1997
* USD 72,500.00

This proposal is for matching funds to purchase a new cryo-electron microscope
equipped with a slow-scan CCD camera. This system will allow direct acquisition
of digital images suitable for computer image reconstruction and structural
analysis of macromolecular complexes. Although the UCLA campus has several
electron microscopes, none are suitable for state-of-the-art cryo techniques.
Each of the major users will contribute different areas of expertise to the
shared facility, including cryo sample preparation, classical electron
microscopy, site-specific antibody and gold labeling techniques, two-dimensional
crystal growth, and three-dimensional image reconstruction. Proposed research
projects involve a diverse array of biological assemblies: human adenovirus
particles with bound cellular receptors; retroviral capsid protein assemblies;
the spliceosome, a complex particle involved in mRNA processing; the vault
organelle, a ubiquitous cytosolic ribonucleoprotein particle; cell-to-cell
channels, which directly connect the cytoplasms of adjacent cells; and GABAA
receptors. The proposed facility will complement the existing strengths at UCLA
in imaging and biological structure. The Nuclear Medicine Division has leaders
in the fields of PET scanning and medical image reconstruction. The Molecular
Biology Institute has several renown x-ray crystallographers. One goal of the
proposed facility is to bridge the resolution gap between x-ray crystallography
and electron microscopy by combining atomic structural information of component
molecules with image Reconstructions of macromolecular complexes. The Department
of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology will provide suitable renovated space for
the cryo-electron microscope and funds for half of the instrument's cost.
Sufficient computational power for image processing already exists at UCLA.
Additional computer graphics workstations will be purchased from the Principal
Investigator' s start-up funds. After the initial one ye ar warranty period, the
ongoing maintenance and operating expenses for the cryo-electron microscope and
CCD cameras will be covered jointly by the major users' grants and departmental
funds. The administration of the proposed cryo-electron microscopy facility will
be carried out by an inter-departmental committee at UCLA. Dr. Nigel Unwin, a
recognized leader in the field, has agreed to serve as an external consultant
and provide both technical advice and overall scientific guidance.