* 9419907
* Molecular Phylogeny and Evolution of Dasyurid Marsupials    Based on Protamine P1 Genes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1995,02/29/2000
* Carey Krajewski, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 02/29/2000
* USD 145,000.00

9419907 Krajewski Dasyurid marsupials are the dominant terrestrial carnivores of
Australia and New Guinea. The proposed study will continue the rich tradition of
investigation into dasyurid relationshisp, one that began nearly a century ago
with basic anatomical descriptions and has lately incorporated direct
comparisons of gene sequences. The project breaks new ground in combining
information from three genes, one rapidly and one slowing evolving locus from
the mitochondrial genome (cytochrome b and 12rDNA, respectively), and one from
the nucleus (protamine P1). Protamines are short peptides that package
chromosomal DNA molecules in sperm cells, and their gene sequences have proven
valuable in elucidating the relationships of several mammalian groups. Once
assembled for all dasyurid species, this genetic database will refine our
estimate of phylogeny to the point where specific questions about dasyurid
evolution can be addressed. Most importantly, the answers to such questions can
be made precise. New analytical procedures for detecting the coevolutionary
relationships (if any) of species and their areas, as well as methods for
reconstructing ancestral adaptations, are powerful because they operate on a
known phylogeny. In effect, phylogeny is the framework for integrating,
proximate, ecological explanations of biological diversity with their ultimate,
evolutionary counterparts.