* 9419498
* Re-examination of the Algal Class Chrysophyceae Using Gene  Sequences and Electron Microscopy
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Robert Andersen, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 200,000.00

9419498 Andersen The world's freshwater and marine algae are an important group
of photosynthetic organisms, usually studied botanically with plants and fungi.
In the oceans they provide the primary food for marine animals. The
Chrysophyceae are one group of algae characterized by their golden color (due to
photosynthetic pigments and storage compounds); despite their simple external
morphology, they are diverse physiologically and ultrastructurally. Over the
last three decades, active oceanographic exploration followed by laboratory
studies in electron microscopy and molecular biology have shown that numerous
unusual chrysophytes were misclassified or simply missed in previous studies.
Furthermore, the original classification of chrysophytes, reflecting a need for
a simple identification scheme, placed emphasis on flagella and other external
cell wall characters observable with light microscopy, features that are now
suspected to represent instances of convergent evolution in adapting to open-
ocean conditions. Dr. Robert Andersen of the Bigelow Laboratory and colleagues
will study new collections of chrysophytes from Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian
ocean expeditions, with emphasis on electron microscopy of fine-scale internal
features and on gene sequencing. DNA data will be accumulated from both nuclear
and chloroplast genomes of individual strains. A modern and reliable systematic
classification of the Chrysophyceae will benefit those working in areas of
marine ecology, biodiversity, aquaculture, and marine biotechnology. ??