* 9419141
* RUI: Integrated Stratigraphic and Sedimentological Analysis of the Cambro-Ordovican Inner Shelf, Colorado
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Paul Myrow, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 01/31/1998
* USD 90,803.00

9419141 Myrow The relationship between intervals of faunal turnover, including
major extinctions, and various depositional and tectonic processes which may
ultimately govern these events, is critical to the holistic understanding of the
stratigraphic record. Integration of sedimentological, paleontological, and
stratigraphic data from all regions in an onshore-offshore profile are required
for a complete analysis of system dynamics. The Cambro-Ordovician boundary
interval, which records several faunal turnover events including a major
extinction at the base of the Cordylodus proavis conodont zone, is generally
unrecognized or not preserved in inner detrital belt deposits in North America
because of poor biostratigraphic resolution. Sedimentological and
biostratigraphic data from well-documented Cambro-Ordovician platform and
offshore areas of the Great Basin and elsewhere have been used to propose
processes-response models for faunal extinctions, which in many cases include
puported ecstatic "events". Unfortunately, little or no information exists from
coeval proximal carnal deposits concerning the relationship of intervals of
faunal turnover with depositional and tectonic events, which can be used as a
test of the cause of extinctions or the global correlation of proposed ecstatic
events. Well-exposed and thick Cambro-Ordovician siliciclastic and carbonate
carnal rocks in central and western Colorado provide an excellent opportunity to
assess spatial and temporal changes in depositional systems during and between
faunal turnover events for this poorly understood and biostratigraphically
unconstrained paleogeographic region in the Cambro-Ordovician of ancient North
America. A two-year project is proposed for a sedimentological and stratigraphic
study in which the recognition of unconformitites using conodont biostratigraphy
and sedimentological criteria will for the first time enable construction of a
detailed sequence-stratigraphic framework for the Cambro-Ordovician of Colorado.
Co mparison of systems dynamics for these deposits with well-documented outboard
successions will contribute to a more complete understanding of the interplay
between the evolution of faunal communities and depositional systems.