* 9419305
* Borane Initiators and Borane Containing Polyolefins;        Synthesis and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Tze Chiang Chung, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/1998
* USD 210,000.00

9419305 Chung A broad range of functional polymers and graft copolymers, with
polypropylene (PP), ethylene-propylene copolymers, and polyisobutylene
backbones, have been synthesized by using a borane approach. Most of them would
be very difficult to obtain by other existing methods. The key advantages of the
borane approach are (a) the stability of borane groups to transition metal
catalysts, such as Ziegler-Natta and metathesis catalysts, (b) the solubility of
borane groups in the hydrocarbon solvents used in the polymerization reactions
(both are essential to ensure the effective incorporation of borane groups in
polyolefins under conventional reaction conditions) and (c) the versatility of
borane groups which can be transformed to a remarkable variety of
functionalities. In addition, the borane groups in polymer can be selectively
auto-oxidized to polymeric radicals, which are then used as a active sites for
graft polymerizations. A broad range of polyolefin graft copolymers, with
polyolefin backbone and functional polymer side chains, have thus been obtained.
The successful results in the borane approach will now be used in four related
areas: (1) "living" radical polymerization using oxidation adducts of borane
moieties as the initiators; (2) a synthetic route to prepare borane-group
terminated polyethylene (PE) and polypropylene by using Ziegler-Natta catalysts
and borane chain transfer agents; (3) the utilization of borane-terminated
polyolefins to prepare diblock copolymers that have a polyolefin block, such as
PE and PP, and a functional polymer block; (4) the extension of the
functionalization chemistry to metallocene "single- site" catalysts which will
allow us to effectively incorporate borane groups in polyethylene. The resulting
linear low-density polyethylene with various functional groups, such as -OH,
-NH2 and halides, will be a both scientifically interesting and potentially
commercially important material. %%% Overall, the goal is not only to extend the
borane approach to broader polymer compositions and structures of functionalized
polyolefins, but also to widen the role of borane reagents in polymer chemistry.
These uses of borane reagents in polymers may provide us with new tools to
control polymerization processes and to obtain polymer structures which can not
be obtained by other existing methods.