* 9419018
* Evolution of the Cascades Subarc Mantle:  Evaluation of     Subduction Contribution Based on Petrology of Lavas and     Mantle Xenoliths
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1995,12/31/2000
* William Leeman, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2000
* USD 214,000.00

9419018 Leeman This study addresses the relation between tectonic evolution of
the Pacific Northwest and geochemical evolution of the mantle below the Cascadia
volcanic arc. Cascade volcanism began at about 40 Ma following collision of a
seamount/oceanic island chain (Oregon-Washington coast ranges) with the
Paleogene subduction zone westward migration of subduction to its present
location shortly after this event. Between that time and the present, there was
a five-fold decrease in convergence rate as well as a systematic decrease in the
age of the subducting plate as the Juan de Fuca ridge system approached the
mainland. These variations should have resulted in progressive and predictable
modifications of the subarc mantle. It is planned to test this subduction model
in two ways: First the P.I.s plan to characterize the major and trace element
and isotopic compositions of primitive pre-Quaternary lavas erupted throughout
the history of the arc. this will be done in two temporal transects across the
Cascade range where exposures are optimal and geologic mapping is available.
Second, the P.I.s plan to complete a detailed petrologic study of variably
metasomatized mantle xenoliths from the southern Washington Cascades. Some of
these rocks have been strikingly modified by infiltrating potassic siliceous
melts and CO2-rich fluids. Given the range of lithologies available, and
assuming that the original lithosphere was oceanic, it will be possible to
document directly certain aspects of subduction-related mass transfer fluxes.
The mineral chemistry, textures, and fluid and melt inclusion characteristics of
the xenoliths suite will be thoroughly documented to constrain the petrologic
evolution of a portion of the subarc mantle.