* 9419538
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Aseptic Processing and Packaging Studies
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1999
* Sharon Shoemaker, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1999
* USD 248,712.00

9419538 Shoemaker The Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for
Aseptic Processing and Packaging Studies is becoming a multi-university Center
with the addition of a research site at the University of California - Davis to
the original North Carolina State University research group. A total of four
companies are joining the Center inconjunction with the University of California
- Davis research site. The research projects to be funded at the Center's new
research site are "Flow visualization of fluid/particulate mixtures in tubes"
and "Optimization of particulate texture in aseptically processed products
through determination of pectic activity, pectic composition and mechanical
properties." The research are eminently qualified for this research. The Center
has been coordinated with Dr. Fred Heineken, Program Director in the Division of
Bioengineering and Environmental Systems. The Department of Energy's Sandia
National Laboratories has provided funding to augment the Centers ongoing
research program and to obtain a membership in the Center. The Program manager
recommends the University of California - Davis be awarded $50,000 for the first
year of a five-year continuing award. An additional $34,272 is recommended for
one year with funds provided by the Department of Energy's Sandia National
Laboratories. Near the end of each 12-month period the Program Manager and/or
the Division Director of the Engineering Education Center Division will review
the progress of the Center on a number of renewal criteria requirements,
including the following: 1) the extent to which the industry/university
interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which the support base is
developing; and 3) the extent to which a robust research program is developing.
If the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend support for
the next period of this continuing award.