* 9419103
* Collaborative Research: Development of RADAP-II Radar       Database for the United States
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1995,10/31/1997
* Robert Saffle, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 10/31/1997
* USD 135,186.00

9419103 Krajewski The main goal of the proposed work is to develop a radar
database for use by the hydrological and meteorological community. The data are
from digital RADAP-II radars operated by the National Weather Service and which
are being phased out and replaced by the new NEXRAD technology, complemented by
the raingage networks. The database will consist of high quality radar-based
rainfall estimates based on several WSR-57 and WSR-74S radars equipped with
RADAP-II digital processors, operated by the National Weather Service (NWS). The
data base will include rainfall estimates at temporal scale that range from
instantaneous to daily accumulations, and a spatial scales of 4 km by 4 km, 15
km by 15 km, and 50 by 50 km. In order to obtain rainfall estimates from radar
data, several processing steps are required. First, removal of anomalous
propagation (AP) echoes will be done with a modified Gaussian classification
approach. Range correction is required to remove systematic errors due to range
effects. Radar reflectivity to rainfall rate (Z-R) conversion based on raindrop
size distributions is applied to achieve physically-based data, and polar to
rectangular coordinate conversion is carried out followed by removal of
advection effects. Accumulation calculations and bias removal complete the
estimation procedure. The final step is to perform an error propagation analysis
of the preceding steps. The work planned under the proposal includes three main
elements: (1) development of a quality-controlled radar reflectivity database;
(2) providing estimates of rainfall based on the radar data; and (3) developing
procedures for uncertainly propagation and providing estimates of error variance
for the above rainfall products. The quality of the proposed products would be
greatly enhanced if a combined radar-raingage analysis was conducted. This is
due to significant gaps in the temporal coverage by the radar data caused by
various technical difficulties as well as the potential rad ar calibration
problems. On the other hand, the radar data will be helpful in clarifying
certain quality control problems in the raingage data, and in estimating the
error structure of the raingage-based estimates, particularly the error
component due to a spare spatial sampling by the raingage network. The main
product of our research will be grided analysis of rainfall based on combined
radar and raingage observations, complemented by a quantitative assessment of
its uncertainty. This analysis will be performed for the Arkansas River Basin
with a particular focus on the ARM/CART experimental site in Oklahoma and
Kansas. Essential elements of the project will be development of conceptual
design for data analysis, simulation studies of error propagation, and
independent cross-validation of our products.