* 9419500
* Environmental and Physiological Regulation of Water Flux    Through a Tropical Forest Ecosystem
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1995,04/30/2000
* Frederick Meinzer, Hawaii Agriculture Research Center
* Continuing grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 04/30/2000
* USD 375,130.00

Meinzer 9419500 Transpiration, or evaporation of water from the leaves of
plants, is a biological process that has a large impact on our physical
environment through its effects on soil water storage, atmospheric water
content, and the distribution of rainfall. Little is known about how plant
species in tropical forests partition and regulate their use of soil water in
time and space, yet such information is critical for predicting the effects of
deforestation and climatic fluctuations on the water balance of tropical as well
as temperate regions. The overall goal of this research is to determine how
water movement along a continuum from the soil through plants to the atmosphere
is regulated in contrasting types of tropical forest plants such as upper canopy
trees, characteristic of mature forests, and forest gap colonizing plants, which
may be representative of regrowth after harvest. The project will be carried out
at three sites operated by the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in
Panama. The relative roles of external environmental factors and inherent plant
traits in the regulation of water use will be characterized. The research will
provide unique, detailed information about how soil water resources in a
seasonally dry environment are shared in time and space among different types of
plants. General patterns that emerge will be applicable to temperate zone
forests and other plant communities as well as tropical forests. The findings
will contribute to our ability to predict how water use by vegetation at the
stand and regional scales is influenced by species composition and should
constitute a valuable contribution to the data necessary to make informed
decisions in watershed management.