* 9419922
* RUI:  Pattern Formation and Lanscape Change in a Sand Plain Oak Savanna and Woodland
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Mark Davis, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1998
* USD 200,000.00

9419922 Davis This project is a study of habitat change in a sand plain oak
savanna in east central Minnesota. A threatened habitat in Minnesota, oak
savannas are converted to oak woodlands in the absence of fire. In this process,
patches of oak trees expand, connect, and encircle patches of prairies.
Conversely, when fire is reintroduced, oak woodlands are opened up as patches of
trees shrink, subdivide, and even disappear. Thus, the study of habitat change
in these oak dominated environments is partly a study of pattern formation. One
of the objectives of this study is to identify factors that influence the
pattern development of oaks in the habitat. Factors to be investigated include
landform effects, effects of pocket gophers, fire, and effects of existing
herbaceous and woody vegetation. A second objective is to quantify some of the
important physical and biological consequences of the changes in the oak
vegetation, including effects on shrubby and herbaceous vegetation, pocket
gopher and thatch ant distribution, litter layer, oak recruitment, and fire
intensity. The project's methodology includes analysis of aerial photographs and
spatially referenced data collection from a ground grid using geostatistics and
GIS; an experimental garden study to investigate the effects of shade, water,
and surrounding landscape on seedling survivorship and growth; and an
experimental plot study to measure the effects of fire and the physical removal
of shrubs and oak saplings on the herbaceous community. The methodology has been
developed to permit the study of pattern formation at several spatial and
temporal scales. %%% By elucidating mot only the patterns but the processes and
mechanisms that produce the patterns, this study will contribute to our
understanding of site history and habitat change in oak savanna and woodland
environments. Information gathered from this study will specifically complement
studies on oak regeneration as part of the Cedar Creek Long-term Ecological
Research Project. Fin ally, the proposed project will provide data that can lead
to improved management plans for one of the upper midwest's most threatened
habitats.