* 9419992
* A Molecular Quantitative Genetic Study of Epistasis and Its Evolutionary Role
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1995,08/31/1998
* James Cheverud, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1998
* USD 337,941.00

9419992 CHEVERUD Many traits are affected by multiple genes. Studying the
interactions among these genes, epistasis, is essential for understanding the
genetic basis for these complex traits. Gene interaction, for example, may cause
a disease to occur in some families but not others depending on what sets of
genes are in those families. The extent of epistasis is also important for the
amount of flexibility available in small populations to respond to selective
pressures, to avoid extinction or as part of speciation. The amount of gene
interaction on adult body weight in mice will be measured and then the effects
of that interaction on inherited differences between animals in small
populations will be followed. Standard population genetic theory predicts a
sharp decline in inherited differences as inbreeding occurs in small
populations, thus limiting their evolutionary potential. However, new models
incorporating the effects of epistasis predict only a slight decline, or even an
increase in the level of inherited differences, with inbreeding. Two inbred
strains of mice will be crossed. Fifty small populations (4 animals) and two
large populations (100 animals) will be derived from this cross. The overall
average level of inherited differences between mice and the differences due to
each previously identified gene will be compared between the large and small
population size treatments and the results interpreted in the light of
evolutionary models incorporating epistasis.