* 9419696
* Scientific Supercomputing, Visualization, and Animation in  Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering &amp; Engineering Seismology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Jacobo Bielak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 02/29/1996
* USD 49,656.00

9419696 Bielak This action is to support a workshop to address the use of
advanced computer architectures for the solution of large-scale problems in
geotechnical earthquake engineering and strong ground motion seismology,
including the application of visualization and animation techniques. The
workshop is to be held in the Fall of 1994. The workshop will convene selected
researchers and practitioners from academia, industry and government to exchange
information and ideas, and to provide broad guidelines for the use of this
technology. With the advent of supercomputers, earthquake engineers and
seismologists have begun to address, mainly with the help of vector
multiprocessors, problems of great practical interest, such as the three-
dimensional analysis of the seismic response of earthdams and alluvial basins.
Anticipated increases in raw computing power over the next five years will not
be sufficient for the successful understanding and prediction of the earthquake
response of large systems, unless simultaneous advances are made in physical
modeling, numerical approximations, parallel algorithms, and software tools for
the new generation of high performance parallel systems. Another important
aspect of the computational process, which is shared by engineering activities
such as field and laboratory experiments, is the need to process and understand
vast amounts of numerical data. In recent years advanced visualization and
animation techniques have been developed to assist in analyzing and interpreting
these large numerical data sets. Thus this workshop will discuss these evolving
trends associated with the use of advanced computer architectures and
visualization techniques as applied to earthquake hazard mitigation. ***