* 9419475
* Aircraft Measurements of Aerosol Physical, Chemical and     Optical Properties During ACE-1
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Antony Clarke, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/1998
* USD 211,091.00

9419475 Clarke This project is part of the Southern Hemisphere Marine Aerosol
Characterization Experiment (ACE-1), which will be conducted in the remote
Southern Pacific in 1995 using aircraft, ship-board, and ground-based
measurements of a wide variety of chemical species, physical and meteorological
parameters with the central goal of investigating the formation, evolution, and
optical properties of atmospheric aerosol. In this component, a variety of
instruments will be deployed on the C-130 aircraft to measure aerosol
properties: thermally conditioned optical particle counters will be used to
assess size resolved composition of the larger optically active aerosol, various
condensation nuclei counters, ultrafine condensation nuclei counters, and a
differential mobility analyzer to determine the condensation nuclei size
spectrum, nephelometers for the aerosol scattering coefficient, and an
aethaelometer for the aerosol absorption coefficient. The objective of this work
is to characterize aerosol radiative properties in the region studied, and also
to develop tools that may lead to a predictive understanding and modeling of the
remote aerosol and its radiative properties. The following specific objectives
will be addressed: Establish a link between aerosol microphysical, chemical and
optical parameters that can be used to model aerosol optical properties,
radiative forcing and satellite derived radiance. Examine the contribution of
fine particles (e.g. sulfate) and coarse particles (e.g. sea salt) and relative
humidity to the local and column aerosol scattering extinction. Develop a
quantitative understanding of the processes shaping evolution of the aerosol in
the marine boundary layer during Lagrangian advection. Identify the presence of
particles recently formed in situ and/or surface derived aerosol (sea salt,
dust, soot) in the mid-troposphere and examine the relationship of associated
air masses to environmental processes and sources. Work with other ACE-1
participants towa rd linking aerosol data, lidar data, gaseous precursors, etc.
on global, regional and local scales to identify key parameters and processes
for a dynamic model of remote marine aerosol.