* 9419997
* A Nested Phylogenetic Analysis of Malvales, Bombacaceae     and Adansonieae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,05/31/1998
* David Baum, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 05/31/1998
* USD 125,000.00

9419997 Baum The plant order Malvales contains ca. 5000 species of mainly
tropical plants including several of economic importance (cotton, chocolate,
okra, hibiscus). This study by Dr. David Baum of Harvard University and his
colleague Dr. William Alverson will employ molecular techniques and analyses of
plant morphology to study the evolution of the order, and in particular the
phylogeny of certain groups at three nested levels. The placement of the order
Malvales within the major dicot radiation of flowering plants; the placement of
the family Bombacaceae (the kapok family) within the order; and relationships
among the tribes and genera of Bombacaceae, are the three levels of emphasis.
The molecular studies will involve the determination of DNA sequences from
representative species of Bombacaceae and related Malvaceae, Tiliaceae, and
Sterculiaceae, with emphasis on several chloroplast genes. In parallel the
genera of Bombacaceae and relatives in the other three families will be studied
for morphological characteristics, and the combined datasets will be used to
infer phylogenetic relationships among the taxa. The resulting phylogenetic
framework can be used to explain the great diversity of floral form within
Bombacaceae and to account for evolutionary shifts in chromosome number and for
geographical migrations through time. ??