* 9419715
* Land-Atmosphere Interactions: A Core Program in Support of  Community Climate Models
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Andrea Hahmann, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 01/31/1998
* USD 581,000.00

Abstract ATM-9419715 Dickinson, Robert E. University of Arizona Title: Land-
Atmosphere Interactions - A Core Program in Support of Community Climate
Modeling This project focuses on understanding and parameterizing the
interactions between land and the atmosphere in the context of global change
models. Its objectives are: to establish, through data analyses, numerical
process studies and model stimulations, the function of the most important
atmospheric processes, from the viewpoint of coupling to land-surface processes;
and on the basis of these studies, to develop new or improved parameterizations
for GCMs, implement and test these parameterizations in NCAR community climate
system models, and provide successful parameterizations to the NCAR climate
modeling community. This proposal brings together and supports a strong research
team with a wide variety of background and experience, each with important
individual skills. The proposed work will: expand the basic understanding of the
processes responsible for land-atmosphere coupling; determine how these operate
in NCAR community models; determine how these processes differ, if they do, from
those in other climate models of comparable merit; determine how these
observations, sensitivity studies, and model intercomparisons are necessary to
clarify the relative correctness of differing parameterizations; and develop
indicated new treatments that are suitable, in the context of GCM's, for future
improvements and upgrades by the scientific community. Individual subprojects
designed to pursue these objectives include: studies of interactions between the
land surface and clouds in the planetary boundary (PBL); characterization of
cloud radiative fluxes and their coupling to the land surface; parameterization
of the effects of mesoscale circulations in a GCM, including moist processes,
clouds and precipitation; observation characterization of relationships between
cloud properties, atmospheric thermodynamics propert ies, and land cover;
observational search for effects of Amazon deforestation on cloud processes;
further exploration of climate effects of Amazon deforestation to better
understand land-surface interactions; and paleoclimatic linkages. These studies
will use satellite, radiosonde, and surface data for their observational
analyses. Satellite data analyses will emphasize the use of a local archive of
high-resolution (30 km) ISCCP data. They will also use integrations of mesoscale
and global climate models, with an emphasis for the latter on NCAR community
models. Theoretical and parameterizations analyses will use mesoscale model
integration and various 1-D convection parameterizations. The proposed work will
contribute substantially to great understanding of and confidence in the use of
NCAR climate system models for projections of future climate. This will be done
by promoting major advances in what is arguably now one of the weakest aspects
of model performance from the viewpoint of scientific understanding and
practical aspects of climate simulation. The performance of the proposed
research will provide training and education on these questions for a generation
of graduate students and post-doctoral trainees. This award is under the USGCRP,
Climate Modeling, Analysis and Prediction (CMAP) project.