* 9419876
* Aquisition of a DNA Sequencer for Plant Molecular Biology   Research
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Michael Sussman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 12/31/1996
* USD 75,700.00

Underpinning much of the current research in plant molecular biology is the
ability to routinely sequence genes of biological and economic interest. These
genes are being cloned as genomic and cDNA fragment from higher plant species,
as well as from the many microbes that act as plant symbionts and pathogens. The
ability to isolate Arabidopsis mutants and sequence the genes underlying
specific altered phenotypes has introduced a powerful new means of deciphering
the molecular mechanisms by which plants grow and develop. Unfortunately, much
of the actual research time spent by graduate students and postdoctoral
associates in plant molecular biology laboratories is occupied with the rote,
laborious procedure by which DNA sequencing `ladders' are electrophoretically
separated, detected and analyzed. We estimate that at least 30% of their time is
occupied with this procedure, which takes time away from the more critical and
intellecutually demanding design of biological experiments. The purpose of this
proposal is to obtain federal matching funds to purchase an automated DNA
sequencer. This machine will be supervised by Prof. Sussman and operated in his
laboratory by a full-time technician with salary provided by state of Wisconsin
funds. These automated, fluorescent- based sequencers are widely used in genome
sequencing projects, and have been shown to be a cost-effective means of saving
time and labor. In addition to time savings, other advantages of the automated
technique include the absence of radioactive nuclides and a decreased financial
burden associated with their safety and disposal. Major users of this equipment
include 8 faculty with federally funded basic research program s in the area of
plant molecular biology. The laboratories of these faculty are in close physical
proximity but are administered through 5 different academic departments
(Departments of Horticulture, Agronomy, Biochemistry and Plant Pathology in the
College of Agricultural and Life Sciences; Department of Botany in the College
of Letters and Science). Minor users include several newly hired `applied'
geneticists with active research programs using recombinant DNA techniques for
more efficient breeding of improved crop plants.