* 9419949
* Acquisition of a Multi-User Laser Scanning Confocal         Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1998
* Daphne Blumberg, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1998
* USD 128,030.00

Funds are requested for the purchase of a multi-user laser scanning confocal
microscope and associated workstation to be housed in the Electron Microscopy
Facility of the Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland
Baltimore County. No such instrument is currently available on the Catonsville
Campus of the University of Maryland System. The applicants have been using
traditional epifluorescence microscopy, electron microscopy and fluorescent
activated cell sorting for the study of cell structure, function and problems in
spatial and temporal localization of developmentally regulated macromolecules.
The availability of a laser scanning confocal microscope would substantially
enhance these research efforts by improving resolution in the x-y plane by a
factor of 2 and in the Z axis by ~1.4x. Additionally the ability to take optical
sections and do 3-D image reconstruction and analysis will enable us to address
aspects of these problems which had previously been impossible. All of the
applicants hold federal grants for the support of their research and several are
recipients of NSF grants. The instrument will consist of a Bio-Rad MRC 1000
confocal laser scanning unit mounted on a Zeiss Axiovert Inverted Fluorescence
Microscope fitted with phase and Nomarski optics in order to overlay the
confocal fluorescent images on the brightfield images. Image collection and
control of the microscope will be managed by a 486 (or appropriate upgrade)
computer running the Bio-Rad CoMOS software. The data will be stored on an
optical disc drive. The 486 computer will be hooked by an ethernet link to the
department Silicon Graphics Indigo Computer. Vital Images Volume Microscope
Workbench software will be loaded on the SGI computer for doing the 3-D image
analysis. A network printer will be hooked by ethernet link to both computers so
that digitalized images can be printed for publication and for preparation of
slides. The instrument will be administered by a committee consisting of the
P.I. and the major users. Dr. Terry Viancour who has extensive experience with
enhanced video microscopy and image analysis has agreed to be the faculty
supervisor responsible for insuring that all users are trained in the proper
operation of the instrument. The instrument will be a part of the Biological
Sciences Electron Microscope facility. This facility is staffed by a full time
research associate, Mr. Phillip Rutledge. The Department of Biological Sciences
will commit 10% of Mr. Rutledge's time to overseeing the day to day operation of
the laser scanning confocal Microscope. The microscope will be made available
for use by all members of the University community, including post-doctoral
fellows, graduate and undergraduate students. While primarily a research
instrument, its use will be incorporated into an advanced course on microscopy
and into the research projects of the graduate and undergraduate programs thus
providing increased student exposure to this powerful technology. In recognition
of the central role that research plays in the teaching mission of the
University and the importance of exposure of students in the
biomedical/bioengineering sciences to "state of the art" technology the
University of Maryland Baltimore County has committed matching funds to aid in
the purchase of this equipment should the grant be funded.