* 9419892
* Exhalation Mechanics and the Evolution of Aspiration        Breathing in Tetrapods
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1999
* Elizabeth Brainerd, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 03/31/1999
* USD 202,276.00

Brainerd 9419892 The mechanism by which complex biological systems with many
interacting parts evolve has engaged biologists since Charles Darwin. The goal
of this research is to determine how one such complex system, the respiratory
pump used for breathing, has changed during vertebrate evolution. Reptiles,
birds, and mammals ventilate their lungs with an aspiration pump in which ribs,
and in some cases a diaphragm muscle, expand the chest cavity and suck air into
the lungs. Air-breathing fish lack the rib and diaphragm structures that are
necessary for aspiration breathing. They take air into the mouth cavity and
compress it, forcing air into the lungs. Mouth pumps use only muscles of the
head region while aspiration pumps use only muscles of the chest and abdominal
regions. The transition between the two is a significant change in a complex
system. Some amphibians, however, appear to be intermediate, using head muscles
for inhalation and body muscles for exhalation. This research will determine
whether the use of body muscles for exhalation is common to most species of
amphibians, and thus is a probable evolutionary step between mouth pump and
aspiration breathing. Pressure transducers, muscle activity transducers, air
flow transducers, and x-ray video will be used to determine ventilation patterns
in representatives of all three orders of extant amphibians. The results will
test the hypothesis that use of body muscles for exhalation is an ancestral
character of the amphibians, and hence a probable intermediate stage in the
evolution of the aspiration pump. In the long term, this research will aid in
identifying the sequence of behavioral, morphological and neural changes that
resulted in a reorganization of a complex physiological system for function in a
new environment.