* 9419397
* Real-Time Clocking of Energy Redistribution in Molecules    Falling Apart
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 02/28/1998
* USD 270,000.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Mostafa El-Sayed of the Georgia Institute of Technology will pursue a
series of investigations in transition state spectroscopy. Specifically, the
internal vibrational energy redistribution (IVR) in photodissociating molecules
will be studied in real time using a pump-probe method. Two femtosecond lasers
are to be used, one to cause photodissociation and the other, suitably time
delayed with respect to the first, to resonantly ionize one of the
photofragments whose recoil velocity distribution is determined as function of
the pump-probe time delay. The spatial distribution of the recoil velocities of
the photofragments will also be determined. This distribution depends on the
internal energy distribution over the various degrees of freedom of the parent
and photofragment species. The experiments will be done with unsaturated organic
and metal iodide molecules. One of the current problem areas in chemistry is the
nature of the transition state. Inherent in the field of chemistry is the simple
idea that during a chemical reaction the reactants are converted to products by
breaking reactant bonds and forming new bonds. During the reaction new species
are formed which are neither reactants nor products. These species are transient
species and, due to their role in the transition from reactants to products, are
said to occur in the `transition region`, and their specific nuclear
configurations are termed `transition states`. One of the most important issues
in chemical reaction dynamics is to elucidate the relation between the
properties of the transition state and the characteristics of the reaction
product. The duration, or life time, of a transition state, and thus the
duration of a chemical reaction rocess, varies from one trillionth of one second
(one picosecond) to one housandth of a trillionth of one second (one
quadrillionth, or one femtosecond). Direct, detailed molecular level information
about the transition state of molecular systems can only be obtained with
sophisticated techniques that employ lasers with ultra short pulse duration
(femtosecond lasers). The research proposed by Professor El-Sayed uses novel
laser techniques to obtain needed data for the understanding of the transition
state in chemical reactions.