* 9419863
* Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope Imaging System
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Kuan Wang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 95,000.00

The specific objectives of this proposal are to: 1) Determine the functional
domains of the subunits of wheat germ eIF-(iso)4F and eIF-4F. The subunits of
eIF-(iso)4F have been expressed in E. coli and recombined to form an
enzymatically active complex. Mutations will be made in the subunits of
eIF-(iso)4F and eIF-4F and tested in an in vitro wheat germ translation system
and several in vitro assays that measure partial reactions, i.e., ATP
hydrolysis, RNA unwinding, cross-linking to the m7G cap and binding of mRNA to
40S ribosomal subunits. 2) Complete the partial cDNA sequence of wheat eIF-4B
and express this protein in E. coli. The missing portion ( 100-200 nucleotides)
of the cDNA for eIF-4B will be obtained by RACE-PCR, inverse PCR or genomic
sequencing. The cDNA will be expressed in E. coli and the enzymatic activity
determined in the assays described above (Specific Objective 1). 3) Complete the
cDNA sequence for the subunits of Arabidopsis eIF-4F, p28 of eIF-(iso)4F and
eIF-4B and express these proteins in E. coli. We will continue to screen using
antibodies to wheat factors and wheat cDNA sequences. Different regions of the
wheat cDNAs will be used to prepare probes for screening. The cDNAs for the
Arabidopsis factors will be expressed in E. coli. The activity of the expressed
Arabidopsis factors will be measured in the assays described above. The
completion of this goal will set the stage for future work in vivo exploring the
control of expression of the initiation factors and regulation of protein
synthesis in plants.