* 9419935
* Acquisition of Centrifuges for Plant Biochemistry and       Molecular Biology Research
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Rodney Croteau, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1997
* USD 162,162.00

We are requesting matching funds for the purchase of five centrifuges and
associated rotors to use in plant biochemistry and molecular biology research
being carried out by eight investigators in the Institute of Biological
Chemistry at Washington State University. Our current roster lists 85 graduate
or postgraduate researchers and technicians. These full-time scientists,
together with about 20 undergraduates, share 4 ultracentrifuges and 7 high speed
centrifuges. The demand on available centrifuges has increased to the point
where it is often difficult to schedule a centrifuge or rotor and we currently
depend on an adjacent department for access to two special use centrifuges. The
need for centrifuges and rotors has increased considerably over the last six
years due to the addition of Drs. Kahn, Browse and Lewis, the growth of other
research groups and the extension of several programs into molecular biology. In
addition, there are commitments to add two new faculty positions within the next
2 years. These new groups will place further demands on our centrifugation
capabilities. The Fellows of the Institute have research programs of national
and international prominence in the broad areas of plant productivity, plant
metabolism, plant protection, and signalling and recognition processes in
plants. The principal investigator studies plant gene regulation, especially
during the development of complex plant tissues. Other programs investigate the
synthesis of plant storage molecules such as lipids, starch and storage
proteins, symbiotic nitrogen fixation, plant "secondary" compounds such as
terpenoids, phenylpropanoids, cyclitols and oxalate, plant structural materials,
molecules that are used to carry information between plant cells and the
mechanisms by which the cells alter their gene expression in response to these
signals. The research is heavily dependent on centrifugation to isolate and
purify specialized cells, cell components, cell walls, organelles, membr anes,
proteins, DNA and mRNA. Our centrifuge inventory is outdated and inadequate--the
average age of our ultracentrifuge rotors is 12.6 years and only one is less
than 10 years old. In addition to upgrading our existing centrifuges,
acquisition of new types of centrifuges and rotors will allow procedures and a
number of specialized methods to be carried out much more efficiently and will
permit the investigation of new research areas.