* 9419772
* RUI:  Systematics and Genetic Biogeography of               Mielichhoferia (Bryopsida)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Arthur Shaw, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 04/30/1998
* USD 160,000.00

9419772 Shaw Some of the more spectacular cases of evolutionary adaptation to
novel environments include the mosses, and in particular those species that grow
on mine tailings and other substrates rich in mineral ores. Dr. Jonathan Shaw of
Ithaca College, with assistance from several undergraduate students, is studying
population and species-level genetic variation in northern species of the moss
genus Mielichhoferia, so-called copper mosses, with the goal of understanding
historical and ecological controls on the present distribution of the four
northern species in North America and Europe. In addition to morphological
features of the small gametophyte and sporophyte stages of the plant, Dr. Shaw
is analyzing variation at allelic loci by protein electrophoresis, and will be
adding new data from analysis of chloroplast DNA variation as well. Prior
studies have demonstrated unique marker alleles of individual populations of the
moss species, enabling study of the path of historical migration and of possible
hybridization between species. The pattern of genetic variation among related
species of mosses has been little studied, despite the interesting haploid
nature of the major vegetative (gametophytic) stage found in nature. This study
poses several challenging contrasts between widespread and narrowly restricted
taxa, between species with wide genetic variability and those quite limited, and
between reproductively isolated taxa and those potentially able to hybridize
with relatives.