* 9419102
* Theoretical Models for Photoisomerization Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* John Frederick, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 01/31/1999
* USD 196,243.00

Professor John H. Frederick at the Chemistry Department of the University of
Nevada, Reno is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program at NSF to study vibrational spectroscopy and excited state
molecular dynamics. The work supported under this grant is focussed on light
induced reactions that form isomers, different stable geometries, in several gas
phase molecules. The molecules that are being studied are representative of a
class of molecules which have conjugated pi-systems. The first step in the
studies is to use a combination of experimental data and ab initio theoretical
data to construct descriptions of the interaction energy surfaces. Then, the
dynamics of excitation from the ground to the first excited state and de-
excitation back to the ground state are studied using both quasiclassical and
quantum mechanical methods. These studies may lead to methods to control the way
in which the reactions proceed and the amounts of different isomers which are
formed. The photochemistry of molecules with conjugated pi-systems is of central
importance for many natural processes, such as vision and photosynthesis, and
for organic conductors. Many molecules in this class have been extensively
studied by experimentalists and by theorists and much is known about the
properties of these systems. However, the dynamical mechanisms by which
photochemical transformations occur are still not fully understood. The work
under this grant is addressing this missing link.