* 9419916
* Neuroendocrine Regulation of Crustacean Molting
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* R. Douglas Watson, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 03/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

9419916 Watson The primary objective of the proposed research is to define the
action of molt-inhibiting hormone (MIH) in the regulation of crustacean growth
and development. The crustacean carapace (exoskeleton) is restrictive to growth.
Therefore, as crustaceans develop, they must periodically shed (molt) the old
carapace and replace it with a new and larger version. The processes of growth
and molting are driven by steroid hormones (ecdysteroids) secreted by paired
endocrine glands, the Y-organs. The secretion of ecdysteroids by Y-organs is
regulated by a neuropeptide hormone, MIH. MIH is produced by a cluster of
neurosecretory cells (the X-organ) located in neural ganglia of the eyestalks.
Thus, a generally accepted model suggests MIH inhibits Y-organs during much of
development, and a molting sequence ensues when MIH secretion declines. Despite
the central importance of MIH in regulating crustacean development, little is
known about its structure and function. In particular, there is a glaring lack
of information about MIH gene expression and secretory cycles. Our lab has
recently cloned a cDNA encoding MIH from the blue crab, Callinectes sapidus.
Using the cloned cDNA as probe, recombinant DNA technology (e.g., Northern blot,
nuclear runoff assay, in situ hybridization) will be employed (1) to quantify
MIH mRNA levels during the blue crab molt cycle, and (2) to determine the
tissues and cells that express the MIH gene. In addition, recombinant MIH will
be produced by inserting the cloned cDNA into a baculovirus expression vector.
Monoclonal antibodies will be generated against the recombinant peptide and used
to develop an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for quantification of
MIH in crab hemolymph (blood). The proposed research addresses fundamental
questions about the neuroendocrine regulation of development in this abundant
and economically important group of organisms. The results will be a starting
point for designing methods to specifically manipulate growth and molting in
crustaceans, a potential benefit to fisheries management, aquaculture, and
consumers of shellfish. ***