* 9419309
* Conference on Frontiers of Plant Morphogenesis              Keystone Symposium, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina,     March 29 - April 4, 1995
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Barry Palevitz, Keystone Center
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 12/31/1995
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal requests support for a Keystone Symposium, Frontiers of Plant
Morphogenesis, to be held at Hilton Head Island, South Carolina, from March 29
through April 4, 1995. The meeting will be held concurrently with another
Keystone Symposium, Signal Transduction in Plants, and there will be two joint
plenary sessions that will bring together both groups of scientists for
discussion of topics of mutual interest. The area of plant development is
tremendously diverse; however with the acquisition of modern cellular and
molecular information, common themes are beginning to emerge. It is therefore
essential, at this time, that workers in traditionally diverse areas be apprised
of recent advances in order for new syntheses to be developed. To date, there
has not been a meeting that has concentrated on bringing cell and molecular
biologists together for the sole intent of presenting and discussing problems in
morphogenesis. This is the first meeting that will bring together workers who
are interested in understanding how gene expression affects, and is affected by,
second messengers; how this information is translated by the cytoskeleton into
positional information; and how the wall components, in turn, cue this
positional data to define the morphology of plant cells which ultimately defines
the overall shape of the plant.