* 9419318
* The Role of Ecological Interactions in Diversification:     Rates of Habitat Shifts and Within-Habitat Diversification  in the Enallagma Damselflies of Two Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Jonathan Brown, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 05/31/1997
* USD 70,000.00

9419318 McPeek Our ability to steward the world's biological diversity depends
on our understanding of the processes that generate and maintain biodiversity in
different ecological settings. This research explores the importance of
evolutionary processes in affecting biodiversity patterns in different habitats
for a group of aquatic insects, the Enallagma damselflies (Odonata:
Coenagrionidae). Some Enallagma species are found only in fishless water bodies.
Furthermore, 3-4 times more species exist in habitats with fish than in fishless
habitats. Aspects of the physical environment, the major prey, and major
predator species that coexist with various Enallagma species will be identified
and used to evaluate how these aquatic communities vary across the southeastern
USA. Also, a phylogeny for most of the North American Enallagma will be
developed using modern molecular DNA techniques. Statistical techniques
developed to test for differences in diversification rates will be applied to
evaluate whether the differences in the number of species between the two lake
types can be explained by speciation and extinction in the group. Along with
addressing basic questions about diversification into multiple habitats, this
study has important implications for the conservation of biological diversity.
Most effort for conserving species is directed at the processes leading to
extinction, because of extinction's immediate and irreparable impacts. However,
in the longer term an understanding of how conservation practices influence the
continued evolution and diversification of taxa is needed to preserve
functioning ecosystems and the abilities of species to respond evolutionarily to
long-term environmental changes. By studying how ecological conditions influence
diversification, this research will provide initial data to evaluate how
properties of ecological settings may influence the continued evolution of taxa.