* 9419990
* Kinin Peptide Receptors that Influence Mosquito Diuresis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Timothy Hayes, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 06/30/1999
* USD 278,000.00

9419990 Hayes This project is basic biological research has practical
implications for improving the human condition. The cells that compose an animal
must communicate with each other to coordinate their actions to make the
individual functional as an organism. There is a fundamental molecular language
that exists for cells to "talk" with one another. The "words and sentences" of
that language are different molecules and one of the most often used types of
molecules are the peptides. These are small fragments of molecules called
proteins that are the direct products of gene expression. The "ears" that cells
have to hear the molecular language are called receptors. Rather than using
human or vertebrate subjects as a model for our research, Dr. Hayes has turned
to a pest that plagues humans from their beginning, the mosquito. The female
mosquito must consume two-and-a-half times her body weight in blood to have the
protein to make eggs. During this feeding, she must rapidly eliminate the
massive weight of the excess salt and water not needed for making eggs. The
brain, the nervous system, the "crop", the "stomach", the "kidneys", the
"intestines", and the rectum must "talk" and coordinate to keep the animal alive
and deal with this challenge. Some of the molecular messenger peptides that are
used allow the cells of these tissues to "talk" with one another. Analogs of
these peptides will be used to understand the parts and shapes of the molecules
that carry these messages. This understanding will be used to design and make
molecular tools to specifically tag the receptors. The molecular tools, called
photoaffinity labels, will also be used to isolate genes that code for the
receptor proteins for structure determination. Knowing the important structures
for the "message" (i.e. the peptide) and the "ears" (i.e. the receptor) are
critical to break the general code for communication between cells.
Understanding the general aspects of the language is already providing a
foundation f or the design of human and veterinary pharmaceuticals, plus future,
effective, environmentally safe pesticides that do not harm human beings. ***