* 9419940
* Collaborative Research: Generic Flora of the Southeastern   United States (Phase III)
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1995,02/29/2000
* Walter Judd, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 276,254.00

9419940 Judd The Generic Flora of the Southeastern United States project is a
collaborative effort between the University of Florida and the New York State
Museum, building upon prior work done at Harvard University. The taxonomic
research leads to comprehensive treatments for all 1320 genera in 193 families
of seed plants estimated to occur in the Southeast. These treatments include
technical descriptions, identification keys, summaries of the biology of a
genus, annotated bibliographies of pertinent literature, and original
illustrations of morphological details. They summarize what is known about many
aspects of the plant resources of a large part of North America, especially
taxonomic and phylogenetic relationships, economic uses, and ecological status.
Currently 140 installments have been published, of an estimated 186 total.
During Phase III, all monocot families including such large and challenging
groups as the grasses (Gramineae) and most lily family relatives, the mint
family (Lamiaceae) and its relatives, and numerous other groups will be
completed, in all about 350 genera. The Generic Flora treatments are widely used
by plant scientists, horticulturists, resource managers, and conservationists.
Various products, including an index to all published treatments, are now
available electronically through InterNet access on the New York State Library
gopher server.