* 9419512
* Mineral Processing Reagents, Iron Oxide-Titania Separation  Indo-U.S. Collaborative Project
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Brij Moudgil, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 01/31/2000
* USD 22,577.00

Description: This project supports a cooperative project by a US scientist, Dr.
Brij Moudgil, and Dr. Michael L. Free, a Post doctoral Research Fellow, at the
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, at the University of Florida,
Gainesville, and Dr. N.C. Chaudhuri and Dr. Pradip, of the Tata Research
Development &amp; Design Centre (TRDDC) in Pune, India. The objective of this
research is to understand the basic mechanisms involved in selective adsorption
of hydroxamate and fatty acid reagents in the iron oxide-titania systems.
Physical and surface chemical characterization would involve x-ray, SEM, pore
size distribution and electrokinetic measurements. Adsorption, FT-IR and
microflotation tests would be conducted to identify the conditions for achieving
the desired separation. Selectivity observed would be explained on the basis of
conditional stability constants, crystal structure specificity and molecular
orbital considerations. It is expected that the fundamental knowledge base
generated in this study would be useful in scientific design of reagent schemes
for processing of low grade complex ores. Scope: This project allows cooperation
of two well known scientists whose capabilities complement each other and who
work in institutions with complementary facilities for the proposed research.
Dr. Moudgil is the director of the newly established Engineering Research Center
for Particle Science and Technology at the University of Florida. He has had
extensive list of research publications, including some with Pradip. The
collaboration with Dr. Chaudhri is new and is likely to benefit both institutes.
This project meets a number of important objectives of the Division of
International Programs, especially in bringing in new participants to the
international colaboration, and in the international exposure of a new U.S. Post
Doctoral Fellow.