* 9419322
* Collaborative Research:  Coastal Air-Sea Fluxes of CO2:     Nutrients and the Biological Pump
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Francisco Chavez, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 09/30/1997
* USD 169,642.00

9419322 Chavez This proposal was submitted in response to a one-time Program
Announcement - NSF 93-101 for the Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) Coastal Air-Sea
Chemical Fluxes pilot study. The Announcement suggested that a mutually
beneficial opportunity exists to coordinate an NSF/CoOP research effort with the
ONR-sponsored Marine Boundary Layer (MBL) Advanced Research Initiative (ARI)
planned for 1995. The CoOP study might complement the ONR physical processes
study by encompassing biological and chemical oceanographic processes aimed at
developing a mechanistic understanding of air-sea fluxes. The overall scientific
project would be interdisciplinary, with the NSF/CoOP efforts addressing
chemical and biological parameters, while the ONR study focuses on physical
oceanographic and meteorological parameters. This research is a collaborative
effort with the University of Southern California. The work will determine the
effect of phytoplankton productivity on the fate of upwelled CO2 in coastal
environments. The PIs intend to make measurements of pCO2, TCO2, NO3, NH4, urea,
pigments, POC, PON, biogenic silicon (BSi) and Si(OH)4 and also perform
incubations with 14CO2, 15NO3, 15NH, and 15N-urea to estimate and interpret
biological activities within the region of the experiment. The ultimate goal is
to determine how nutrient concentrations control uptake of "new" CO and the
length of time that high surface water pCO2 concentrations remain above
atmospheric levels. Because the rate of new production controls the length of
time newly upwelled CO2 are exposed to the atmosphere, its measurement is key to
a thorough understanding of the CO2 flux transfer from ocean to atmosphere. Data
collection will be conducted through both underway and station shipboard
activities as well as through drifters and moorings. Phytoplankton species
determinations will be made on selected samples. Finally, the ratios of uptake
of carbon to nitrogen, disappearance of CO2:NO3:Si( OH)4 from the water column,
and POC:PON:BSi will be calculated from collected data. The proposed work will
be coordinated with physical and meteorological experiments to be conducted by
other researchers.