* 9419800
* Plant Life History Adaptation in Response to Environmental  Stresses:  Genetic Correlations and Tradeoffs.
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Denise Thiede, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 10/31/1999
* USD 201,000.00

9419800 Stanton Because increasing demand leads to expansion of agriculture into
marginal lands, and because intensive farming methods often decrease soil
quality, understanding the consequences of environmental stress for plant
populations is becoming increasingly important. Environmental stresses may both
affect the productivity of individual plants and act as selective forces
favoring the evolution of particular combinations of traits in plant
populations. This research will investigate the costs and benefits of
evolutionary changes in plant populations cultured in stressful environments. It
will determine whether selection for survival under one sort of stress improves
tolerance of other stresses, and examine the trade-off between stress tolerance
and maximum yield. Plants will be grown for several generations under a range of
environmental conditions (high salt, high boron, low light, low nutrients, low
water, and optimal conditions) at crowded and uncrowded densities. Finally,
seeds from each population will be grown across the whole range of test
conditions to determine how adaptation to individual stresses affects tolerance
to other stresses and growth and productivity under favorable conditions. The
results should have significant implications for sustainable agriculture and for
directing development of stress-tolerant strains of commercial crop species.