* 9419537
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Engineering Tribology
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* Leon Keer, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/2000
* USD 181,000.00

9419537 Cheng This Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) is
being funded as a multi-site research Center. Northwestern University is adding
the Georgia Institute of Technology as a research site in the I/UCRC for
Engineering Tribology research. Four companies are joining the Center with the
Georgia Institute of Technology becoming an additional research site in the
Center. The joint operation will add research activities on modelling of
mechanical seals, investigation of hydrodynamic film forming capability of
various liquids, and the optimization of the dicing of silicon wafers to the
existing research activities and attract more companies to joint the Center. The
researchers involved with the Centers are well qualified to perform the research
projects. The Program manager recommends the Northwestern University be awarded
$25,000 for the first year of a five year continuing award. Near the end of each
12-month period, the Program Manager and/or the Division Director of the
Engineering Education and Center's Division will review the progress of the
Center on a number of renewal criteria, including the following: 1) the extent
to which the industry/university interaction is developing; 2) the extent to
which the support base is developing; and 3) the extent to which a robust
research program is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program
Manager will recommend support for the next period of this continuing award.