* 9419732
* Acquisition of Automated DNA Sequencer
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1996
* John Hall, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 12/31/1996
* USD 80,824.00

Field Museum requests funds to purchase an automated DNA sequencer, the Applied
Biosystems 373A, for its Biochemistry Laboratories, a core facility that
provides opportunities for Field Museum staff and students to use gene
amplification (PCR) and DNA sequencing in basic research and research training
in systematics. Examination of the levels and patterns of Lab use indicate why
this instrument is needed. The Biochemistry Laboratories, which are undergoing
NSF funded renovation in 1994, are heavily used: 10 curatorial staff and
research associates independently have used the facilities, and at six of these
research staff are now pursuing or planning major DNA sequencing projects in the
near future. The effect of this increasing demand on the facilities and the
concomitant establishing of reliable protocols in the preceding steps (DNA
extraction, PCR, and amplicon purification), is that sequencing and base calling
have now become the primary factors limiting the Labs' productivity.
Productivity and cost analyses support the contention that acquisition of the
373A will result in: 1) greater lab productivity; 2) an increase in lab capacity
by freeing otherwise dedicated lab space; and 3) a cost savings of about 40% per
sequencing reaction. The latter will allow the Labs to recoup purchase costs iTI
less than three years at present productivity levels. The Applied Biosystems
373A has several advantages over competing instruments, including: 1) a 4-dye
fluorescent-labeling system that enables running up to 4 times as many samples
per PAGE gel; and 2) patented dye-labeled dideoxynucleotide terminators that
permit use of unlabeled oligonucleotide primers in both ~q cycle sequencing and
Sequenase formats. Ability to use unlabeled primers offers an economy and
versatility for Field Museum projects, as sequencing is entirely from PCR
products amplified from a myriad of plant, fungi, and animal sources. Field
Museum has well-developed training pro grams at all levels. Scientific staff
have adjunct appointments at neighboring institutions (e.g., U. of Chicago and
U. of Illinois, Chicago) and offer graduate training in systematics through
these institutions. These students generally use the Labs for their graduate
research projects. Finally, the Laboratories are an active participant in Field
Museum's summer intern program, which targets high school and undergraduate
students, especially those representing minority groups. llhe Labs' capacity
will be significantly augmented by the acquisition of this instrument, providing
additional opportunities for students to gain research experience in
systematics. NSF FORM 135~ (1194) A--1