* 9419962
* Stratigraphic and Sedimentologic Analysis of Permian Strata in the Shackleton Glacier Area, Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* John Isbell, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/1998
* USD 139,619.00

9419962 Isbell This award supports a project to investigate the Upper
Carboniferous (?) and Permian glacial diamictite, basinal shale, and fluvial
coal-bearing strata in the central Transantarctic Mountains that accumulated in
a major sedimentary basin that formed along the Paleo-Pacific margin of
Gondwana. The basin contains 1.5 km of upper Paleozoic strata. At the time these
rocks were deposited, Antarctica was centrally located within the Gondwana
continent, and occupied a position near the Permian South Pole. Glacial deposits
suggest conditions similar to the present. Within post-glacial strata, coal,
fossil plants, and the deposits of large prograding clastic wedges record a
dramatic change in climatic and tectonic conditions. Although Upper
Carboniferous and Permian rocks in the central Transantarctic Mountains contain
an abundance of information, they are primarily nonmarine and lack invertebrate
fossils. Due to a present lack of time control within these strata, the basin's
geologic history consists of numerous local mosaics. Until time control is
obtained, the significance of events recorded within these local sections will
remain speculative. This study will examine Upper Carboniferous (?) and Permian
strata in the Shackleton Glacier area in order to establish time control within
the depositional basin. Sequence stratigraphic techniques, along with
palynomorph analysis, will be applied to the study of these rocks. These tools
will help to constrain the location and timing of regionally significant
depositional, climatic, tectonic, and paleoecologic events within Antarctica.