* 9419566
* Design and Construction of Camera-Based Spectrometers and Polarimeters for Vision Research
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1997
* Ellis Loew, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1997
* USD 35,072.00

In order to understand the possible functions of ultraviolet-(UV) and
polarization-vision in animals, it is necessary to be able to view and measure
these environmental parameters. Since we are functionally blind to these aspects
of the photic environment, we must depend on instrumentation such as
spectroradiometers and cameras for visualization. It is also necessary that we
understand how these environmental parameters vary with time as many animals
gain and lose these visual sensitivities with age. This project will provide two
new instruments for the study of W and polarization vision. The first is a
photographic camera-based spectroradiometer which will allow for unattended,
long-term monitoring of the solar spectrum from 300 nm to 700 nm. The second is
an imaging polarimeter based on modifications to a three-tube colour television
camera. This camera is already being used for multispectral imaging in the
visible and UV, and the addition of polarization imaging will greatly enhance
its utility. The information gained using these instruments will greatly enhance
our understanding of why animals have evolved UV and polarization visual
capabilities. The imaging polarimeter will also determine the polarization c
haracteristics of relevant visual targets, such as planktonic prey, for which UV
information is available.