* 9419178
* Engineering an Fe SOD Active Site into a Host Protein
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1995
* John Caradonna, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 12/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research is supported by the Inogranic,
Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for development of a novel
synthetic route to functional metalloproteins. Dr. John Caradonna of the
Department of Chemistry, Yale University, will use a combinatorial approach to
construct proteins with active metal sites inside host proteins of known
structure. Effectively, reaction initiates a search for the constellation of
backbone positions that satisfies the geometry of the active site without
affecting the host protein's tertiary structure. The mutant proteins constructed
would be tested for enzymatic activity. The initial experiments will attempt to
synthesize the iron site of superoxide dismutase, so a successful outcome could
lead to a powerful tool in reducing tissue damage resulting from superoxide. One
immediate result will be the ability to test the effect of secondary protein
topologies on the chemistry of metalloproteins. The active sites of metal-
containing enzymes consist of metals bound to proteins folded in a certain
pattern. By devising a means of adding the metal without disrupting the folding
pattern, this research could lead to a method of synthesizing metalloenzymes
that are functional, and thus ready for use in biological investigations and
applications. In the process, the effect of protein structure on activity of
metalloenzymes will be studied.