* 9419293
* Conference: Bacterial Locomotion and Signal Transduction    III to be held January 12-16, 1995, Austin, TX
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1995
* John Parkinson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/1995
* USD 4,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F T C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t A O b j e c t P
o o l F F $ % &amp; ' ( ) * + , - F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; MSAPPS MSAPPS=C:\WINDOWS\MSAPPS
MSGRAPH=C:\WINDOWS\MSAPPS\MSGRAPH EQUATION=C:\WINDOWS\MSAPPS\EQUATION
WORDART=C:\WINDOWS\MSAPPS\WORDART PROOF=C:\WINDOWS\MSAPPS\PROOF
TEXTCONV=C:\WINDOWS\MSAPPS\TEXTCONV GRPHFLT=C:\WINDOWS\MSAPPS\GRPHFLT
MSINFO=C:9419293 Parkinson The conference, which is expected to have 160-190
participants, will enable researchers from the United States and abroad to
discuss recent developments and ideas regarding the molecular mechanisms of
sensing and movement in simple bacterial systems. Scientific sessions will
compare and contrast the sensory and locomotor systems in diverse prokaryotes,
focusing on each fundamental step in their signal transduction pathways: (a)
transmembrane signaling by chemo- and photo-receptors; (b) signal transduction
by intracellular phosphorylation cascades; (c) sensory control of cellular
motility and gene expression; and (d) the mechanics of cell motility. The
meeting format will include approximately 70 oral presentations and 80 posters,
allowing virtually all laboratories working in this rapidly moving field to
present their key findings. The requested funds are for students expenses only.
In previous years the meeting has provided an important forum for emerging
concepts and generalizations concerning bacterial sensing and motility, and has
presented the first molecular details co ncerning the structure and function of
a family of signaling proteins that are pervasive in prokaryotic organisms and
now are turning up in eukaryotic cells as well. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Lawrence R. Griffing Thomasin S u m m a r y I n f
o r m a t i o n ( # a M Osborne @ - 7_ @ $m @ ( @ ~ Microsoft Word 6.0 5 e 3 e A
p p p p p p p 1 # % % % C c T ; p p p p p # p p p p # u 9419293 Parkinson The
conference, which is expected to have 160-190 participants, will enable
researchers from the United States and abroad to discuss recent developments and
ideas regarding the molecular mechanisms of sensing and movement in simple
bacterial systems. Scientific sessions will compare and contrast the sensory and
locomotor systems in diverse prokaryotes, focusing on each fundamental step in
their signal transduction pathways: (a) transmembrane signaling by chemo- and
photo-receptors; (b) signal transduction by intracellular phosphorylation
cascades; (c) sensory control of cellular motility and gene expression; and (d)
the mechanics of cell motility. The meeting format will include approximately 70
oral presentations and 80 posters, allowing virtually all laboratories working
in this rapidly moving field to present their key findings. The requested funds
are for students expenses only. In previous years the meeting has provided an
important forum for emerging concepts and generalizations concerning bacterial
sensing and motility, and has presented the first molecular details concerning
the structure and function of a family of signaling proteins that are pervasive
in prokaryotic organisms and now are turning up in eukaryotic cells as well. ***