* 9419540
* Center for the Enhancement of Science and Mathematics       Education (CESAME)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Michael Silevitch, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/1997
* USD 344,993.00

9419540 Silevitch This award provides funding for a three year continuing award
to support the Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for the
Enhancement of Science and Mathematics Education (CESAME). This Center,
organized within the framework of the I/UCRC model, is a multi-sector
partnership of federal, state, private foundation, and industry partners. CESAME
enables K-12 elementary and secondary teachers in the State of Massachusetts to
design and implement their own innovative ideas of teaching science and
mathematics to children. CESAME is concerned with fostering projects conducted
by teachers concerned with enhancing K-12 education. By applying the IUC
approach to education, CESAME is systematically disseminate results and nurture
the development of "teacher-mentors." These leaders are vitally needed to spark
widespread positive changes in the U.S. educational system. Minimum funding for
the CESAME effort consists of a three-way match between the NSF (the prime
federal partner), the Bay State Skills Corporation (BSSC) (the prime state
partner) and other federal, industry and private education foundation sponsors.
This mixture of state, federal, and private sector participation is critical in
an area such as precollege education. This program has been coordinated with Dr.
Joyce Evans of the Teacher Enhancement Program, Division for Elementary and
Secondary Education, Directorate for Education and Human Resources. The U.S.
Department of Army has provided additional funding to augment the Centers
ongoing research and to obtain a membership in the Center. The Program Manager
recommends Northeastern University be awarded $100,000 for the first year of a
three-year continuing award. An additional $15,000 is recommended for one year
with funds provided by the U.S. Department of Army Natick RD&E Center. Near the
end of each 12-month period, the Program Manager will review the progress of the
Center on a number of renewal criteria, includ ing the following: 1) the extent
to which the university/industry interaction is being sustained and growing; 2)
the extent to which the support base of $100,000 is met and expanded; and 3) the
extent to which a robust educational program is developing. If the review is
satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend support for the next year. The
total amount of this three year continuing award is $300,000.