* 9419391
* The Divide-and-Conquer Density-Functional Approach for Large Molecules and for Molecules on Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Weitao Yang, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 01/31/1998
* USD 195,020.00

Professor Weitao Yang at the Chemistry Department of Duke University is
supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program at
NSF for studies of the electronic structure of large systems. These studies
involve the divide-and-conquer, D&amp;C, approach which has been pioneered by
Professor Yang. The D&amp;C approach to electronic structure divides a large
system into many smaller systems and the electron density of each system is
determined separately. The density and properties of the entire system are
obtained by appropriately combining the results for the sub-systems. The D&amp;C
approach provides a powerful way to use Density Functional Theory to determine
the energies and other properties of large systems, condensed matter as well as
isolated molecules. One focus of the work supported by this grant is to enhance
and extend the mathematical methods used in the D&amp;C approach. In particular,
energy gradients are being calculated in order to allow the efficient
calculation of the stable geometries of these large systems. There is also
effort directed toward combining quantum mechanics and molecular mechanics. The
accurate quantum mechanical treatments are used to describe regions of the
system where there are important chemical effects. On the other hand, the more
approximate molecular mechanics treatments are used to describe the environment
of these regions. The second focus of the work supported by this grant is to
apply the D&amp;C approach to the study of the bulk and surface properties of
solids. An advantage of D&amp;C is that it can be used in a straightforward way
to treat systems without translational symmetry; thus, problems involved in the
adsorption, or chemisorption, of atoms and molecules on surfaces are being
treated. A major limitation for accurate theoretical treatments of large
molecular systems has been the exponential increase in computational effort with
the size of the system being studied. A similar comment holds for the size of
the repeat unit, or unit cell, of solids. For a large system, it is possible to
relate the scaling of the computational effort to the number of atoms, N,
contained in the system. Ab initio methods scale at the fourth or even higher
powers of N and standard Density Functional methods scale as the third power of
N. However, the D&amp;C approach to Density Functional methods scales linearly
with N; this linear scaling could make accurate treatments possible for quite
large systems. If the efforts supported by this grant are successful, a major
breakthrough will have been made.