* 9419093
* Functional Analyses of an Epicuticular Wax Gene from        Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1999
* Kenneth Feldmann, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 04/30/1999
* USD 244,822.00

9419093 Feldmann All plants contain epicuticular wax (EW) on the surface of the
cuticle. Scanning electron microscopy has revealed that in many plant species
the EW consists of an amorphous ground layer covered by rod-shaped structures
and irregular shaped plate-like structures with rounded edges. The wax is
composed of a mixture of long chain aliphatic compounds which can be isolated by
dipping an aerial portion of the plant into chloroform or hexane for a few
seconds and then evaporating the solvent. The aliphatic compounds include
alkanes, esters, beta-diketones, aldehydes, primary and secondary alcohols,
ketones, free acids, and triterpenes. There is tremendous diversity among plant
species both in the number of chemical classes present in a wax and in their
relative abundance. Even within an individual plant the vairous organs can be
characterized by quantitative and qualitative differences in the EW composition.
The wax biochemical pathway is poorly understood and even less is known about
the export of these molecules through the cell wall and cuticle to the surface.
However, a large number of EW mutants have been isolated in Arabidopsis, which
allows the investigator to take a genetic and molecular approach to dissecting
the epicuticular wax pathway. The objective of this proposal is to clone and
characterize two of these genes, CER4 and CER21. The mutation at the CER4 locus
eliminates the accumulation of primary alcohols whicle a mutation at the CER21
locus eliminates nearly all of the aldehydes. Both genes will be sequenced.
Their expression level in leaves, stems and siliques will be characterized
during development. Also, the expression of the CER4 and CER21 genes will be
studied in plants grown under several encironmental regimes. The cell-type
specific expression of these two genes will be studied. Subcellular localization
will be performed via in situ analyses with antibodies raised against the CER4
and CER21 proteins. Also s tudied will be the function of these genes in the
plant, i.e., are they important in biosynthesis, transport, or regulation. There
is substantial evidence to show that the composition of the EW is important in
host plant selection by herbivorous insects. Modification of the EW via genetic
engineering methods should enable us to provide resistance to various insect
pests in a number of important agronomic crops. The results obtained from the
modification of Arabidopsis can be used to modify the waxes on agronomic plants.