* 9419823
* The Role of Population Density and Resource Limitation in   Predator/Prey-Mediated Life History Traits
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* David Reznick, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Allen Moore
* 03/31/1998
* USD 326,999.00

9419823 REZNICK One example of a prediction from life history theory is that
high adult mortality rates will select for individuals that mature and reproduce
earlier in change will carry costs, such as reduced life span or reduced
reproduction late in life. This cost is offset by an increase in the probability
of successful reproduction early in life, since the odds of living to an
advanced age in the face of a high mortality rate are poor. The theory of life
history evolution thus also makes predictions about the evolution of aging and
life span. Because the properties and assumptions that underlie the theory are
very general, the predictions are also general and will apply to a diversity of
organisms, including humans. They also provide important insight in areas such
as fisheries management, since a consequence of such resource exploitation is an
increase in mortality rates. Such increases will inevitably select for
undesirable features in exploited populations, such as earlier maturity at a
smaller size. Dr. Reznick has shown that fish from high predation localities
have mortality rates that are twice as great. They also mature at an earlier
age, smaller size, and produce more offspring than those from low predation
localities. These results are all consistent with theoretical predictions. Four
experiments in progress are evaluating these traits by either adding predators
to low predation sites or introducing prey from high predation sites to low
predation sites that previously lacked them. Progress to date indicates that
these traits are as predicted. When combined with other data, such as estimates
of generation time and the heritability of these traits, it is also possible to
evaluate the potential rate of change in nature. It is clearly far greater than
previously thought, in large part because such prior inferences were based
primarily on the fossil record.