* 9419919
* Molecular Analysis of Pokeweed Antiviral Protein Gene       Function
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1998
* Nilgun Tumer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 02/28/1998
* USD 99,474.00

9419919 Tumer Pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP) is a ribosome inactivating
protein (RIP) of 29,000 daltons that is extracted from the leaves of Phytolacca
americana (Pokeweed). RIPs are site-specific RNA N-glycosidases, which
catalytically remove a single adenine from a conserved loop of the 28S rRNA of
eukaryotic ribosomes. This lesion interferes with elongation factor-2 (EF-2)
binding and blocks protein synthesis at the translocation step. PAP was
discovered due to its ability to inhibit the transmission of tobacco mosaic
virus (TMV) in plants and it was subsequently demonstrated that the purified
protein is equally effective against a number of other plant viruses and animal
viruses, including HIV. Recently, we cloned the cDNA encoding PAP and
demonstrated that expression of PAP in transgenic plants leads to broad spectrum
resistance to viral infection (Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90: 7089-7093, 1993).
The primary objective of this to generate critical information regarding the
underlying mechanism for the antiviral activity of PAP. We will test the
hypothesis that the antiviral activity of PAP is distinct from its ribosome
inhibitory activity by isolating nontoxic PAP mutants using general mutagenesis
and selection in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PAP mutants will be characterized (i)
molecularly by sequence analysis and (ii) biologically by measuring their
enzymatic activity and antiviral activity. We will determine if mutations that
render PAP nontoxic are located at the active site or at other domains and
whether the residues that are involved in enzymatic activity are critical for
antiviral activity. These studies will provide insight into the underlying
mechanism of action of PAP. %%% Pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP) is a ribosome
inactivating protein that is extracted from the leaves of Phytolacca americana
(Pokeweed). PAP catalytically removes a single adenine from 28S rRNA thereby
inactivating the ribosome and inhibiting protein synthesis. PAP was discovered
due to its ability to i nhibit the transmission of tobacco mosaic virus in
plants, and was subsequently demonstrated to be equally effective against a
number of other plant and animal viruses, including HIV. The primary objective
of this research is to determine the mechanism for the antiviral activity of
PAP, and to test the hypothesis that the antiviral activity of PAP is distinct
from its ribosome inhibitory activity. These studies will provide critical
insight into the underlying mechanism of action of PAP. *** ??