* 9419428
* Acquisition of a Surface Plasmon Resonance Biosensor
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1996
* James Rothman, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 12/31/1996
* USD 101,500.00

Identifying and understanding the basis for interaction of biologically
significant molecules forms one of the cores of modern biology. Associative
phenomena such as those between cells, receptors and ligands, regulatory
subunits and catalytic subunits, inhibitors and activators with enzymes, and
individual components with macromolecular complexes are fundamental to cellular
function. Instrumentation to study these interactions has constantly evolved.
Application is made here to for the purchase of a BIAcore from Pharmacia
Biosensor, one of the newest generation instruments for the interacting
molecules. The BIAcore uses surface plasmon resonance (SPR) to assess changes in
refractive index very close to a gold surface. By coating the gold surface with
a hydrophilic dextran matrix, specific ligands can be immobilized on the sensor
chip using various alternative chemistries. Binding of biomolecules form
solution in a flow cell to the ligand can then be scored by SPR. The BIAcore
allows real time analysis of the binding interaction, permitting the derivation
of both kinetic and thermodynamic constants and, because the change in
refractive index is directly proportional to the change in absorbed mass, allows
determination of the stoichiometry of the interaction as well. Covalent coupling
of the ligand to the sensor chip allows convenient regeneration and, combined
with the use of a flow call, also allows the study of sequential binding
interactions. The BIAcore is remarkably sensitive, usable measurements can be
made with as little as little as 50 l of a 0.1 nM soluation of the molecule of
interest. The system is fuly automated and computerized and therefore capable of
sustaining a high through-put. The PI, four CO-PI's, and three major users will
use the BIAcore to analyze molecular interactions that are crucial to cellular
processes as diverse as DNA replication and protein trafficking. Studies are
proposed to investigate: i) the protein-protein int eraction between primase and
DnaB (the replication fork, ii) how various eukaryotic replication fork
components associate, iii) how type 1 topoisomerases bind to DNA, in) the
protein-protein interactions required for molecular chaperones of the heat-
shock protein families to assist in protein folding, v) the protein-protein
interactions required for proper recognition during vesicular transport in the
cell, vi) the effects of ligand binding on homo and heterodimerzation of vitamin
D3 and retinoid receptors, vii) the extent to which binding affinities and
specificites of cadherin extracellular domains contribute to cadherin-dependent
cell recognition, and viii) the protein-protein interactions that are crucial to
TGF- signal transduction.