* 9419614
* Acquisition of HPLC System
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* August De Siervo, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 02/29/1996
* USD 24,020.00

This is a shared equipment proposal for the acquisition of a high performance
liquid chromatography system (HPLC). HPLC provides a major improvement over
conventional chromatography by increasing resolution, improving yields, and
decreasing elution times and volumes. HPLC separations are applicable to
virtually any class of compound, including small organic molecules, lipids,
nucleic acids or macromolecules such as proteins, due to the diversity of
available columns. The requested HPLC consists of the basic components required
to provide a fully functional and highly versatile semi-preparative system. The
unit includes an IBM 486 computer with the appropriate software for control of
the individual HPLC components and data analysis; a single two solvent pump
system capable of gradient formation; a manual sample injector; a Diode array
detector for monitoring elution of a wide variety of molecules the Diode array
permits the user to scan multiple wavelengths during an experiment, which will
allow the researcher to determine if the eluted fraction is pure or not ; the
Quick Res software for analysis of co-eluting compounds; and an initial
assortment of HPLC columns to allow separations based on different physical
properties. The requested instrument will enhance and modernize facilities
available for research and teaching in the department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology and Molecular Biology in addition to being available to other
faculty and students outside of the department. The HPLC system will directly
benefit several faculty research projects such as: 1) the metabolism and
degradation of tetracycline and hydrocarbons by bacteria; 2) mechanisms
regulating mammalian proteolytic enzymes, in vivo and in vitro; 4) post-
translational modification as a regulatory mechanism in signal transduction
processes in Dictyostelium; 5) purification of phenolics and hormones; 6)
studies of the intermediate and slow blocks against polyspermy and embryonic
stress tolerance in f ucoid algae and 7) the regulation of membrane lipid and
fatty acid composition and the metabolism of these molecules in a variety of
eubacteria, eukaryotes and plants. The graduate and undergraduate curricula in
Biochemistry, Microbiology and Molecular Biology at the University of Maine
include several laboratory courses that will also be enhanced by the
availability of a HPLC system. Proposed uses include purification of monoclonal
antibodies for Immunology; separation and isolation of DNA and polymerase chain
reaction products for Molecular Biology and Bacterial Genetics; purification of
proteins and peptide mapping in Biochemistry; and characterization of membrane
lipids from several microorganisms for Bacterial Physiology. The inclusion of
HPLC within these courses will provide our students with an important experience
in using current methodologies. Such skills are commonly required and are
greatly beneficial for ensuring their competitiveness for post-graduate studies,
research jobs or careers.