* 9419543
* LTREB: Long-term Studies of Herbivore and Pathogen Damage   to Tropical Trees
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/2001
* Phyllis Coley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/2001
* USD 177,316.00

They propose to collect long-term data on the rates of damage to young leaves by
herbivores and pathogens for 35 species of plants in a tropical rainforest. For
tropical shade- tolerant species, over 70% of the lifetime damage to a leaf
occurs during the short window of leaf expansion. To understand plant defenses
in the tropics, they must therefore focus on the young leaves. Few studies have
quantified herbivore damage to young leaves, and none have followed damage for
more than 1 year. Even fewer studies have included pathogens, despite the fact
that, in the humid tropics, they may be almost as destructive as herbivores.
Long-term, multi-species studies are critical for understanding the leaf
defenses. Plant defenses depend on whether a given plant species is attacked by
many species or only a few, by specialists or generalists, by pathogens or by
herbivores. How much variation is there in damage from year to year? Do the few
bad years account for most of the damage? Are the major players the same each
year, or is there annual variation in the damage attributed to each spe cies of
pathogen or herbivore? To answer these questions, they will monitor damage rates
and identify the culprits. Much of the damage can be attributed to individual
species of herbivores or pathogens, we will also quantify plant phenology to
obtain a measure of synchrony and to identify when major periods of leaf
production occur for each species. The work will be carried out in a lowland
rainforest on Barro Colorado Island (BCI), in Panama. Their extensive research
experience on BCI coupled with several long-term studies enhance the value of
their proposed project. The 35 study species represent 20 different families to
ensure that they sample the diversity of damage patterns. As the rate of
expansion of young leaves is the best correlate with damage, they will include
species with both fast- and slow-expanding young leaves. And finally, so that
their data are as useful as possible to other investigators, they will include
the 14 most common species in the Forest Dynamics Plot on BCI.