* 9419508
* Influence of Molecular Structure on the Thermodynamic and   Mechanical Properties of Crystalline Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Rufina Alamo, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2000
* USD 363,000.00

9419508 Mandelkern The main objective of this research program is to improve our
understanding of the thermodynamics, structure and properties of nonoriented,
bulk-crystallized flexible-chain polymers. The research will be concerned with
the interrelation between molecular, phase, and superstructures and
crystallization kinetics and macroscopic properties. Carefully characterized
molecular-weight and composition fractions of linear polyethylenes, as well as
well-defined blends of these components will be studied. Small and wide- angle
x-ray scattering will be used to investigate the phase structure. These studies
will be correlated with thermal measurements and analysis of Raman spectra. The
influence of the initial topology and melt structure on the resultant
crystalline state will be investigated. Studies of tensile properties will be
emphasized. Advantage will be taken of a recently constructed apparatus that
only requires very small amounts of sample. Emphasis will be given to the
influence of stain rate and temperature, as well as molecular and structural
factors, on key tensile properties and the transition between ductile
deformation and brittle failure. %%% These studies should give us a better
understanding of the molecular and structural factors that govern macroscopic
properties of crystalline polymers and improve the end-use of this class of
polymers. ***