* 9419655
* Acquisition of Scanning Electron Microscope For A Multi-User Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Janine Caira, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1997
* USD 170,150.00

This proposal requests matching funds to purchase a Field Emission Scanning
Electron Microscope (FESEM) for the a multi-use facility at the University of
Connecticut Storrs Campus. The proposed instrumentation will replace an existing
16 year old FESEM which is heavily used, but is now out of date and increasingly
difficult to maintain. The instrument will be available to investigators within
and outside of the main campus of the University of Connecticut. Over the past
five years 83 individuals have used the existing FESEM. The requested instrument
will ensure continued availability of high resolution scanning electron
microscopy for research and training at this institution. It will also introduce
useful capabilities not available on the existing instrument. In particular,
variable scan rates and high resolution low voltage operation will permit high
magnification imagine of radiation sensitive material and uncoated samples
difficult or impossible to study in the existing instrument. Other improvements
such as high vacuum gun design, digital control electronics, and capabilities
for digital image acquisition and replay, will greatly facilitate operation and
maintenance, increase throughput for users and reduce photographic costs. This
instrument will be used to carry out planned or ongoing projects of six major
users. These include investigations of phylogenetic relationships of parasitic
worms, the role of development in evolution and ecology of plants, cell death
during neurogenesis, effects of heat shock on renal function, effects of land
use on plankton biodiversity in lakes, larval and pupal morphology in insect
development. It is expected, based on previous experience at this facility, that
the requested instrument will also be heavily used by many additional projects
in years to come.