* 9419774
* Developmental Analysis of a Putative Juvenile Hormone       Receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Thomas Wilson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/1999
* USD 314,463.00

Juvenile hormone (JH) is critical for insect development and reproduction.
Although numerous whole-organismal studies of JH have been carried out, little
is understood of the molecular action of this hormone. Using a genetic approach,
this PI has been studying how JH acts at the molecular level in Drosophila
melanogaster. Previous work led to the isolation of a mutant, Methoprene
tolerant (Met), which has high resistance to JH or to methoprene, a JH
insecticidal analog. Met flies were shown to have an intracellular JH binding
protein, perhaps a JH receptor, possessing a reduced affinity for JH III. There
is good evidence that this change in affinity is responsible for the resistance.
Both the phenotype of Met resistance and the JH binding data suggest that the
Met+ gene may encode the receptor. The DNA region containing the Met+ gene has
been cloned, two transcripts have been identified, and cDNA molecules have been
isolated and 80% sequenced. The work is now poised for a molecular developmental
study of this gene and its product. Met+ cDNAs will be expressed to generate
both fusion and non-fusion Met+ protein. Met+ fusion protein will be used to
raise a polyclonal antibody specific for Met+ protein. This antibody will be
used to identify Met+ protein in biochemical preparations as well as determine
its intracellular localization. Particular attention will be given to possible
interaction of the antibody with polytene chromosomes to determine if the Met+
protein interacts with chromosomes, presumably as a transcription factor.
Authentic Met+ non-fusion protein will be generated for each of the two Met+
full-length cDNAs following expression in a baculoviral expression system. The
ability of each of these proteins to bind JH III and JH bisepoxide will be
evaluated. The hypothesis that Met+ encodes a JH binding protein will be
directly tested in these experiments. Finally, in work designed to bridge to
future studies of JH action in Drosophila, novel methoprene-resistant mutations
on the second and third chromosomes will be isolated following FRT- FLP
screening. The screen will be designed to identify loci whose gene product may
act independently or may physically interact with the Met+ protein to confer
resistance. This work will have significance in several ways: (1) the
intracellular localization and JH binding of the Met+ gene product will be
evaluated, leading to a better understanding of JH action; (2) novel loci
involved in JH action may be identified; and (3) since Met mutants are resistant
to JH insecticidal analogs, a better understanding of this resistance mechanism
to these compounds will be gained. This knowledge may be applicable for
resistance management of pest insects under control with JH insecticidal
analogs.