* 9419693
* Conference on:  Digital Libraries in the History of Science and Technology to be held in New Orleans, Louisiana;        October 10-12, 1994
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1994,11/30/1995
* Timothy Lenoir, History of Science Society
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 11/30/1995
* USD 25,365.00

Archivists, librarians, and historians of science and technology in the Science
and Technology Studies field are currently engaged in a number of new projects
to preserve in digital format large bodies of material (text, sound recordings,
images, video) and to render them accessible, indexible, and searchable through
a variety of different interfaces. Other groups of researchers in the STS field
are engaged in designing software to be incorporated into the construction of
multimedia databases and electronic digital libraries. An urgent task for STS is
to set priorities for tools and corpora that may join in the development of
these digital libraries and to identify directions for future work most
beneficial to the STS research community. With support from this grant, a two
day conference on the needs of the STS community is being held in New Orleans.
The aim is to bring together archivists and librarians engaged in digitization
and preservation projects; researchers and scholars constructing multimedia
databases in the STS field; computer scientists who have provided technical
support and designed software for these projects; and representatives of funding
agencies interested in digital libraries. The meeting is being held prior to the
national meetings of the History of Science Society, the 4S Society, and the
Philosophy of Science Association, October 12-15, 1994. A report of the
conclusions of the conference will be made at the national meetings.