* 9419019
* Tungsten and Molybdenum Oxotransferases
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Michael Johnson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1997
* USD 313,250.00

9419019 Johnson The objective of this research is to investigate the structural
and functional diversity of Mo-pterin and W-pterin centers in terms of Mo/W
coordination environment and the nature and properties of the molybdopterin
component. The approach involves the use of three complementary spectroscopic
techniques that are capable of selectively monitoring the electronic, magnetic
and vibrational properties of the Mo/W-pterin centers even in the presence of
additional paramagnetic or chromophoric prosthetic groups. Ground and excited
state electronic properties for Mo(V) and W(V) forms will be established by
variable temperature magnetic circular dichroism and electron paramagnetic
resonance spectroscopies. Vibrational frequencies for Mo/W-ligand and
molybdopterin stretching modes will be investigated by resonance Raman
spectroscopy using excitation into visible charge transfer bands/ Electronic and
vibrational assignments will be based on resonance excitation profiles, isotope
shifts, and studies of appropriate Mo/W model complexes. Spectroscopic studies
will focus on five distinct classes of oxotransferases: hepatic sulfite oxidase,
DMSO reductase from Rhodobacter sphaeroides, formate dehydrogenase from
Clostridium thermoaceticum, aldehyde ferredoxin oxidoreductases from the
hyperthermophilic archaea Pyrococcus furiosus and ES-4, formaldehyde ferredoxin
oxidoreductases from the hyperthermophilic archaea Pyrococcus furiosus and
Thermococcus litoralis. %%% Oxotransferases catalyze a diverse array of oxygen
insertion/removal reactions that are of crucial importance in the metabolism of
carbon, nitrogen and sulfur. In mesophilic organisms that function at ambient
temperatures (plants, bacteria and mammals), many of these reactions are
catalyzed by enzymes with a novel molybdopterin active site of unknown
structure. Recent studies of hyperthermorphilic archaea from deep sea volcanic
vents have revealed the presence of similar enzymes with tungstopteri n active
sites, that appear to be evolutionary ancestors of the mesophilic enzymes. The
objective of this research is to investigate the structural and functional
diversity of molybdopterin and tungstopterin oxotransferases in terms of
molybdenum/tungsten coordination environment and the nature and properties of
the pterin component. The approach involves the use of three complementary
spectroscopic techniques that are capable of selectively monitoring the
electronic, magnetic and vibrational properties of the molybdopterin and
tungstopterin cofactors. Ground and excited state electronic properties for
molybdenum(V) and tungsten(V) forms will be established by variable temperature
magnetic circular dichroism and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopies.
Vibrational frequencies for metal-ligand and pterin stretching modes will be
investigated by resonance Raman spectroscopy using excitation into visible
charge transfer bands. Electronic and vibrational assignments will be based on
resonance excitation profiles, isotope shifts, and studies of appropriate
molybdenum and tungsten model complexes. The results will be important in
understanding the catalytic mechanisms of this class of enzymes and are likely
to have important evolutionary and biotechnological implications. ***