* 9419506
* Dynamics of Extended Non-Equilibrium Systems:  Hysteresis,  Electromigration, and Defect Chaos
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* James Sethna, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/1997
* USD 213,000.00

9419506 Sethna Collective behavior emerging on long length scales will be
explored in three systems. First, the investigator will study disorder-induced
nucleation of bursts associated with certain hysteresis loops and investigate
innovative applications to magnetic recording which result. Second, the dynamics
of large, mobile voids will be studied analytically and using realistic
simulations of bulk aluminum and copper. This work will help understand failure
present in microfabricated devices with high current densities. Third, chaotic
states in two-dimensional systems described by partial differential equations
whose topological defects move in a chaotic, turbulent manner will be studied.
More general coarse-graining methods will be used to investigate phase
transitions and the effects of boundaries, and to understand the nature of noise
in these systems. %%% For many systems, even though the underlying physics of
the interactions of the individual particles is complex, on a large scale rather
simple laws can often be found. Three examples of such systems that are forced
to be far from equilibrium will be investigated theoretically. First, certain
systems, such as magnets, behave differently depending on whether a parameter
(such as an external magnetic field) is increased or decreased. Such systems
will be investigated and these results will be applied to magnetic recording.
Second, the movement of voids (pockets of air) in materials such as aluminum and
copper will be investigated using equations and computer simulations, with a
goal to better understand failure in microfabricated devices with high currents
flowing through them. Third, the behavior of chaotic noise and defects will be
investigated in certain classes of two-dimensional systems, such as fluids that
are forced to flow and heart muscle walls. ***