* 9419765
* Symposium:  Phylogenies and Comparative Biology Stage II:   Testing Hypotheses Derived From Phylogenies With Data From  Extant Taxa
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1995,05/31/1995
* Jonathan Losos, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/1995
* USD 9,000.00

9419765 Losos In recent years , our ability to discover the phylogenetic
relationships among species (i.e., how species are related to one another) has
increased substantially, thanks to advances both in our ability to collect
relevant data, such as DNA sequences, and in analytical advances in the ability
to utiliza this information to deduce phylogenies. Although the relationships
among species are interesting and scientifically important in their own right,
phylogenies can be useful for other purposes as well. %%% This symposium will
demonstrate the utility of phylogenies for framing hypothese that can be tested.
In the past, phylogenies have been used to examine previously-derived
hypotheses; i.e. hypotheses were framed based on other data and then examined in
the context of the phylogeny to determine whether species had changed as
predicted. However, this sympoqium will illustrate how phylogenies can be used
to actually derive hypotheses that can then be tested by gathering data on
extant taxa. For example, based on a phylogeny, one might deduce that a given
feature had evolved earlier than the occupation of the new habitat. Thus, one
might propose that the feature was required for use of that habitat, which one
could then test experimentally using extant organisms. This symposium will
include workers in fields as disparate as developemntal biology, behavior,
ecology and conservation to illustrate the powerful uses to which phylogenies
can be put to generate testable hypotheses. ***