* 9419909
* Support for the Collection of Genetic Resources, Louisiana  State University Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1995,10/31/2001
* Mark Hafner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 10/31/2001
* USD 136,802.00

The Louisiana State University Museum of Natural Science (LSUMNS) Collection of
Genetic Resources is probably the largest and most active collection of wild
vertebrate frozen tissues in the world. It contains nearly 40,000 specimens and
over 100,000 samples of frozen tissues and extracts (e.g., DNA, proteins, and
antisera). In the last five years, the Collection has given more than 2,000
samples of frozen tissues to researchers form 10 countries. During the same
period, more than 80 publications and theses relying on LSUMNS tissues and
extracts have been produced. In the years to come, demands for tissues and
tissue extracts are expected to rise substantially as more and more researchers
turn to comparative molecular methods and as the LSUMNS Collection grows and
becomes better known as a repository and source of genetic materials.
Improvements in molecular technology and methodology will cause an increase in
specimen requests form systematists and population geneticists (currently the
Collection s main users), and will lead to greater interest in the Collection
form nontraditi onal sources -- ecologists, behaviorists, wildlife managers,
epidemiologists, and other comparative molecular biologists. Already, the
Collection is feeling an impact particularly from bird ecologists and
behaviorists interested in an historical (phylogenetic) perspective from which
to interpret their copious life- history data. The LSUMNS Collection must meet
this expected increase in demand. The Collection is growing rapidly as a result
of the Museum s aggressive program of collection and soliciting tissues and
tissue extracts. This program is intended not only to increase holdings but also
to salvage and centralize tissues and genetic extracts that might otherwise be
scattered and unavailable to the research community. This project will support
repairing, replacing, and adding new ultracold freezers and their alarms and
backup systems. It will also assist in storing and in preparing and mailing of
frozen specimens to researchers at other institutions.