* 9419067
* RUI: Structure and Function of an Alternatively Spliced,    B-Cell-Specific, Transcription Factor, PAX-5
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Roberta Pollock, Occidental College
* Continuing Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 12/31/1997
* USD 243,000.00

94109067 Zwollo B-cell-specific activating protein (BSAP) is thought to play
important roles in the transcriptional regulation of several B-cell-specific
genes, including (CD19, CD20, V(pre-B) IgH, Ca, and blk.) BSAP is encoded by the
Pax-5 gene, a member of the Pax gene family of homeodomain class transcription
factors. In this project, the molecular nature of Pax-5 gene transcripts and
proteins will be investigated in mouse spleen and B-cell lines. Preliminary
results have revealed that at least two alternative splicing products are
present within the murine B-cell population. The presence and structure of
those, and any additional alternatively spliced Pax-5 isoforms in vivo will be
investigated. To study the structure/function relationships of the different
Pax-5 isoforms, the following basic questions will be addressed: 1) What is the
structure of the different isoforms? 2) How do the different isoforms effect in
vivo transcription? 3) Can the different isoforms interact with their DNA
target, the BSAP-binding site? 4) When are the different isoforms present during
B-cell development ? 5) Which areas on the Pax-5 isoforms are involved in
protein-protein interactions? These studies will increase our understanding of
the functional roles that Pax-5 plays during B-cell development, as well as
contribute to the elucidation of the mechanisms coordinating cell proliferation
and differentiation throughout B-lymphocyte development. %%% B-lymphocytes or
B-cells are responsible for producing circulating antibodies in response to
antigen stimulation and are an essential component of the immune response.
B-cell-specific activating protein (BSAP) is thought to play important roles in
the transcriptional regulation of several B-cell-specific genes. BSAP is encoded
by the Pax-5 gene, a member of the Pax gene family of homeodomain class
transcription factors. In this project, the molecular nature of Pax-5 gene RNA
transcripts and proteins will be characterized in mouse spleen and B-cell lines,
and the structure/function relationships of the different Pax-5 gene products
will be determined. These studies will increase our understanding of the
functional roles that Pax-5 plays during B-cell development, as well as
contribute to the elucidation of the mechanisms coordinating cell proliferation
and differentiation throughout B-lymphocyte development. ***