* 9419993
* Mechanisms of Orientation and Navigation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Kenneth Lohmann, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 05/31/1999
* USD 112,758.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY Lohmann, K., IBN 94-19993 Mechanisms of Orientation and
Navigation Sea turtle hatchlings begin an amazing long-distance migration as
soon as they emerge from their underground nests on oceanic beaches. They
scramble to the sea and swim through the surf, then quickly establish a course
towards the open ocean, Maintaining their direction after swimming beyond sight
of land.. Little is known about how hatchling sea turtles maintain their course
through a vast ocean that contains no obvious landmarks. Near the beach, wave
direction provides a reliable cue, Which the hatchlings seem to use initially.
But farther from land, where waves no longer reliably indicate direction, the
hatchlings appear to depend on the magnetic field of the earth. Recent
experiments have demonstrated that sea turtles have a well- developed magnetic
compass that allows them to maintain a specific heading, even in total darkness.
For long-distance migrants such as sea turtles, the geomagnetic field not only
provides a possible cue for compass orientation, but a potential source for
worldwide positional information. Several parameters of the earth s magnetic
field vary predictably with latitude and it appears that hatchling sea turtles
can sense these parameters. The research that Dr. Lohmann will carry out is
designed to investigate: (1) how hatchlings may use these geomagnetic parameters
in global position finding; (2) how young sea turtles may acquire a directional
preference and how the preference influences orientation; and (3) the mechanism
hatchlings use to detect wave direction and how this information interacts with
the information from the magnetic compass. All species of sea turtles are now
either threatened or endangered. Thus this research will provide information
useful to conservation workers trying to save these animals from extinction. In
addition it will provide valuable information about how animals (including
turtles, fis h and whales) navigate using information from the magnetic field of
the earth. .