* 9419613
* Physiological Mediation of Apoptosis During Avian Ovarian Follicle Atresia
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Alan Johnson, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Elvira Doman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 229,400.00

9419613 Johnson This proposal describes studies to evaluate physiological
mechanisms that mediate normal cell death (a process called apoptosis or
programmed cell death) within preovulatory ovarian follicles of the domestic
chicken. Although in most animal species follicle atresia (the death and
resorption of nonviable follicles) occurs in greater than 95% of ovarian
follicles present within the ovary at the time of hatch (or birth), relatively
little is known about events within follicle cells that are associated with the
initiation of follicle death. Dr. Johnson was among the first to determine that
ovarian follicle atresia in the hen, as well as in mammals, is mediated via the
process of apoptosis thus providing for the first time an early endpoint to
facilitate studying causative effects. Among the physiological factors now known
to be associated with cell survival/cell death in a variety of mammalian and
avian tissues are members of the bc1-2 gene family (a family of genes related to
Ced genes previously characterized in the worm, Caenorhabditis elegans). The
fact that these genes are so highly conserved during the process of evolution
points to the importance of their function in maintaining cell viability or,
alternatively, inducing cell death. Thus, results from the studies outlined will
have implications for better understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms
which regulate ovarian follicle selection and physiological follicle death in
nonmammalian species. Moreover, the data should more generally provide
information related to the regulation and mechanisms responsible for
physiological cell death in all tissues from vertebrate species. ***