* 9419640
* Direct and Indirect Effects on Community Resilience in      Oak Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Clive Jones, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Taber D. Allison
* 12/31/1996
* USD 65,000.00

9419640 Ostfeld A critical role for ecologists is to predict the consequences of
perturbations to communities of interacting species. Traditional approaches to
understanding the determinants of community structure and dynamics have focused
on direct effects of populations on other populations and have ignored indirect
effects. The PI's will begin to test the importance of both direct and indirect
interactions in oak forest of southeastern New York state. Specifically,
episodic mast production by oak trees stimulates a series of direct and indirect
effects by causing transient increases in the density of rodent populations, and
changes in space use by deer. Rodents, in turn, appear to be key regulators of
low-density gypsy moth populations, and are the primary reservoirs for the
etiological agent of Lyme Disease. White-tailed deer are the primary host for
adult deer ticks, the vectors of Lyme Disease. The purpose of this project will
be to demonstrate the effects of mast years on rodent population dynamics in oak
forests. This will be tested with a large scale field experiment in which acorns
are added to or removed from replicated 2.25 ha plots. Rodent populations will
be monitored for one year. %%% This is an award that is designed to demonstrate
the feasibility of the large scale acorn manipulation experiment, and to
determine if rodent populations respond to the manipulation as predicted. Such
information will provide the first step in understanding the direct and indirect
effects of acorn production in deciduous forest landscapes.