* 9419201
* Industry Presence on Campus Experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* David Chang, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 07/31/1995
* USD 48,418.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9419201 K. Dozier Funding is provided for partial support of a
joint research-educational project between CSULA and Hughes Aircraft. Dr. David
Chang, Director of Technology Transfer at Hughes, will spend one day per week at
CSULA and will interact with students and faculty. The objectives are: (1)
Catalyze university-industry collaborative research projects; (2) Promote
student involvement in research and design of relevance to industry; (3) Improve
the infrastructure laboratory on campus. Four projects will be initiated: (a) An
optics gyroscope analysis for automotive applications also supported by a
TRP/ARPA grant); (b) An interactive learning at distance via a satellite
network; (c) Training for clean manufacturing technology program, including
technology transfer to other companies; (d) Damping of waves in shallow water
for two-phase flow air cleaning fountains on the California shore. The last
project will make use of a patent application for using wave energy to create
the fountains. At least three students will be placed to temporarily work in
Hughes. The visit of Dr. Chang on campus will also facilitate the design of a
optics sensor and communication laboratory in CSULA. This is an experimental
CRISP (Combined Research Industrial Scholarship Project, GOAL Announcement
93-149), where the industrial partner comes on the University campus to forge
the university-industry interaction. CSULA is a minority institution, and Hughes
plan to encourage recruiting of minority graduates. It is expected that the
proposed project will have a significant impact on developing the curriculum and
attracting students to industry at CSULA, initiating several joint research
projects of relevance for industry, and enhancing the infrastructure at CSULA.