* 9419197
* Minority Research Opportunities in Interfacial Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Bruce Gaber, Department of Navy Naval Research Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1998
* USD 263,000.00

9419197 Gaber For a variety of historical and social reasons, African Americans
are severely under represented at the PhD level in science and mathematics. It
is imperative that the scientific community take a leadership role in providing
training opportunities and incentives for these young Americans to choose
careers as active scientists. Cooperatively with National Science Foundation,
the Naval Research Laboratory has developed a summer research internship program
for promising undergraduate students science, engineering, and mathematics. The
program specifically targets students who aspire to careers in scientific
research. This cooperative program provides an unique summer research internship
experience for outstanding minority undergraduates. During the first three years
of the program twenty five outstanding undergraduates have been identified and
recruited at three of the Nation's leading historically black colleges and
universities: Clark-Atlanta University, Spelman College, and Morehouse College.
These students have worked with distinction as summer research interns at NRL's
Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering. Based upon the program's
initial success, it is proposed to enlarge its scope to: . Expand the number
summer research internships by one third . Extend the internship program to
students from additional HBCUs . Provide research opportunities at the Georgia
Institute of Technology . Establish research programs between NRL and
participating HCBUs. ***