* 9419301
* Genetic Dissection of Systemic Acquired Resistance in       Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Christopher Lamb, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1998
* USD 350,000.00

9419301 Lamb Attempted infection by a non-pathogen or an avirulent form of a
pathogen can result not only in localized hypersensitive resistance, but also in
the development of systemic acquired resistance (SAR) in which resistance to
normally virulent pathogens develops throughout the plant. Establishment of SAR
is associated with increases in cell wall hydroxyproline levels and peroxidase
activity, together with the system expression of a subset of defense genes, but
the functional significance of these defenses in SAR has not been established.
Induction of the systemic signals is correlated with localized hypersensitive
necrosis, and salicylic acid is a component of the SAR mechanism although it
does not appear to be the systemic signal. A system has been extablished for
biological induction of SAR in Arabidopsis (A. thaliana) by pre-challenge
inoculation with genetically well-defined bacterial pathogens. This system
exhibits many of the features of well-characterized SAR in tobacco and cucumber,
and a tractable mutant screen has been developed that in preliminary studies
resulted in the isolation, from a population of 11,000 mutagenized plants, of 10
confirmed mutants that exhibit local hypersensitive resistance but fail to
develop SAR. It is now proposed to exploit the tools available with Arabidopsis
for genetic dissection of SAR with the following specific objectives: 1. Further
physiological characterization of biologically induced SAR in Arabidopsis. 2.
Analysis of hypersensitive resistance-defective mutants to define the role of
localized hypersensitive necrosis in the biological induction of SAR. 3. Further
develop the collection of SAR mutants from mutagenized seeds of Arabidospsis
ecotype Col-O and T- DNA taggd lines of ecotype Wassilewskija. 4.
Characterization of this developing collection of mutants with respect to
dominance, complementation, and map position. 5. Use these mutants to delineate
the signal pathway for biological induction of SAR by genetic and physiological
analysis of the sequence of gene action. 6. Molecular cloning of SAR genes with
an initial emphasis on key genes for which T-DNA tagged alleles have been
identified.