* 9419660
* Evolution, Coevolution and Predator-Prey Dynamics:  An      Experimental Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1997
* Sharon Lawler, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/1997
* USD 30,000.00

9419660 Lawler Evolutionary theory predicts that predators can cause
evolutionary change in their prey and that predators may evolve in response to
their prey. Such changes are thought to affect the population dynamics of both
predators and prey. However, this important realm of evolutionary theory is
practically untested because prolonged studies are required to observe evolution
and population dynamics in most animals. This problem can be overcome by
studying evolution in micro-organisms, which can evolve rapidly because their
generation times are only 4-48 hours. It is crucial to discover whether
evolution can alter population dynamics, to determine whether evolutionary
processes need to be incorporated into population biology theory. Such knowledge
may increase the ability of scientists to predict changes in population sizes.
In this project, protozoan predators and their prey will be grown in replicated
laboratory microcosms, where their population dynamics and other characteristics
can be measured with comparative ease. The project consists of four sets of
experiments, each on a different predator-prey pair. Prey will be grown for over
100 generations, in microcosms alone and with predators. A wide variety of
predator and prey characters will be measured regularly during this time to
quantify evolutionary changes. Population sizes will also be monitored.
Subsequent experiments will measure the effect of evolution on predator-prey
population dynamics. In these, predators from the first experiment will be grown
with either of two types of prey: prey that have not coexisted with the predator
for hundreds of generations, or prey that have. Differences in the population
dynamics of the predator when grown on the two prey types will provide evidence
that evolution affects population dynamics. This research will clarify whether
population biologists need to consider evolutionary processes when constructing
predictive models of population dynamics, and may establish whether coevolution
o ccurs in predator-prey pairs. The theory that this research will test is
potentially important to some problems in applied ecology. For example, it is
important to know whether pest species can rapidly evolve resistance to
predators introduced for biological control.