* 9419994
* Multi-User Analytical Equipment for the Plant Ecology       Program at UM-St. Louis
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Bette Loiselle, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1997
* USD 141,500.00

This proposal requests funds for multi-user analytical equipment for the
University of Missouri-St. Louis plant sciences program. Five investigators
require this equipment to enhance their current research programs and for future
research. These researchers work in the areas of plant population genetics,
plant-herbivore interactions, and plant life history. Research in these diverse
areas gains a common focus through the investigators' interest in determining
the selective environmental factors influencing plant development, growth, and
reproductive success. The equipment requested would provide the resources for
faculty and students to study patterns of plant resource allocation, plant
responses to environmental variation and stress, water relations,
photosynthesis, and secondary compound chemistry. Specific research projects
requiring this equipment include: comparative analysis of resource allocation
and growth patterns in different microhabitats in Quercus species, assessment of
genotypic variation in Piper arieanum defense and tolerance resistance to
herbivory, documentation of resource allocation across canopies of tropical
forests and between developmental stages of seedlings in Missouri forests,
resource availability in fleshy fruits and assimilation efficiencies for common
understory fruit-eating bats and birds, and determination of the genetic basis
of reproductive costs in Solidago. The requested equipment includes an elemental
analyzer, a fluorometer and photosynthesis system, water relations instruments,
environmental monitoring equipment and computer, plant growth chambers, a gas
chromatograph, and an ultracold freezer.