* 9419168
* Stochastic Effects and Deterministic Chaos in Spatially Extended Nonlinear Dissipative Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/2001
* Guenter Ahlers, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/2001
* USD 654,000.00

The project employs optical and video techniques to record pattern formation in
classical fluids such as acetone and water. Thermal convection, flow, and
imposed electric fields induce density fluctuations or patterns in non-
equilibrium systems that can detected by optical means. These patterns can be
irregular both in space and in time. The mathematical description of such
irregularity is often described by deterministic macroscopic equations and is
referred to as spatio- temporal chaos (STC). However, an additional stochastic
term representing local microscopic fluctuations (thermal noise external to the
deterministic equations) is also thought to be important in STC. The purpose of
this project is to seek experimental evidence for the external noise in
different fluids and in different geometries. The project involves strong
collaboration between the principal investigator and theorists in the U.S. and
in Germany. The results are of fundamental interest and are also of
technological interest in the behavior of liquid crystals in electric fields,
engineering fluid dynamics, and re lated fields. % % % The project employs
optical and video techniques to observe and record pattern formation in
classical fluids such as acetone and water. Thermal convection, flow, and
imposed electric fields induce density fluctuations or patterns that can
detected by optical means. These patterns are in some ways similar to patterns
appearing in smoke plumes rising and moving by convection in front of a theater
projection lens. The mathematical description of such phenomena is quite complex
and careful experiments, as proposed by the principal investigator, are required
to test extant probabilistic theories of pattern formation. The project involves
strong collaboration between the principal investigator and theorists in the
U.S. and in Germany. The results are of fundamental interest and are also of
technological interest in the behavior of liquid crystals in electric fields,
engineering fluid dynamics, and related fields.