* 9419859
* Acquisition of a Phosphorimager and Associated Peripheral   Equipment
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1996
* Timothy Nilsen, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 03/31/1996
* USD 30,500.00

We propose to secure funding for a phosphorimager to be shared among the
members of the Center for Molecular Parasitology at Case Western Reserve
University. This group, within the Department of Molecular Biology and
Microbiology, is a newly formed division consisting of four current (increasing
to eight) principal investigators. Each of the member laboratories is involved
in research examining different aspects of RNA processing. Briefly, this
research includes studies examining cis- and trans-splicing in nematodes, the
characterization of similarities and differences between cis- and trans splicing
systems, protein factor involvement in cis- and trans-splicing, mechanisms of
RNA editing in the slime mold, Physarum polycephalum, developmental regulation
of RNA editing in Physarum polycephalum, molecular analysis of signal
recognition particle in the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe and
splicing mechanisms and factors in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. As the molecular
tools employed in the analysis of RNA processing have become increasingly more
sensitive, the traditional film-based autoradiographic approach to isotope
detection has become limiting. The acquisition of a phosphorimager would allow
us to gain access to new technology that would directly impact not only our
ability to perform a majority of our experiments where signal strength is a
critical issue, but it would also allow for the Center as a whole to increase
its productivity by drastically decreasing the time required between the
performance of an experiment and the analysis of data. The system's multi-user
capabilities would be enhanced through the incorporation of a package of
peripheral equipment (detailed in the Description of Instrumentation) aimed at
maintaining the base phosphorimaging unit as a data acquisition point with all
subsequent data analysis performed at remote, existing computer locations. This
also allows for several students, postdoctoral fellows and technicians t o
analyze data simultaneously. If funding for this equipment is provided by the
NSF through a Multi-User Biological Equipment and Instrumentation Resources
Grant, then multiple laboratory groups (presently four, but expanding to eight)
will gain access to current technology that will allow for experiments to be
conducted that otherwise would be difficult or impossible to analyze.