* 9419898
* RUI - Phylogenetic Analysis of the Cetacean Basal Cranium   and Inner Ear and Study of the Cetacean Relationships
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Zhe-Xi Luo, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 90,000.00

9419898 Luo The phylogenetic relationships of cetaceans (whales, porpoises and
dolphins) provide the basis for understanding their great diversity and unique
aquatic adaptations. Recent molecular and paleontological studies of cetaceans
have posed very different hypotheses for cetacean relationships that would lead
to different evolutionary interpretations of their aquatic specializations. To
test these competing hypotheses, the proposed research will examine the
morphological characteristics of the cranium and the ear. Although the
basicranium is a very useful source of systematic characters in studies of other
mammals, it has been relatively under-explored in cetaceans. Therefore, a
thorough phylogenetic analysis of the basicranium has a good potential to
generate new data for inferring relationships of cetaceans. Two groups of modern
cetaceans, the odontocetes (toothed whales) and the mysticetes (baleen whales),
have very different underwater hearing mechanisms. Modern toothed whales have
some inner ear structures specialized for hearing high frequency sound that is
crucial for their echolocation (sonar). By contrast, extant baleen whales rely
entirely on the low frequency sounds. The anatomical data that are related to
these functional differences between modern odontocetes and mysticetes are very
limited. Little is known of the ear structures of fossil cetaceans. As a result,
several issues on the structural evolution of cetacean ears have not been
resolved. This study will examine the inner ears of fossil and extant
odontocetes, mysticetes and the extinct archaeocetes, using accurate techniques
of serial grinding, the industrial CT scanning, and computer graphic
reconstruction. A detailed study using these techniques will contribute new data
to cetacean evolutionary biology, and test hypotheses on the structural
evolution of the cetacean ear.