* 9419545
* Cell Culture Facilities for Organismal and Integrative      Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1995
* Martin Feder, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John W. Cross
* 12/31/1995
* USD 26,595.00

Matching funds are requested from the National Science Foundation to set up a
cell/tissue culture facility for use by faculty investigators and trainees in
the Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy of The University of Chicago.
During the past decade, this department has made major studies in applying the
techniques of molecular biology to problems of organismal biology, and in
training students to do likewise. Conspicuous by their absence from these
developments have been cell/tissue culture techniques. Absence of suitable
facilities in the building prevents departmental researchers from analyzing gene
expression in cultured cells and performing physiological investigations. Use of
facilities elsewhere on campus necessitates transport of cells/tissues in
culture over long distances and outside in inclement weather, which is
incompatible with the proposed research. Accordingly, funds are sought to
acquire facilities on site. Proposed research applications include (1)
examination of possible molecular chaperone activity of a heat shock protein,
hsp70; (2) study of gene expression associated with differentiation in a leech
model; (3) elucidation of temperature-sensitive regulation of transcription in a
natural model (the Ldh-B locus of the fish Fundulus); (4) investigation of
effects of aqueous flow regime on stem cell differentiation in demosponges and
development of an experimental model for optimizing fluid flow in biological
systems; (5) examination of neural bases of learning in a brain explant model.
The proposed facility would not only permit these projects to be carried out,
but also serve as a springboard for educating all departmental personnel about
the utility, promise, and practice of cell/tissue culture. To this end, the PIs
would conduct regular workshops whose participant would include departmental
personnel and local secondary school instructors.