* 9419541
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Aseptic Processing and Packaging Studies
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* Kenneth Swartzel, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/2000
* USD 305,899.00

9419541 Schwartz The Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Aseptic
Processing and Packaging Studies is becoming a multi-university Center with the
addition of the University of California - Davis to the original North Carolina
State University research group. Four new companies are joining the Center
inconjunction with the University of California - Davis research site. Seven
companies are already members of the initial Center. A woman undergraduate is
also being funded for a study to determine the hydrocolloid - protein
interactions in vitro. The researchers are eminently qualified for this
research. The Center has been coordinated with Dr. Fred Heineken, Program
Director in the Division of Bioengineering and Environmental Systems. The
Program Manager recommends North Carolina State University be awarded $5,000 for
the first year of a five-year continuing award. An additional $5,000 is
recommended for one year with funds provided by the Women, Minorities, and
Disabled Engineering Research Assistants Program. Funding for years two through
five of the five year continuing award are recommended at $30,000 per year
including $5,000 per year for an evaluator. Near the end of each 12-month period
the Program Manager and/or the Division Director of the Engineering Education
Centers Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of renewal
criteria requirements, including the following: 1) the extent to which the
industry/university interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which the
support base is developing; and 3) the extent to which a robust research program
is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend
support for the next period of this continuing award.