* 9419175
* Electrostatics Mediates the Membrane Binding of Src, a      Myristoylated Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Stuart McLaughlin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1999
* USD 345,000.00

9419175 McLaughlin The overall objective is to understand the molecular
mechanism by which proteins containing myristate, a 14 carbon acyl chain,
interact with biological membranes. The proposal focuses on Src (the product of
the v-src oncogene, v-Src, and its cellular homolog, c-Src, are known
collectively as Src); the working hypothesis is that membrane binding requires
both the hydrophobic insertion of the NH2-terminal myristate into the bilayer
and the electrostatic interaction of a cluster of adjacent basic residues with
acidic lipids. There are four specific projects. 1) Developing a simple model
that describes the synergistic effect of myristate and basic residues on the
binding of Src to phospholipid membranes and testing this model by measuring the
membrane binding of myristoylated and nonmyristoylated peptides corresponding to
the NH2-terminal region of Src. 2) Confirming that the basic residues in the
NH2-terminal region of Src are responsible for the electrostatic component of
protein-membrane interaction by measuring the membrane binding of native v-Src
and c-Src as well as mutant and chimeric versions of these proteins. 3)
Measuring the effect of phosphorylation by C and A kinases on the membrane
binding of both Src and corresponding peptides. 4) Constructing a molecular
model of a phospholipid bilayer and the NH2-terminal region of Src, then using
the nonlinear Poisson-Boltzmann equation to calculate theoretically the
electrostatic component of the binding. The project is significant because
membrane binding is crucial to the function of Src. The biophysical principles
that emerge should be applicable to some other myristoylated (e.g. MARCKS) and
farnesylated (e.g. K-Ras) proteins. %%% The overall objective is to understand
the molecular mechanism by which proteins containing myristate, a 14 carbon acyl
chain, interact with biological membranes. The proposal focuses on Src (the
product of the v-src oncogene, v-Src, which functions to transfor m cells, and
its cellular homolog, c-Src, which is involved in control of the cell cycle, are
known collectively as Src); the working hypothesis is that membrane binding
requires both the hydrophobic insertion of the NH2-terminal myristate into the
bilayer and the electrostatic interaction of a cluster of adjacent basic
residues with acidic lipids. These are four specific projects. 1) Developing a
simple model that describes the synergistic effect of myristate and basic
residues on the binding of Src to phospholipid membranes and testing this model
by measuring the membrane binding of synthetic peptides. 2) Confirming that the
basic residues in the NH2-terminal region of Src are responsible for the
electrostatic component of protein-membrane interaction by measuring the
membrane binding of native v-Src and c-Src as well as mutant and chimeric
versions of these proteins. 3) Measuring the effect of phosphorylation by C and
A kinases on the membrane binding of both Src and corresponding peptides. 4)
Constructing a molecular model of a phospholipid bilayer and the NH2-terminal
region of Src, then calculating theoretically the electrostatic component of the
binding. The project is significant because membrane binding is crucial to the
function of Src and the biophysical principles that emerge should be applicable
to other myristoylated proteins. ***