* 9420695
* Leak Prevention, Detection and Location in Storage          Tank/Pipeline Facilities
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/1994,11/30/1995
* Daniel Watts, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 11/30/1995
* USD 348,440.00

9420695 Watts Underground pipelines and storage tank systems can develop leaks
over time and cause significant environmental damage. A number of Government
Agencies have jointly recognized this concern and are joining together to
facilitate a research and development program to be undertaken jointly by the
New Jersey Institute of Technology's Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center for Emission Reduction and Iowa State University's Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center for Nondestructive Evaluation. This proposal address
the initiation phase of an envisaged broad scope, multi-year project. The
Emission Reduction Research Center (ERRC) will be responsible for the interface
with he sponsoring Agencies, EPA, DOE, DOD, and NSF. ERRC is conducting a needs
assessment, with particular emphasis on environmental and regulatory compliance
issues. These initial activities are to identify existing leak detection/leak
location equipment; assess modifications to regulatory and operating needs;
develop experimental plan leading to modifications; and develop bench scale
studies leading to new technologies and protocols. All field testing will
utilize the pipeline systems at the EPA UST/Pipeline Test Apparatus in Edison,
New Jersey. The Center for Nondestructive Evaluation is responsible for
assessment of technology, based initially on the existing EPA technology and
literature information. This Center will survey industry consensus on the
effectiveness of available technologies and conduct experimental studies of
current acoustic emission techniques. The researchers are fully qualified to
perform these studies. Funding for this project is being provided by EPA, DOE,
DOD and NSF. Dr. Ken P. Chong, Program Director of the Structural Systems and
Construction Processes Program, provided the NSF funds. The Program Manager
recommends New Jersey Institute of Technology be awarded $348,440 for one year
for its portion of this project with funds pr ovided by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, the U.S. Department of Energy, and the National Science Foundation.