* 9420985
* RUI:  Endocrinological Basis of Parental Behavior and       Dominance in Burying Beetles
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Stephen Trumbo, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/2000
* USD 100,219.00

Trumbo, Stephen IBN-9420985 NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Behavioral flexibility is the
key to relating behavior to ecology and to reproductive success. The research
proposed here will develop the first invertebrate model of a biparental organism
for studying the behavioral and hormonal mechanisms that regulate reproductive
behavior. Blood levels of juvenile hormone will be determined and correlated
with detailed changes in parental behavior. Topical application of juvenile
hormone will be used to test the hypothesis that increased male parental effort
will increase the rate of larval development and lead to a decrease in parental
effort by the male's partner. Hormone levels will also be measured during
competitive interactions between two females to test the hypothesis that
contests for the breeding resource result in elevated levels of juvenile
hormone. Furthermore, Juvenile hormone will be administered to subordinate
females during competition for resources to examine hormonal influences on
dominance, reproductive output and parental contributions to broods of mixed
parentage. This study will be based on an already thorough understanding of
behavioral variation in the animals in a natural ecological context. The ability
to integrate behavioral and physiological analyses in a group amenable to
experimental manipulation will contribute to a broader understanding of the
flexibility of reproductive behavior. The proposed project promises to advance
our understanding of how complex sequences of behavior are organized, and how
behavioral flexibility contributes to effective parental care.