* 9420254
* Collaborative Research:  Comparative Breeding Structure of  Four Species of Sonoran Desert Columnar Cactus
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* James Hamrick, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

9420254 HAMRICK The columnar cacti of the North American Sonoran Desert offer an
excellent opportunity to analyze how plants interact with their pollinators to
produce the patterns of matings that characterize their populations. Each of the
four species of cactus to be studied has large, open flowers visited by a shared
set of pollinators (i.e. bats, birds, insects). We will establish exclusion
treatments to insure that individual flowers are pollinated by a single
pollinator type. Genetic analyses at multiple gene locations will then be used
to describe the breeding structure of each pollinator-cactus species
combination. These analyses will allow us to determine how the different
pollinators distribute the pollen of an individual cactus species and will lead
to a basic understanding of the relative importance of each pollinator to the
overall breeding structure of each cactus species. Knowledge of the roles that
different pollinators play in the reproduction of these dominant plant species
will allow more effective and efficient management of desert reserves. For
example, the determination that bats may disperse pollen long distances leads to
the conclusion that the preservation of bat roosts which may be outside of the
reserve is an essential component for the maintenance of genetic diversity in
the cactus populations. If we find that a large proportion of the effective
pollinations are performed by a single pollinator species for each of the cactus
species, .the maintenance of this pollinator would be essential to the
reproduction of an individual cactus species and to the overall integrity of the
Sonoran Desert community.