* 9420357
* Liquid-Crystal Photopolymers for Stereolithography
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Allan Lightman, University of Dayton
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/1998
* USD 1,055,003.00

9420357 Chartoff This research deals with a family of diacrylate liquid
crystalline monomers that can be photopolymerized to produce functional parts in
the stereolithography process. These materials will be designed to have low
shrinkage approaching zero) when polymerized in the ordered state; will maintain
their order after polymerization so as to retain preferential anisotropy; and
will have glass transitions (Tg) approaching 200C because of their rigid rod
segmental structures, orientation, and high degree of crosslinking. The project
will have two major objectives: The synthesis and characterization of liquid
crystalline diacrylates and process optimization and construction of model parts
in the stereolithography process with layered molecular alignment directions
similar to ply orientation in continuous-fiber composites. These may be referred
to as "self-reinforcing" composites. The appropriate orientation sequences will
be determined by a part design incorporating stress analysis This is an
interdisciplinary project in the Rapid Prototyping Initiative involving
personnel with backgrounds in chemical and materials engineering, chemistry, and
physics. It also will involve a collaboration between the University of Dayton
and Case Western Reserve University. The research emphasis will be on the
engineering aspects of materials processing in stereolithography. The University
research team will work with an advisory group of individuals from industry who
have a direct interest in the outcome of the project. ***