* 9420017
* Physiological Mechanisms of Anoxic Tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Donald Jackson, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 315,000.00

9420017 Jackson The object of this investigation is to understand how a
specially adapted vertebrate animal, the freshwater turtle, is able to survive
long periods without oxygen. Based on this knowledge, the long-term goal is to
uncover fundamental principles of cellular and organismal function related to
this problem. Several experimental approaches will be utilized. First, at the
whole animal level, the distribution and excretion of key body fluid substances,
lactic acid, CO2 and chloride ion will be determined using injected
radioactively-labelled compounds. These compounds are all important in
determining acid-base balance during anoxia and these experiments will clarify
aspects of the important homeostatic function of blood pH regulation in these
animals. Second, heart function in these animals will be studied because of the
usual sensitivity of this organ to anoxia. Mechanical properties of small strips
of cardiac muscle will be studied under conditions that simulate the anoxic
state of the living animal, utilizing known changes in blood pH, ion
concentrations, and catecholamine levels in our test solutions. Third, the
response of skeletal muscle to long-term anoxia will be studied both in the
intact animal and in isolated pieces of muscle using the technique of magnetic
resonance spectroscopy. Dr. Jackson's object in these experiments is to assess
the cellular energetics, the capacity to do work, and the recovery from activity
in the muscles of this animal in the absence of oxygen. The remarkable
characteristics of an animal specialist such as the turtle and its organ systems
make it an ideal preparation for understanding basic principles of cellular
metabolism and energetics in response to anoxia and acidosis. Of broader
significance is understanding how adaptations revealed at the cell or organ
system level incorporate into the integrative behavior of the intact animal. ***