* 9420202
* The Analysis of Craft Production and Residential Activity at Xochicalco, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/2000
* Kenneth Hirth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2000
* USD 98,866.00

Hirth In 1992 and 1993, with NSF support, Dr. Kenneth Hirth conducted extensive
excavation at the site of Xochicalo an archaeological site located in Mexico.
Xochicalo is important because it marks the capital of a pre-Columbian state
which was a major regional power and because a survey of surface remains
indicated that it was rich in archaeological materials. During the course of two
seasons excavation, Dr. Hirth and his team uncovered three intact and well
preserved residential compounds with rich and undisturbed artifact assemblages.
Large quantities of household goods, domestic tools and the remains of obsidian
(volcanic glass) stone tool production were recovered. The unusual preservation
makes it possible to engage in a detailed analysis of domestic activity patterns
which usually can not be attempted using archaeological remains and Dr. Hirth
will undertake such work with support of this grant. Archaeologists want to
understand how complex societies arose and how they were maintailed in
technologically simple societies which lacked written language and computation
systems. Evidence has shown that societies developed systems of economic
specialization in which production took place in varied and carefully regulated
contexts and that control over this production helped to reinforce the
centralization of power which state control requires. Obsidian played an
important role in pre- metal societies because this glasslike rock can we worked
to produce sharp cutting edges. At Xochicalco obsidian is abundant and is
present in both the residential structures and other workshop areas. Through the
analyses which Dr. Hirth plans to conduct insight will be gained into the
organization of this important industry. This work is significant for several
reasons. It will produce data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also
increase our understanding of the emergence and maintenance of complex
societies.