* 9420558
* Structure, Reactivity, and Models of the Silicon/Silicon    Dioxide Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1995
* Mark Banaszak Holl, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/1995
* USD 105,672.00

9420558 Holl This research is focused on developing a better understanding of
the atomic scale structure of the silicon/silicon oxide interface and the
chemical reactions which occur at this interface. To accomplish these goals,
methods are developed for making silicon/silicon oxide interfaces of well-
defined structure to serve as model spectroscopic systems. The model interfaces
synthesized provide excellent test systems for crHically examining the
assumptions and assignments used when interpreting data collected from standard
themmal oxide interfaces, an essential component of most microelectronic
devices. The interfaces being synthesized are also interesting from the
perspective of a priori control of solid structure. Synthetic methods are
proposed which allow chemical tuning of the interface and formation of
metastable thin films of silicon oxide. Analysis of the stepwise formation of a
film using surface science techniques avoids a common problem of precursor to
solids chemistry, obtaining meaningful analytical data from the solid formed.
%%% The interface between crystalline and amorphous silicon dioxide plays a
critical role in microelectronic devices and has been the subject of intense
research for over 40 years. Advances in information and communications have been
directly coupled with the development of better methods of materials
preparation. As silicon oxide film dimensions shrink from about 1000 to 50-100
A, design and understanding of the composition of the interface layer becomes of
critical importance. This research is focused on developing a better
understanding of the atomic scale structure of the silicon/silicon oxide
interface and the chemical reactions which occur at this interface.