* 9420630
* International Conference on:  Statistics and Quality of Life Hurgada, Egypt, December 14-16, 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Pranab Sen, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1996
* USD 12,600.00

9420630 Salama Description: This project supports participation by a U.S.
scientific delegation to a conference/workshop on "Statistics and Quality of
Life: A Third World Perspective" to be held in Hurgada, Egypt, December 14-16,
1994. The topics to be covered include: medical studies and clinical trials;
epidemiological studies; environmental studies; genetics and biotechnology; and
population studies". The emphasis will be on the relevance of statistical
methodology in the scientific investigations in these areas. particular
attention will be paid to the prospective and retrospective picture relevant to
third world countries along with their vast cultural and ethnic diversities.
Tutorial presentations by international authorities, as well as contributed
papers, will be included. A conference volume will be published for
international distribution. Scope: This project will enable six U.S. scientists
to participate in this important meeting and to interact with scientists from
Egypt and other countries in the region in a field where advanced mathematical
and statistical tools may be applied to real-life problems of concern to these
countries, and consequently, to other developed countries. The meeting is
organized and supported in Egypt by Dr. A.E. Sarhan, President of the Egyptian
Statistical Society, and professor , Institute of Statistics, Cairo University.
The published proceedings will serve as a reference for future use by students
and researchers. It is expected that contacts will lead to increased interest in
collaborative research by U.S. and Egyptian scientists. ***