* 9420557
* Development of an Optical Communication Design Laboratory
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Carl Verber, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Win Aung
* 08/31/1998
* USD 399,517.00

9420557 Verber ABSTRACT The development of a senior-level fiber-optic
communication laboratory sequence is proposed. The content of the laboratories
incorporates experience gained through the research activities of several
members of the faculty of the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
(ECE) at Georgia Tech. This laboratory sequence comprises the final two courses
of a four-course Area of Specialization (AoS) in Optical Communications. The
proposed laboratory sequence has a number of novel features including a
pipelined approach in which groups of students design a system component,
evaluate the designs of the preceding class, and fabricate the evaluated design
of the class before that. This not only gives the students experience in the
important areas of design, evaluation, and implementation. It is intended that
over time, a complete working optical network will evolve which an then be used
as a test bed for the implementation of applications designed by later groups of
students. In the near term, the Design Laboratory will be coupled to on-going
research by the introduction of devices such as Er-doped fiber amplifiers,
electro-optic modulators, and WDM components which are being used in current
research programs. In later years, system and application concepts developed in
the research programs of the Computer Engineering and the Computer Science
Faculties will be introduced in a way which will enhance the relevance of the
courses to current and future practice in fiber optic communications. ***