* 9420186
* The Evolutionary and Ecological Significance of Natural     Disturbance in a New England Salt Marsh
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1995
* Mark Bertness, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1995
* USD 61,446.00

9420186 Brewer Ecological succession is one of the most widely studied processes
in community ecology. Nonetheless, while numerous ecological models of community
dynamics have been developed to explain successional responses to disturbance,
very little is known about historical effects of disturbance on plant community
dynamics. The main goal of the proposed research is to explore the historical
effects of wrack-burial disturbance on plant community dynamics in a New England
salt marsh. To do this, three experimental approaches will be employed. First,
replicated wrack disturbances in three marsh areas with known differences in
disturbance history will be created to test the hypothesis that marsh plants
with different disturbance histories respond differently to disturbance.
Secondly, disturbance history influences on intraspecific variation in clonal
morphology will be quantified with common garden experiments in three co-
occurring high-marsh perennial species. Third, the hypothesis that disturbance
history influences the intensity of interspecific interactions will be tested
with an additive series of competition experiments in the greenhouse. %%% This
study will explicitly examine the importance of considering disturbance history
in studying plant community dynamics and specifically will examine the role of
disturbance frequency as a selective force on marsh plants. The results of this
study will explore an important interface between plant population biology and
community dynamics that has received surprisingly little attention.