* 9420645
* The MRS:  A Versatile High Efficiency Spectrograph for the  Hobby-Eberly Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/1996,07/31/2002
* Lawrence Ramsey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 07/31/2002
* USD 1,146,490.00

AST 9420645 ABSTRACT This project will design, build, and install a versatile
and efficient Medium Resolution Spectrograph (MRS) for the 9-m Hobby-Eberly
telescope (HET). This instrument will cover the entire visible spectrum from 350
to 1100 nm (with a clear upgrade path for use at 1800 nm), have a resolution
range from 3000 &lt; lambda/ delta-lambda &lt; 18000, and reside in an
environmentally controlled spectrograph room. Optical fibers will couple the
spectrograph to the telescope; operating modes for the instrument will include
single object, synthetic long slit, and multiple object spectroscopy. Because of
the need for both spectral coverage and resolution, the MRS will be a dual beam
system (split at 590 nm), with a grating cross-dispersed echelle, and a white-
pupil that controls vignetting losses while keeping the sizes of costly optical
elements small. This configuration is both economical and highly efficient. The
MRS will be designed to take maximum advantage of the high efficiency optics and
queue scheduled nature of the HET. Among its many programs, the MRS will 1)
explore the broad line regions of active galactic nuclei and quasars through
dense time sample spectroscopy, 2) examine the evolution of large scale
structure in the universe through measurements of quasar absorption lines, 3)
detect and characterize the properties of dark matter via kinematical
measurements in elliptical galaxies, and 4) measure the age and dynamical
evolution of the Milky Way through kinematical study of white dwarfs,.