* 9420053
* Construction and Evaluation of a Step Scanning              Interferometric Instrument for the Observation of Infrared  Circular Dichroism
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Max Diem, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 01/31/1998
* USD 136,391.00

The following proposal is aimed at developing a prototype instrument for the
observation of infrared, or vibrational Circular Dichroism (VCD), using Step-
Scanning Fourier transform (SS-FT) methodology. VCD is a spectroscopic
technique, developed originally in the mid 1970's, in which the differential
absorption of left and right circularly polarized indrared light by vibrational
transitions is observed. This effect is very small, yet contains conformational
and structural information which cannot be obtained easily by any other
spectroscopic method. The lack of commercial instrumentation for its observation
has restricted the wider application of VCD as a structural tool. This proposal
is intended to produce a new generation of VCD instruments which could serve as
blueprints for commercial VCD spectrometers. The proposed instrument is
conceived as a VCD spectrometer, rather than a Fourier Transform infrared
spectrometer to which VCD capabilities were added. A number of technical
innovations will make this instrument very unique, and will extend its
capabilities beyond the present limits of VCD spectroscopy. The applicant's
laboratory has been in the forefront of the development of vibrational optical
activity, and has extensive experience with both dispersive and interferomatic
spectroscopic methods. Thus, this laboratory is ideally suited to take a leading
role in development of a new generation of VCD spectrometers. The main thrust of
the applicant's research is the determination of the solution conformation of
biological model systems: peptides and small proteins, as well
asoligonucleotides and their interactions with drugs. The SS- FT-VCD instrument
described here will be used in these studies to further reduce VCD data
acquisition time, improve spectral quality and permit spectra to be collected
from more dilute aqueous solutions.