* 9420031
* Maintenance of Tropical Tree Diversity by Herbivores and    Pathogens:  A Test of the Janzen-Connell Hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Phyllis Coley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* William Michener
* 07/31/2000
* USD 85,000.00

9420031 Coley One of the most striking features of tropical forests is their
great diversity. The most widely cited explanation for the maintenance of
tropical forest tree diversity is the Janzen-Connell hypothesis, which suggests
that seed predators, herbivores and pathogens maintain diversity by
preferentially attacking seeds or young trees that are close to conspecific
adults. This difference in the rate of attack results in higher juvenile
mortality near adults and increases the distance between successful conspecific
recruits. Thus, the natural enemies of trees are proposed to prevent competitive
dominance, which allows a greater diversity of tree species to persist. Despite
the theoretical importance of the Janzen-Connell hypothesis, few studies have
looked for the predicted pattern of higher seed or seedling mortality near
adults. Even less attention has been directed at understanding the predicted
mechanism of natural enemies centered on the adults. This study will critically
evaluate this hypothesis by asking: 1) whether damage depends on distance from
adult conspecifics, 2) whether damage negatively impacts growth and survival,
and 3) whether the herbivore and pathogens responsible for the majority of
damage are host specialists centered on adults. Understanding the mechanisms
which control diversity of tropical forests has applications to management of
rain forests as well as cultivated plantations. In order not to lose diversity
in managed forest reserves, policies should take into account the Janzen-Connell
effects. For example, encouraging recruitment through plantings or selective
cutting should consider distance to nearest conspecifics. Monocultures, such as
are typically found in plantations, tend to have extremely high levels of damage
from insect pests. Preliminary work suggests that one method for limiting damage
would be to have mixed planting, with a minimum of 50m between any two
individuals of the same species.