* 9420009
* Participant Support for the 8th International Symposium on  Trichoptera (Minnesota/July 9-15, 1995)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1996
* Ralph Holzenthal, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John R. Gold
* 01/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9420009 HOLZENTHAL Funds from this award will be used to support the travel of
international participants at the 8th International Symposium on Trichoptera
(caddisflies), which will be held at the University of Minnesota and Lake
Itasca, MN during July 1995. These meetings, where scientists can share their
most recent research results through formal and informal discussions, take place
every three years. This is only the second time one of these symposia has been
held in the Western Hemisphere. Special attention will be placed on identifying
and inviting caddisfly biologists from Latin America to the symposium and on
sponsoring those international participants who might otherwise be unable to
attend the symposium because of financial limitations. About 100 scientists from
around the world are expected to participate and they will present papers on all
aspects of caddisfly biology, including ecology, taxonomy, biogeography,
pollution tolerance, physiology, evolution, and behavior among other topics.
Publication of symposium proceedings are planned. %%% Caddisflies, or
Trichoptera, are a group of aquatic insects that are best known for the cases
and nets constructed by their immature stages. Caddisflies are very important
participants in aquatic food webs, where their larvae serve as food for fish and
in turn feed on other smaller aquatic organisms or stream debris. Caddisfly
larvae are found around the world and occupy many different microhabitats. They
are also very sensitive to pollution and are used as biological indicators of
water quality. ***