* 9420475
* Cretaceous-Paleogene Foraminiferida of the Victoria Land    Basin (Cape Roberts Project)
* O/D,OPP
* 06/15/1995,05/31/2002
* Peter-Noel Webb, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/2002
* USD 145,795.00

Abstract This award supports efforts to characterize the foraminifera in drill
core recovered by the Cape Roberts Project (CRP). The CRP will drill four holes,
from a sea-ice platform in up to 500m of water, in the southwest Ross Sea.
Geophysical site surveys suggest that the four drill holes will provide an
aggregate thickness of about 1500m of core and span about 100 to about 30 Ma
(Cretaceous-Paleocene). This interval of geological time is not yet documented
by in situ stratigraphic sections in either the Ross Sea or East Antarctica. The
nearest comprehensive data sources for the Cretaceous and Paleocene) occur in
New Zealand, the northern Antarctic Peninsula and the southern ocean. Benthic
and planktic Foraminiferida from the core will be used, together with data from
other fossil groups, to provide on-site age and stratigraphic control as
drilling progresses. Age correlations will be made with DSDP/ODP biostratigraphy
from southern Ocean drill sites, and also with New Zealand planktic and benthic
zonal/stage schemes. A principal task of this work is to document in the
project's initial report, a comprehensive accounting of foraminiferal material
present so as to assist planning of post-drilling investigations. Basic
information to be recorded on the foraminifera will include: presence,
abundance, preservation, species dominance and diversity, stratigraphic
distribution, levels of endemism or cosmopolitanism in faunas, and completeness
or fragmentation of population structures, et cetera. These data will be used to
address a variety of geological problems. Disconformities and acoustic
reflectors which extend across the rift system basins and are also expected to
be encountered in the drill hole will be dated. Major basin subsidence/uplift
trends resulting from compaction and/or rift margin faulting will be deduced
from benthic foraminiferal bathymetric indicators. More subtle cyclicity in the
stratigraphic distribution of benthic species will be u sed to recognize and
document phases of transgression and regression, which in turn may indicate a
relationship between sea level oscillation and terrestrial glacial events. The
Cretaceous- Paleocene was an interval of time during which the final
disintegration of Gondwanaland occurred, specifically the northward movement of
New Zealand and Australia away from Antarctica. Foraminifera from the CRP drill
holes will contribute to an understanding of the paleogeography and
paleoceanography between the highlands and Pacific margin of East Antarctica
(the location of the proto-Transantarctic Mountains), and the West Antarctic
Rift System basins between this suspected island chain and the highlands of West
Antarctica. This will help answer the question as to whether the marine margin
of East Antarctica, in the vicinity of the planned drill holes, was located in a
Cretaceous cul-de-sac, or whether it occupied, at times, a position on a major
oceanic circulation pathway between the SW Indian Ocean, SW Pacific, and SW
Atlantic Oceans.