* 9420716
* Wide-Angle Symmetry
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Margaret Fleck, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 06/30/1997
* USD 122,000.00

This project is developing algorithms to recognize objects in wide- angle
images using local symmetries. A new mathematical model of imaging geometry,
based on stereographic projection, provides a more accurate model of real wide-
angle lenses than traditional perspective projection. It also creates a simple
mathematical relationship between local symmetries of round objects and their
outlines in 2D images: symmetries project onto symmetries. Finally, projection
of small objects is approximately orthographic, so that existing algorithms for
detecting skew symmetries (symmetries of flat 3D objects) can be adapted to wide
fields of view. An object recognition system is being constructed, using both
skew and non-skew symmetries, a calibrated camera/lens system, and a canonical
frame construction. Faster algorithms are being developed to detect symmetries
so they can be used to group edges in complex wide-angle images. This project is
evaluating techniques for using additional views of an object to verify or
disambiguate possible symmetries, such as imposing depth constraints on the
initial search for symmetries and confirming that the apparent shape of the
object changes appropriately between two views. The frequency of local
symmetries in real objects, and their stability across changes in viewpoint, is
also being studied.