* 9420613
* Clonal molecular evolution in E. coli
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Roger Milkman, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1998
* USD 318,850.00

9420613 Milkman The current paradigm for the evolution of E. coli is an
outgrowth of the periodic selection model, in which from time to time a broadly
favorable rare allele arises and, because recombination is rare, selection for
this allele carries its entire genome to a high frequency. The clone thus formed
has very little genetic variation initially. Evidently other existing clones are
not eliminated. Recombinational replacements do accumulate, and so the clonal
chromosome is comprised by stretches of DNA from other ancestors; the clonal
frame, a discontinuous but prominent ancestral sequence type, is still
recognizable. Strains sharing a recognizable clonal frame have been called
members of a meroclone. Eventually the clonal frame is obscured by additional
replacements. Among the representative set of 72 wild "ECOR" strains, three
major meroclones are recognized on the basis of comparative sequencing, and so
far these correspond to the three major groupings according to multi-locus
enzyme electrophoresis. The recombinational replacements are often recognized,
by comparative sequencing, to belong to homologous sets; these clonal segments
are often on the order of 1 kilobase (kb) in length, though this varies. The
purpose of the present project is to reconcile the observed distribution of
discontinuous sequence similarities with the rates and patterns of
recombinational replacements. For example, the DNA molecules introduced into E.
coli cells by transduction may be as large as 100 kb; conjugation may transmit
much larger molecules. How are the smaller discontinuities produced? Recent work
suggests that DNA introduced by general transduction in E. coli is often cut up
by restriction enzymes, resulting in much smaller replacements which are often
multiple and discontinuous. --There is clear evidence for similar restriction
effects on conjugation, but some possible indications to the contrary exist as
well. Also, sequence differences (~ 20%) much greater than those generally obser
ved among E. coli strains have been shown to block conjugation between species.
Do the smaller (1 -3%) sequence differences have a lesser (modifying) effect on
conjugation? --Finally, a computer simulation has demonstrated that patterns
comparable to those observed can be generated by successive randomly-placed
large replacements. And certainly whether the replacements are large, small or
both, the cumulative effects of recurrent replacement must be considered. The
individual aims of this project are: 1) to expand the existing 12.7 kb region of
comparative sequencing into a unique continuous 40-strain, &gt;20 kb database,
which will provide insight into DNA sequence variation in bacteria, and aid in
the analysis of recombinants in its region; 2) to investigate experimentally,
describe and explain the patterns of conjugational replacement between strain
k12 and various wild strains of E. coli; 3) to infer the distribution of size
and multiplicity of conjugational replacements in nature; 4) to explore the
potential cumulative effects of transductional and conjugation recombination in
nature by simulation; 5) to consider chromosomally local special characteristics
via restriction analysis of PCR fragments; and then 6) to begin work on a
quantitative model of the evolution of the chromosome of this species. %%% This
study of a number of bacterial chromosomes is providing an understanding of the
means by which bacteria exchange genes in natural settings. ***