* 9420704
* Dissertation Research:  Frontier Economies:  Prehispanic    Pottery Production in the Chalchihuites and La Quemada      Regions of Zacatecas, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1994,05/31/1996
* Ben Nelson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1996
* USD 4,774.00

Nelson Under the direction of Dr. Ben Nelson, Ms. Nicola Strazicich will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She will travel to Mexico and collect
pottery samples from archaeological sites for both petrographic and chemical
analysis. The ceramics derive from two regions in Northern Mexico - Alta Vista
and La Quemada. Each has been studied extensively by archaeologists and each is
characterized by a different degree of political centralization. The site of La
Quemada contains artifically constructed terraces situated on a bluff above the
Malpaso Valley floor. The central precinct of the site houses monumental
architecture including a hall of columns, votive pyramid and a massive masonry
staircase. Architecturally, the site represents significant labor investment and
planning. However the region lacks evidence for either economic diversification
or the manipulation of prestige goods which indicate a highly stratified and
centrally managed society. At Alta Vista, in addition to large-scale
architecture, extensive mining and quarrying activities were carried out.
Minerals extracted included iron, malachite, hematite, chert and blue-green gem
stones. Evidence here argues for a more complex and centralized form of social
organization. Ms. Strazicich wishes to understand differences in ceramic
production within this comparative context. She will conduct both elemental and
petrographic analysis to determine the extent of intrasite variability of both
clay matrix and production technique. She hypothesizes that the more complex
Alta Vista site will show a higher level of standardization. Archaeologists wish
to understand how complex societies emerge and are maintained. Many have
focussed on the economic aspects of this process and want to know when and how
standardization in production emerges. The assumption is that as societies grow
more complex and centralized management emerges, manufacturing activities such
as pottery production will come under central contr ol and will be carried out
by specialists. The resulting wares will become more standardized. While such a
scenario may appear sensible from a theoretical perspective, very little
empirical work has been done to either verify or disconfirm this idea. The two
sites chosen by Ms. Strazicich provide an excellent context within which to
address this issue. This research is important because it addresses a topic of
interest to many archaeologists. It will help to develop a technique with
potential applicability in many situations and will assist in the training of a
promising young scientist.