* 9420481
* U.S.-Sweden-Estonia Cooperative Research:  Immunoglobulin inGene Expression in Transgenic Rainbow Trout
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1999
* Gregory Warr, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1999
* USD 30,000.00

9420481 Warr This three-year award will support U.S.-Sweden-Estonia cooperative
research in immunology. The investigators are Gregory Warr of the Medical
University of South Carolina, Lars Pilstrom of Uppsala University in Sweden, and
Sirje Timmusk of the Estonian Marine Institute. The objective of their research
is the study of antibody gene expression in transgenic rainbow trout. They
propose single cell studies of the following: (1) channel catfish immunoglobulin
enhancer in tissue-specific gene expression in rainbow trout; (2) impact of
transgenic expression of the endogenous immunoglobulin genes of rainbow trout;
and (3) functional chimeric antibodies in transgenic rainbow trout. The U.S.
investigator brings to this collaboration expertise with in vitro studies of
gene expression and catfish immunoglobulin genes and enhancers. This is
complemented by the Swedish and Estonian investigators' experience in growing
transgenic trout and expertise with in vivo transgenic studies of immunoglobulin
expression. The transgenic fish are grown and maintained at the Estonian Marine
Institute. The project will determine whether the catfish heavy chain gene can
be expressed and if so can it assist with the formation of a functional antibody
in rainbow trout. The project will advance our understanding of the immune
system and comparative immunology. It also has potentially important commercial
applications if transgenic fish with desired traits can be raised. ***