* 9420502
* Support for the Gordon Research Conference on the Chemistry of Plant-Herbivore Interactions to be held January 1, 1995, in Oxnard, California
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Mark Rausher, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1995
* USD 7,600.00

#9420502 Rauscher This proposal seeks funding for the sixth Gordon Conference on
the Chemistry of Plant-Herbivore Interactions to be held in January 1995 in
Oxnard, California. The focus of this conference will be a critical assessment
of the directions in which the study of Plant-Herbivore Interactions is heading,
as well as identification of the crucial outstanding problems in this
subdiscipline. In addition, a major goal of this conference will be to determine
if and how plant-herbivore systems can contribute to conceptual generalizations
in larger disciplines such as chemistry, behavior, physiology and ecology. The
conference program is designed to facilitate discussion of several specific
topics: 1) Is there a coherent, general conceptual framework for understanding
chemical interactions between plants and herbivores? Is attempting to construct
such a framework desirable? 2) Are there general principles that cut across taxa
and environments and apply to many, if not most, plant-herbivore systems? Or
must each system be studied as a special case? 3) What are the important
unresolved conceptual issues and unsolved problems that need to be addressed in
this field? 4) How can the study of plant-herbivore systems contribute to
conceptual advancement of major disciplines such as chemistry, physiology,
behavior, ecology, and evolution? %%% The timing of this conference is ideal.
The study of plant-herbivore interactions is now in a stage where vast amounts
of data have been collected and it is now time to step back and synthesize. This
subdiscipline has important contributions to make on management of crop systems
which annually suffer huge economic losses to pests. Clearer understanding of
the chemical underpinnings of the discipline can lead to more ecological forms
of pest management