* 9420560
* RUI:  Highly Correlated Systems of Reduced Dimensionality:  A Study of the Fractional Quantum Hall Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1995,12/31/2000
* Edward Rezayi, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/2000
* USD 220,000.00

9420560 Rezayi Numerical work is proposed to investigate some outstanding
problems in the phonomenon of the fractionally quantized Hall effect, which is
observed in a two-dimensional electron gas subject to a transverse magnetic
field. The electron layer is formed at the semi-conductor interface of a high
quality gallium-arsenic heterostructure semi-conductor device. The proposed
research addresses the nature and properties of the Fermi-Liquid state formed at
even fractions of the lowest Landau level occupation, novel parafermion quantum
Hall states and the physical conditions which stabilize them, edge states, the
quantum fluid to classical Wigner crystal transition, and optical properties of
quantum Hall state. %%% This research is aimed at understanding the behavior of
a system of electrons (carriers of electric current) confined spatially to a
plane and subject to a perpendicular magnetic field as prepared in gallium-
arsenic heterostructure devices. Under suitable conditions the electrons exhibit
the phenomenon of Fractional Quantum Hall Effect. The phenomenon results from
the condensation of electrons into a highly collective state with the little
semblance of their initial individual characteristics. This is the subatomic
realm of quantum mechanics - an area of considerable scientific interest. In
addition, the quantum Hall effect has potential technological applications in
semiconductor industry. This RUI research will be carried out at California
State University, Los Angeles - a predominantly undergraduate minority
institution - and will involve both undergraduate and Master's level students.