* 9420228
* Isolation and Properties of Enzymes from the                Hyperthermophile Pyrococcus Furiosus
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Evangelos Moudrianakis, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1998
* USD 145,000.00

The primary structures of proteins contain the chemical characteristics that
determine the native folded conformation having the global free energy minimum
for the system in a given microenvironment. Analysis of the pathway(s) of
polypeptide chain folding and the nature of the intramolecular interactions that
stabilize the final native format are active areas of research in many
laboratories. Modern methodologies and technical advances in more classical
approaches are now offering a real chance for solving these problems with a high
degree of precision. From the standpoint of biological system, the synthesis and
thermal stability of enzymes of the hyperthermophilic bacteria and Archaea raise
further questi ons about the nature of forces involved in intramolecular
stabilization. The experimental system focuses on proteins derived from the
hyperthermophile Pyrococcus funosus, an obligate anaerobe isolated from
geothermally heated marine sediments off the island of Vulcano, Italy. These
organisms grow optimally at 100 C and their enzymes are also maximally active at
this temperature. Alpha amylase, a serine protease, a DNAase, and a
`dithioglycolase` are the subjects of this study. Work with these proteins will
involve their purification from natural and from genetically engineered sources.
The purified proteins will be analyzed by enzymologic, spectroscopic, and
thermodynamic procedures. Crystallization of some of these enzymes will be
attempted. From these studies, a data base will be developed that would allow
correlations between structural and catalytic properties characteristic of these
thermoactive enzyme systems. This information will be analyzed within the
framework of the issue of protein folding and stability. Moreover, in the long
run, such understanding may aid in the production of stable enzymes with
economic and environmental applications. %%% The primary target of this research
is to better our understanding of the process of protein folding. Since the
biological specificity and activity of all proteins depends on a precisely
folded 3D architecture of the molecule, understanding the rules that govern this
process is of fundamental importance both to basic science as well as to
biotechnology and medicine. A number of years ago Dr. Anfinsen proposed that the
amino acid sequence within a protein chain contained all the thermodynamic
information necessary to dictate the final folded state of that protein. Much
remains to be understood about the rules governing the mechanics specificity and
kinetics of the protein folding pathway(s). The relatively recent introduction
of the experimental system of Archaebacteria offers new experimental material
for the study of the problem of protein folding and stability. Enzymes from
these thermophilic bacteria are stable at high temperatures (up to 100 C); most
of the times they are actually inactive at conventional temperatures (15 37 C)
and develop their activity only as temperature is raised. The P.I. plans to
purify certain enzymes (an amylase, a protease and a DNAase) from such
thermophilic archaebacteria and study their catalytic, structural and
thermodynamic properties. If successful, these studies should further our
understanding of the rules of protein folding and enzyme stability, and might,
at some day, contribute towards the engineering of enzymes with improved
properties.