* 9420493
* Dissertation Research:  Technological Approach to the       Acheulian of Mozambique
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1994,05/31/1996
* John W. Harris, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1996
* USD 11,850.00

Harris Under the direction of Dr. John W. Harris, Ms. Paola Meneses will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological fieldwork
along the Umbeluzi and Changalane rivers in Southern Mozambique and analyze the
resultant data. Previous work conducted by Ms. Meneses indicates that this area
is rich in lithic remains associated with the Acheulean industry which covers
the time span from ca. 1,250,000 to 125,000 years ago. The research consists of
three parts. First a survey will be conducted to locate both surface and in situ
materials. This will be followed by limited excavation to recover in place
artifacts and to establish geological context. As part of this first stage, a
geomorphological stages will be reconstructed and a chronological sequence will
be developed. Secondly, lithic materials will be analyzed to determine formal
attributes of the assemblages and to compare these with materials from South and
Eastern Africa. Finally an experimental approach will be used to reconstruct the
lithic manufacture process. On this basis it will be possible to map the
distribution of lithic remains across the reconstructed landscapes and determine
how these were used by Acheulean peoples. Africa provided the geographic cradle
for humans and archaeologists wish to understand the processes which led to the
emergence of both culturally and physically modern humans. Surprisingly little
is known about the 1 million year plus time interval covered by the Acheulean
and very few studies have employed modern analytic techniques. Ms. Meneses work
will shed new light on how humans adapted during this interval. It will also
provide data of interest to many archaeologists. Finally, this grant will assist
in the training of a promising young archaeologist.