* 9420510
* Stream/Ground Water Ecotones: Hydrology, Biogeochemistry    and Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Michael Campana, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Edward T. Elliott
* 10/31/1999
* USD 713,000.00

Streams are complex three-dimensional ecosystems in which surface and ground
water components are interaction the interface between the surface and
subsurface affects the transfer of water and solutes between the stream and
ground water and varies in response to variable climate. The main objectives of
this research project are to quantify the sources and flow dynamics of water at
the ground water/surface water ecotone of headwater streams and to determine
biogeochemical and ecological responses resulting from these interactions. Three
objectives are central. First, the hydrology of the ground water/surface water
ecotone will be determined. Three montane catchments with different alluvial
sediment types (fine-grained to coarse cobble) will be instrumented. Hydrologic
models that characterize surface transport and exchange with the subsurface
(OTIS), three-dimensional flow dynamics within the ground water ecotone
(MODFLOW), and hillslope routing of water from the upslope to the stream
(TOPMODEL) will be used. These models will be used to describe the transient
hydrologic nature of headwater catchments and to quantify the temporal variation
in ground water/ surface water exchange. Seco nd, the three-dimensional
biogeochemical structure of the ecotone will be investigated. They will describe
the vertical distribution of biogeochemical processes in downwelling (ground
water rechange) and upwelling (ground water discharge) reaches of streams. In
addition, the will determine whether flooding or drying will relocate many
microbial processes. Third, they will measure the response of biotic communities
to variation in the hydrologic exchange. Specifically, studies will be
undertaken to assess the community structure and biomass of benthic algal
assemblages, rates of primary production and respiration, and controls on algal
community structure and succession in the stream-aquifer interface. The ecotone
between surface waters and ground waters is extremely important. The terrestrial
portion, the riparian zone is crucial to improving water quality and wildlife
habitat. The aquatic component includes a dynamic subsurface that regulates
nutrient content and cycling. ve. T varies in response to and discharge verying
1996.