* 9420048
* Acquisition of an Image Plate Area Detector for X-Ray       Crystallography
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Raymond Stevens, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1997
* USD 223,431.00

Funds are requested for an X-ray data collection system for macromolecular
crystal structure determination. The instrument is the R-AXIS II imaging plate
system, which includes a rotating anode X-ray generator, focusing mirrors, and a
controlling computer. The new instrument will be located in Stanley Hall at the
University of California, Berkeley, and will be shared by three research groups
which- use X-ray crystallography as a primary research tool. Currently, the
three research groups share one X-ray area detector, which is used full time,
and the backlog of data collection limits progress. The three groups have a
broad range of research interests. The proteins and peptides under investigation
differ significantly in size and biological function. Prof. Alber asks general
questions about protein folding, stability, and intra- and intermolecular
protein interactions. Model systems used to test these questions include coiled-
coils, T4 lysozyme, ATCase, and transcriptional accessory proteins. Prof. Nelson
studies DNA binding proteins and protein-DNA interactions. Crystals of the DNA
binding domain of the heat shock transcription factor diffract X-rays to at
least 0.9 resolution, making this the highest resolution structure for which
mutants are readily obtained. Prof. Stevens studies proteins involved in
neurotransmission. Proteins under study include: two proteins involved in
catecholamine biosynthesis, tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine monoxygenase;
neuroreceptors, such as human 2-adrenergic receptor, fish olfactory receptor,
and yeast factor receptor; and the botulinum neurotoxin. In addition, to the
individual research interests of the three groups, collaborative
crystallographic projects have been initiated with other faculty at Berkeley.
Clearly, an additional instrument will allow significant progress to made on a
wide range of crystallographic studies. In addition to supporting the research
efforts of these three groups, this instrument will have a train ing function.
Between the three groups, there are 4 post-doctoral fellows, 14 graduate
students, and 4 undergraduates who are pursuing crystallographic projects. The
size of the joint group is expected to grow by 6 more students and fellows
within the next year.