* 9420827
* Interfacial Chemistries of Molecular Electronic Materials:  Epitaxial Ultrathin Films of Large Molecules Created by     OMBE, LB and Self-Assembly Strategies
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Neal Armstrong, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 02/28/1998
* USD 610,000.00

The epitaxial growth of organic thin films which may have utility in electronic
devices and chemical sensor systems is the focus of the research in this project
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program. The work emphasizes
the mechanistic understanding of epitaxial growth and molecular organization,
and will use both vacuum and solution deposition procedures to form these films.
Thin films of large dye molecules deposited on metal, semiconductor, and
insulator surfaces will be explored. The relationship between molecular packing,
multilayer ordering, and the electronic and optical properties of these
materials will be determined. Small molecule chemisorption on these dye molecule
films will be investigated, and the development of designed "molecular
recognition sites" on these films will be initiated. This strategy may be useful
in the fabrication of versatile molecule specific chemical sensors. The
controlled growth of organic molecular thin films may have important application
in the development of molecular electronic devices and highly specific chemical
sensors. The work of this research project is directed to developing an
understanding of the conditions which control the growth of organic thin films.
A range of experimental methods will be brought to bear in these studies, with
the goal of the controlled design of thin film assemblies with molecular
recognition sites directly incorporated.