* 9420240
* Social Networks and Health Outcomes in Mali
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Sarah Castle, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 05/31/1997
* USD 191,896.00

This project involves the collaborative research of two social scientists, one
at Brown and one at Harvard University, in rural Mali, West Africa. The
researchers are interested in explaining variations in women's' (and children's)
health. The research design is to compare two communities of different
ethnicities living in different ecological zones, who face different
environmental constraints and have contrasting systems of production (one
agricultural, one agro-pastoral). The researchers will examine the effects of
these variables on the social networks, both kin and non-kin, that women can
draw upon to gain social support and accrue resources for health. The research
design will also examine the seasonality of health outcomes. Methods include
focus group discussions, semi-structured interviews, a sample survey of 1000
women spread across 10 villages, 5 in each ethnic group, wealth rankings of each
community, a household census and specific questionnaires relating to social
networks and health. Respondents will also be measured and weighed to assess
their growth status. This research is important because the health of children
is crucial to their growth and development, and the health of mothers is a
critical determinant of their children's health. Advances in our understanding
of how ecological and seasonal variations in non-mechanized agricultural and
agro-pastoral economies affect health is important for planners to design
policies to safeguard and improve the existing situation.