* 9420803
* Metabolic Physiology During Embryonic and Larval            Development of Antarctic Echinoderms
* O/D,OPP
* 06/15/1995,05/31/2000
* Donal Manahan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/2000
* USD 399,725.00

Manahan 9420803 Feeding larval forms of benthic marine invertebrates in the cold
waters of McMurdo Sound, Antarctica are present in the water column for many
months prior to the phytoplankton bloom. It is currently not understood how
these feeding larvae of antarctic invertebrates survive long periods under
starvation conditions. Knowing the physiological mechanisms of this process is
important for understanding the ecology of larvae from antarctic regions. Recent
findings with antarctic echinoderm larvae do not support the suggestion that
feeding larvae survive this period of negligible phytoplankton abundance by
using other food sources (bacteria or dissolved organic material). Physiological
data, however, do suggest a possible survival strategy whereby potential larval
lifespans can be extended for about one year in the complete absence of food.
Such lifespans (without food) for feeding larval forms are unique to antarctic
larvae. The metabolism of this process in antarctic echinoderm larvae is the
focus of this research. A hypothesis that the metabolic cost of development will
be lower in antarctic echinoderms than for the same "unit of differentiation"
(fertilized egg to feeding larval form) in comparable temperate larvae will be
tested. Such data on temperate larvae already exist and the proposed studies
with antarctic larvae will allow for a comparison of stage-specific
developmental metabolism. To obtain these metabolic data, a novel technique
called coulometric respirometry that permits continuous measurements of
metabolic rate during development will be used. In addition, the biochemistry of
development will be examined to determine the mechanism(s) of low metabolism in
antarctic larvae. Data from experiments will test long-standing hypotheses about
cellular mechanisms of low metabolism as they apply to invertebrate development
in antarctic environments. The findings from this research may also have
implications for larvae developing under lo w food conditions in other cold
environments, such as the deep sea.