* 9420282
* Linking Hydrologic Exchange to Nitrogen Cycling at the      Groundwater-Stream Water Interface
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2001
* Frank Triska, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Emmeline Edwards
* 06/30/2001
* USD 335,000.00

JACKMAN, TRISKA, and DUFF The interface between ground water and surface water
is a dynamic boundary where strong gradients in nutrients, dissolved oxygen, and
redox potential occur. This interface zone, termed the hyporheic zone, exerts
considerable influence on the biotic communities of streams and rivers, the flux
of nutrients from terrestrial to aquatic ecosystems, and upon the hydrology of
streams, rivers, and floodplains. This project focuses upon this dynamic
interface with emphases on the cycling of nitrogen and effects on aquatic
macrophytes. The project combines a thorough study of hydrology of the hyporheic
zone with the biogeochemistry and biological interactions at this interface.
This research will yield significant progress in coupling the hydrology and
biogeochemistry of catchments at the terrestrial/aquatic interface. Riparian
zones have been shown to provide buffering capacity for reducing the import of
excessive nutrients of terrestrial origin into aquatic ecosystems. These initial
studies on this filtering capacity of this interface, however, have not been
coupled to a rigorous characterization of the hydrologic flow paths in space and
time within this zone. This project quantifies major components of nitrogen
cycling along known flow paths and follows the impact of these processes to the
biota of stream and river ecosystems.