* 9420565
* Convex Optimization for Engineering Analysis and Design
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Stephen Boyd, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Win Aung
* 09/30/1998
* USD 305,441.00

9420565 Boyd ABSTRACT The focus of this combined research-curriculum development
(CRCD) proposal is convex optimization applied to engineering analysis and
design. The basic idea is that many analysis and design problems arising in
engineering can be expressed in terms of convex optimization problems, which are
mathematical problems of a special form. While these problems can appear very
difficult, they can be solved very efficiently by computer, using recently
developed methods that exploit convexity. This idea has recently been applied
successfully to several problems in the field of automatic control systems,
resulting in new theoretical advances as well as the development of practically
useful computer-aided design tools. Of course, not all problems arising in
engineering are convex, and some methods developed for more general numerical
optimization problems can be used to solve convex problems. But the
extraordinary potential increase in efficiency of the new interior-point methods
over more general methods makes the concentration on convex problems worthwhile.
The research component involves the development of new and improved algorithms
for the solution of the convex optimization problems that arise in engineering.
The project concentrates on methods that can exploit the underlying engineering
structure in the problem, and hence solve even large-scale problems efficiently.
The research will involve not only the development and analysis of algorithms
but also extensive numerical experimentation on real problems. Preliminary
experiments suggest the possibility of solving problems involving thousands of
variables and tens of thousands of constraints in minutes on a workstation. The
curriculum development component involves the creation of a complete set of
teaching materials a conventional textbook as well as HTML hypertext material
available via World-Wide Web for a new course on convex optimization with
engineering applications. The course is aimed at senior under graduates and
first year graduate students from all fields of engineering, and will
concentrate on developing the background, experience, and skills required to
recognize and exploit convexity in engineering applications. The goal is that
the course should eventually be adopted at every university with an advanced
engineering program. The ultimate goal is that convex optimization and the
recently developed interior-point techniques for solving convex problems should
make their way into the mainstream of numerical mathematics, and our main point
into engineering practice. The practical significance of a convex optimization-
based solution to an engineering problem is the possibility of developing
powerful computer-aided design and analysis tools for the engineering problem.
The development of such CAD tools and the training of students to develop such
CAD tools is an obvious and substantial contribution to overall U.S. economic
competitiveness. ***