* 9420638
* An Insect Model of Molecular Host-Parasite Relationships
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Nancy Beckage, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 03/31/1999
* USD 281,500.00

9420638 Beckage The goal of this project is to determine how parasites exploit
biochemical mechanisms of host interaction to achieve successful development in
their host. Parasites suppress the immune system of the host, and escape being
recognized as foreign. In the system under study, a wasp parasite (called a
parasitoid) lays its eggs in the body cavity of its host, the tobacco hornworm,
and the wasp develops to maturity and kills its host. Because parasitoids
invariably invade their hosts, they are effectively exploited in the biological
control of many devastating insect pests. The immunological interactions between
parasitoids and hosts are important because they determine the host range of the
parasitoid, and these physiological interactions are the focus of this study.
Importantly, the parasitoid Cotesia congregata injects a large DNA virus (termed
a polydnavirus) into the hemolymph of the host during parasitization and
deposition of eggs into the hemocoel. The role of the virus is to suppress the
host's immune response, much like the AIDS virus depresses the mammalian immune
response making the host show enhanced susceptibility to other parasites and
pathogens. The mechanisms of host immunosuppression, and their regulation by the
virus, will be explored using a variety of biochemical and molecular techniques.
Genetic selection techniques will be utilized to generate a "refractory" line of
hosts which do not support development of the parasite, allowing us to clarify
the biochemical mechanisms of resistance. The research provides an excellent
framework for deciphering how parasites work to achieve successful infection of
their host, and will provide data of fundamental importance to the fields of
immunology, physiology, parasitology, virology, entomology, epidemiology, and
evolutionary biology. ***