* 9420158
* Floral Evolution in Caesalpinioid Tribes Amherstieae,       Detarieae, and Cercideae (Fabaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Shirley Tucker, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 150,000.00

9420158 Tucker Recent molecular analyses of DNA variation in putatively
primitive members of the legume family Leguminosae (Fabaceae) as well as
continued morphological studies have emphasized our poor understanding of the
taxonomic relationships among the genera of the subfamily Caesalpinioideae.
These are typically woody plants of tropical regions of the world, some of which
are nitrogen- fixers and hence important ecologically as well. Dr. Shirley
Tucker of Louisiana State University is studying the early ontogenetic or
developmental stages of floral form in a broad sample of genera of caesalpinioid
legumes, using light and scanning electron microscopy. The goal is to
characterize the sequential stages of sepal, petal, stamen, and ovary
initiation, relative positioning, fusion of parts if any, and maturation,
leading to the final structure of the flower in this group of plants.
Specialized floral shape and size often result from seemingly minor shifts in
the timing and positioning of developing floral organs. Evidence about these
morphological shifts in pattern formation is useful for assessing the taxonomic
and phylogenetic relationships among plant groups. Detailed morphological
studies of floral form and ontogeny provide criteria for assessing the homology
of taxonomic characters used to infer phylogenetic relationships. Dr. Tucker's
morphological findings will be integrated with new molecular data from DNA
analyses to improve understanding of the early evolution of the legume family.