* 9420734
* Dissertation Research:  Zooarchaeological Analysis of       Subsistence and Social Organization at the Middle to Late   Woodland Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Mary Whelan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1997
* USD 10,569.00

Whelan Under the direction of Dr. Mary Whelan, Ms. Margot Neverett will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She will continue her analysis of abundant
faunal material collected during the excavation of the Gast Farm site which is
located on an alluvial fan at the edge of the Mississippi River in southeastern
Iowa. Four seasons of fieldwork have been conducted at the site and these reveal
two distinct periods of occupation both dating to the Woodland period. The shift
from the earlier Havana to later Weaver phases took place approximately 2,000
years ago. Spatially discrete remains of both Havana and Weaver villages have
been discovered. The sites have yielded abundant faunal as well as other
cultural remains and in her NSF supported research Ms. Neverett will focus on
the former. She will travel to La Crosse Wisconsin and Springfield Illinois to
examine comparative collections which will permit detailed identification of the
Gast Village faunal remains. With the data collected she will then reconstruct
subsistence patterns and determine how food was obtained and distributed in each
time period. The Gast Village Site forms part of the Midwestern Hopewell
complex. Hopewell has fascinated archaeologists in part because the large mounds
which Hopewell people constructed and the exotic trade objects they obtained
provide evidence for one of the earliest complex highly-organized societies in
North America. Of equal interest is the decline of the Hopewell peoples because
over a relatively short period of time social organization reverted to a less
complex level. No new earthworks were constructed and exotic trade items became
rare. Archaeologists have speculated on why this happened and have invoked a
number of causes such as environmental change. Ms. Neverett will approach this
question through an examination of social relations within villages on each side
of the transition and faunal remains provide a convenient approach. This
research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to
many archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of how complex societies
arise and decline, and assist in the training of a promising young scientist.