* 9420203
* Peptide Dynamics Investigated by 13C- &amp; 15N-NMR Relaxation  &amp; Modeling
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Vladimir Daragan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1997
* USD 373,101.00

9420203 Mayo 13C- and 15N-dipolar auto-and cross-correlation spectral densities
and NOEs will be determined to systematically investigate backbone and side-
chain rotational dynamics in short linear peptides. 13C- multiplet relaxation in
methylene and methyl groups will provide unique motional information. Side-chain
motions then will be better understood in the absence of most steric
hinderences, e.g., the "unfolded," solvent-exposed state. Penta-peptides like
G-G-X- G-G will be studied to assist in separating relaxation effects due to
correlated internal rotations and overall molecular tumbling. The temperature
dependence of all relaxation parameters will be investigated in order to derive
rational energy barriers. Measurements will be done in water and in organic
solvent, e.g., DMSO. In water, the effect of pH and varying ionic strength will
assist in understanding electrostatic contributions to internal rotations.
Restricted and unrestricted rotational diffusion, rotational fluctuation within
potential wells, jump models, inclusion of internal rotational correlations,
etc., and "model free" approaches will be used to analyze relaxation data, and
molecular dynamics simulations and F,Y,C bond rotation energy profiles will be
calculated for insight into which bond rotations may contribute most to these
relaxation phenomena. %%% Proteins are composed of backbone atoms arranged in a
repetitious polymeric array and specific side-chain groups that are arranged in
a specific sequence. This sequence-specific arrangement of the twenty common
side-chains tells, for example, a protein how to fold and what function it will
have. In this study, NMR spectroscopy and computer modeling will be used to
investigate fundamental processes of how small parts of proteins move and behave
in solution. This in turn will provide a better understanding of protein
backbone and side-chain internal motions and the influence of their motions on
each other. In addition, due to the very nature of correlated motions in
proteins, this study will set the stage for a better understanding of protein
folding, the so-called "second genetic code." ***