* 9420465
* Symposium:  Chemical Perspectives of Microelectronic        Materials;  Boston, MA; November 28 - December 2, 1994
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* John Ballance, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/1995
* USD 4,000.00

9420465 Ballance A Symposium on the chemical perspectives of microelectronic
materials is being held to address current topics in the chemistry of synthesis,
processing and use of semiconductors, dielectrics and metals in a wide variety
of potential areas in the field of electronics/photonics with a strong emphasis
on fundamental atomic level processes. Particular focus will be on chemical
issues associated with the rapidly expanding and technologically relevant areas
of nanotechnology and chemical sensors. Additionally there will be an
opportunity to assess the field, and to establish ties between universities,
research institutions, and industry. It is expected that top scientists in the
field will attend, and that the Symposium will provide an effective forum to
discuss and delineate the critical scientific issues in this research area, and
to consider and define the approaches and techniques needed to address them. %%%
An evaluation of the status of chemical aspects and perspectives of
microelectronic materials, and especially the critical chemical issues in
nanoscale technology, and recommendations by the Symposium participants for the
emphasis of future work, and their assessment of the most important contemporary
research issues will be of great value to the understanding and enhanced
utilization of chemical methodology in the field of microelectronics.