* 9420033
* Ecological Analysis of a Chemoautotrophically-Based         Groundwater Community
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Thomas Kane, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 03/31/1998
* USD 165,000.00

Abstract: 9420033, PI-KANE and KINKLE: Groundwater ecosystems harbor unusual and
largely un-described biotic communities. Groundwater ecosystems in hydrothermal
regions or in areas where reduced sulfur is present can receive energy in the
form of hydrogen sulfide. Ecosystems based around energy from chemical sources
(e.g. hydrogen sulfide, methane, ammonium, manganese, iron) were found at
hydrothermal vents in the deep oceans in 1977, and a groundwater ecosystem with
similar possible sources of energy was recently found in Romania. A
comprehensive analysis of this ecosystem and the microbial and invertebrate
communities is to be studied by this project. This research is important for
four reasons. First, this reasonably accessible cave ecosystem in Romania
provides the chance to test if chemosynthesis, rather than photosynthesis,
produces the organic matter which feeds the organisms in this ecosystem as it
does in marine hydrothermal vent communities. Second, the cave is home to a
large number of endemic organisms previously unknown to science which can be
more thoroughly characterized and described. Third, the project strengthens a
strong collaboration between U.S. and Romanian scientists. Fourth, the mechanism
of producing organic matter from the oxidation of sulfide creates sulfuric acid
as a byproduct. This process may well explain the method by which rapid
formation of large caves can occur such as is found at Carlsbad and Lechuguilla
Caverns in the southwestern United States.