* 9420064
* Moose Foraging Strategy, Energetics, and Ecosystem Processes in Boreal Landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1995,08/31/2001
* John Pastor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/2001
* USD 789,900.00

Abstract: PI-PASTOR: Individual species of animals or plants can produce effects
which are strongly manifest at the ecosystem or landscape level. The population
dynamics of such organisms, or the elimination of such species, can have
dramatic ecosystem impacts. Such an animal with such a strong ecological
footprint is the moose. This project uses state-of-the-art tracking technology
linked to a global positioning system (GPS) to study the effects of moose at
Voyageurs National Park, MN. The project studies the energetic balance of
individual moose, the effect of moose on plant species distribution, the
animal's effects on soil nutrient cycling, and develops a simulation model to
study foraging strategy of moose and the impact of moose on landscape patterns.
This research is valuable because it links behavioral and population studies
with ecosystem and landscape level responses. The interfaces between these
disciplines often do not overlap, although the two-way interaction between
population biology and ecosystems ecology is often acknowledged. Three
components of the research are especially well formulated and planned. First,
the animal tracking work provides the detail necessary to examine animal
behavior, foraging strategy, and spatially-explicit landscape effects. Second,
the simulation model quantifies the impacts of this large grazing animal and may
find application with numerous other large herbivores. Third, the research
addresses animal linkages to processes such as nutrient cycling and
decomposition in addition to structural components of ecosystems such as plant
community distributions.