* 9420458
* Magnetic Resonance Studies of Order and Dynamics in Liquid- Crystalline Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Lucio Frydman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1998
* USD 185,000.00

9420458 Frydman This project focuses on nuclear magnetic resonance investigation
of order and dynamics in liquid-crystalline polymers. These new materials play
special roles in several structural and electronic applications. Their main
characteristics are a strong affinity towards the formation of liquid-
crystalline solutions, and an ability to retain these solution arrangements upon
going into the solid state. This combination makes possible the generation of
highly ordered macromolecular materials with valuable mechanical, thermal and
non-linear optical properties. Further advances in the practical utilization of
these polymers are intimately linked to understanding the ways in which chemical
structures and external factors such as flow fields, can control their dynamics
and orientations. These aspects are explored using state-of-the-art
multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance in both the liquid-crystalline and
the solid phase, as well as gradient-based magnetic resonance microscopy
methods. These experiments rely extensively on a specialized technology whose
purpose is the characterization of local anisotropic environments at molecular
and supramolecular levels. They involve the use of high-temperature dynamic-
angle assemblies for studying molten thermotropics, of variable-angle spinning
probeheads for solid-phase analyses of order and reorientations, and of rheo-
imaging instrumentation for the investigation of flow in lyotropics. Using these
techniques it will be possible to probe how local mesomorphic order in
thermotropic liquid- crystals depends on chemical composition; how much of the
liquid-crystalline order of these systems is preserved upon cooling them into
glasses; how solid-phase chain dynamics affect the alignment of these polymeric
glasses and what is their exact nature; and how different types of flow and
diffusion impart a net anisotropy of solutions of liquid- crystalline polymers.
An important aspect of these experiments is the ir reliance on the natural-
abundance observation of 13C spins, a method that imposes no preconditions on
the type or origin of the samples under study. Thus, the materials to be
analyzed include homopolyesters with high melting temperatures, commercial
thermotropic copolymers, complex molecular blends of liquid- crystalline and
random polymers, and corrosive lyotropic solutions. %%% All these are highly
relevant systems, whose better understanding should have a significant impact on
their practical application.