* 9420652
* Biological and Photochemical Transformations of Dissolved   Organic Matter in a Subtropical Estuarine Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Ronald Benner, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/1999
* USD 450,000.00

BENNER Dissolved organic matter (DOM) is the dominant form of organic matter in
most aquatic ecosystems and is one of the largest reactive reservoirs of organic
carbon on Earth. DOM is the major source of carbon and energy for decomposer
microorganisms. These microorganisms are responsible for most of the respiration
and carbon and nitrogen cycling in aquatic ecosystems. These studies focus on
the cycling of DOM in a shallow subtropical estuary that is highly productive
and dominated by seagrasses. Biological and photochemical pathways are
hypothesized to be interacting processes which dominate DOM decomposition. Thus,
from an ecosystem perspective, sunlight can serve as an important energy source
for the non-biological degradation of organic matter and the regeneration of
nutrients. Shallow aquatic ecosystems may be receiving a previously unrecognized
energy subsidy from sunlight that enhances degradative and regenerative
processes and thereby increases the overall productivity of the system. This is
important because the interaction between the amount of sunlight an ecosystem
receives and the rates of degradation have not been studied in detail in aquatic
ecosystems. Sunlight may stimulate productivity both by enhancing photosynthesis
and decomposition.