* 9420498
* Jurassic Volcanic Rocks in the Transantarctic Mountains:    A Test of a Model for Continental Flood Basalt Magmatism in Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1999
* David Elliot, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 11/30/1999
* USD 274,194.00

Abstract This award supports a project to study the Jurassic volcanic rocks
which overlie the Permian to Triassic Gondwana sequence in Antarctica. These
rocks constitute the Antarctic part of the magmatic record of the break-up of
the supercontinent Gondwana. These Jurassic rocks, which occur along the length
of the Transantarctic Mountains, include both silicic and tholeiitic
compositions. The most complete stratigraphic record of the time interval from
the Late Triassic termination of deposition in the Beacon foreland basin to the
Middle Jurassic eruption of the flood basalts of the Ferrar Group is located in
the central Transantarctic Mountains. In that region, the upper Falla Formation
is dominated by volcanogenic rocks including plinian airfall tuffs and
phreatomagmatic deposits. The overlying Prebble Formation is dominated by fine
to coarse grained phreatomagmatic deposits, including accretionary lapilli tuffs
and breccias. Compositionally the rocks are bimodal with silicic activity
initiating volcanism and continuing into the flood basalt eruptive episode,
whereas the basaltic activity begins with explosive eruptions in the Prebble and
changes to quiet effusion of lava. The basaltic pyroclastic rocks are comagmatic
with the lavas, having the same geochemical characteristics. The silicic rocks
are probably anatectic. Coarse quartzose sandstones with large angular clasts
and the presence of monoclinal structures active late in the magmatic activity,
indicate contemporaneous basement block faulting. Stratigraphic, structural,
petrologic and paleovolcanologic data indicate that these igneous rocks
accumulated in a tectono-magmatic rift setting. In south Victoria Land, the
correlative strata include flood lavas, basaltic pyroclastic deposits and some
recently reported silicic pyroclastic rocks. At one locality a major
disconformity separates the basaltic pyroclastic rocks from the underlying
Beacon. The relations of the silicic tuffs to the basalt ic pyroclastic rocks
and to the disconformity are unclear. The silicic tuffs are reported to include
an ignimbrite. The objectives of this project are to gather data to test the
tectono- magmatic model proposed for the Jurassic magmatism in Antarctica.
Specifically, the objectives are to: 1) establish a detailed stratigraphic
framework for the Jurassic pyroclastic rocks in order to assess syndepositional
extensional normal faulting, 2) investigate the paleovolcanology of the rocks,
in particular the rocks formed by phreatomagmatic processes, in order to
understand the physical environment, 3) further characterize the geochemistry of
the rocks in order to better define time dependent changes in magma
compositions, relations between silicic and basaltic rocks, and source region
characteristics of the silicic magmas, and 4) establish the age of onset of the
silicic volcanism. These data will be used to validate or modify the proposed
model and to assess the model's applicability to continental flood basalt
magmatism in general.