* 9420328
* Characterization of New Stingray Sperm Motility Proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Subbi Mathur, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 05/31/1997
* USD 130,471.00

9420328 Lacy The motility of sperm is an extremely important factor in
determining successful fertilization in livestock, game animals, and man.
Numerous drugs have been used to increase sperm motility but each has a major
drawback which includes damage to genetic material, producing defects in the
embryo, and instability of the drugs. Dr. Lacy's laboratory has discovered a
reproductive gland (alkaline gland) in a cartilagenous fish (the stingray) which
produces a fluid that accelerates sperm motility not only in stingrays but also
in other fish (bass), bull, and man. Experiments in Dr. Lacy's laboratory
further showed that the substance in this fluid which stimulates sperm motility
appears to be protein in nature. Antibodies to one particular protein, the
hormone relaxin, showed that it is likely to be present in this fluid and may be
the causative molecule for increased sperm motility. The objective of the
current grant application is to determine the mode of action and physiological
significance of alkaline gland fluid protein with attention paid to relaxin.
Studies will focus on three specific aims: 1) to isolate and purify the sperm
stimulating protein(s); 2) to isolate and identify the molecules on the sperm
surface which specifically bind the alkaline gland fluid protein(s); and 3) to
determine if stingray relaxin has other effects such as contraction of female
uterine smooth muscle which would also aid fertilization. The significance of
this study's results will be to elucidate some of the mechanisms for successful
fertilization in these fish. ***