* 9420877
* Computerization of the Tulane Museum of Natural History     Fish Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1998
* USD 150,503.00

9420877 Tulane The Tulane University Fish Collection - a "National Center"
Category collection with over 6 million fluid-preserved specimens in more than
168,000 lots, is the largest collection of post-larval fishes in North America.
The existing catalog for the Fish Collection is a hand-written ledger in nine
volumes. There are no data cross-references available (e.g., catalogs of
holdings by state, species, etc.). Thus, the task of providing information on
holdings to potential users is extremely burdensome. Computerization of the Fish
Collection catalog will permit immediate and efficient respond to complex
information requests and thus enhance use of the collection in research.
Computerization will also make the collection records available to the user
community over the internet so that researches can access the data at their
convenience. Georeferencing the collection data will permit investigators to
spatially relate material in the collection, ultimately providing distribution
maps of holdings by species and other taxonomic groupings to potential users.
Latitude and longitude coordinates provide a standard geographic referencing
system that supersedes all other location descriptions and thus is important to
networking efforts. Finally, having coordinate data will help enhance the Tulane
Fish Collection as a repository for repetitive, time-series samples in
ecological, environmental and conservation research.