* 9420769
* Amphiphilic Peptides & Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1999
* David Eisenberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1999
* USD 541,500.00

Eisenberg 9420769 Once proteins can be designed to carry out specific functions,
we will be on the way to the pharmaceuticals of the future. The fundamental
methods of this research are aimed at making protein design a practical science.
Genetic engineering has opened the way to designing new proteins with diverse
uses: catalysts, drugs, specific toxins, scavengers, signals, and biomaterials.
But crucial to these designs is control of 3-D structure. Protein function
depends on structure. We must be able to design animo acid sequences that fold
into predictable three dimensional structures. This project aims to define the
problem of the connection of amino acid sequence to 3D structure for two classes
of small, -helical proteins. These are bundles of -helices, and -helical coiled-
coils, an important special class of -helical bundles. For these two classes of
proteins, amino acid sequences have been designed to fold and oligomerize in
predetermined ways. The main principle of folding and assembly used in these
designs is the removal of apolar sidechains from contact with water, and the
exposure of charged and polar side chains. This principle of segregation
according to polarity may be termed amphiphilicity. The main analytical method
used is x-ray structure determination of the designed proteins. Designed
proteins are synthesized (or expressed); purified, crystallized, and structures
determined as the basis for the next turn of the design cycle. One of the main
design tools used is semi-empirical computational energetics. A major extension
of such methods is termed Profile Refinement. In Profile Refinement, the
conformation of a protein is computed by permitting the protein structure to
change in such a way that each amino acid residue, or atomic group, seeks an
environment within the protein that is most like its average environment in the
database of known protein structures. Profile Refinement is based on principles
of amphiphilicity, rather than of c lassical energetics. Nevertheless, Profile
Refinement can be combined with classical energetics, perhaps to create a more
powerful method for assessing protein designs, and for improving partially
correct protein models, derived from low-resolution structure determinations or
homology models. Among designed proteins whose structures will be determined is
a coiled-coil that is a domain swapped dimer. That is, two tripled coiled-coils
from a dimer by exchanging a helix. The ability to design domain-swapped dimers
will simplify methods for designing larger oligomeric proteins. %%% This project
is aimed at making protein design a practical science. Protein function depends
on structure. this research is focussed on designing amino acid sequences for
proteins that fold into predictable three-dimensional structures. Two classes of
protein will be designed: bundles of - helices, and -helical coiled-coils. The
proteins will be synthesized (or genetically expressed), crystallized and the
structures determined. The results will then be used for a second turn of the
design cycle. The ultimate objective is the design of proteins to carry out
specific functions. ***