* 9420013
* Chemical Ecology of Plant-Pest Interactions:  A Community   Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Jack Schultz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 01/31/1999
* USD 210,125.00

9420013 Schultz Because they lack mobility, plants have had to develop dynamic
responses to changing environmental conditions and stresses such as insects and
disease. Most studies have examined responses to individual enemy species in
isolation. However, plants are attacked by communities of insects and diseases.
Many studies reveal considerable overlap in the key biochemical mechanisms of
plant responses to various enemies. We hypothesize that overlapping plant
responses frequently yield overlapping effects on multiple enemies, determining
which pests will actually infest a plant at any point in space or time. We will
test this hypothesis by examining the responses of several cucumber varieties to
insect pests and diseases. We focus on cucumbers because they have well-studied
resistance mechanisms, insect pests, and pathogens. First, we will characterize
overlap in biochemical responses of individual plants to infection by a virus,
bacterium, and fungus, and infestation with one of four cucumber-feeding
insects. We will then "challenge" these responding plants with each of the other
pests and determine which biochemical mechanisms provide "cross resistance" to
more than one. Finally, the ecological importance of "crossed" or generalized
resistance factors will be assessed by exposing young field-grown plants to the
same infection/infestation treatments as above, but then allowing natural
development of the pest community throughout the growing season, assessing both
pest community accumulation and plant yield. This research will put interactions
among plants, insects, and plant diseases into a realistic community context.
The broad goal is developing a predictive plant-pest science that will provide
improved plant breeding, genetic engineering, and cultivation practices for
improved pest resistance and reduced crop losses, as well as understanding the
development of plant-pest interactions.