* 9420845
* Crystallographic and Mechanistic Studies of Cytochrome c    Peroxidase
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Joseph Kraut, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1998
* USD 465,000.00

9420845 Kraut The electron transfer reaction between cytochrome c peroxidase
(CcP) and cytochrome c will be examined. CcP is a 34,000 M.W. monomeric heme
enzyme that catalyses the reduction of peroxide to water, using cytochrome c as
the electron donor. One step in the catalytic cycle of CcP involves rapid
electron transfer between the hemes of CcP and cytochrome c, although the heme
edges are separated by at least 17 . The crystal structure of CcP and the
complex formed between CcP and cytochrome c have been determined in this
laboratory. These crystal structures will be used to guide site-directed
mutagenesis experiments aimed at perturbing specific elements of the electron
transfer pathway between the two hemes. The effect of specific mutations on
structure and electron transfer rates will be evaluated using crystallography
and transient spectroscopy techniques. The results will help to define the
structural elements that are required for the long distance electron transfer
reaction between the hemes of CcP and cytochrome c. %%% All aerobic organisms
obtain the energy required for biosynthetic reactions from the conversion of
oxygen to water. This is accomplished by a highly ordered enzyme system that
transfers electrons from metabolites to oxygen, while preserving some of the
energy from this reaction for use in synthetic reactions. The cellular electron
transfer system consists of a variety of metal centers that are embedded in
proteins. It is clear that the electrons are transferred between the metal
centers, and the electron transfer is controlled by the protein surrounding the
metal centers, but little is known about how the protein matrix makes these
electron transfer reactions efficient and highly specific. As a first step in
understanding this process, this investigation will examine how electron
transfer is conducted rapidly between the metal centers of twm well-defined
protein molecules. The larger goal of the work is to understand how aerobic
organisms achieve the efficient and specific electron transfer reactions that
are required for survival. ***