* 9420335
* Patterns and Growth Far from Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Leonard Sander, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/1998
* USD 291,000.00

9420335 Sander A series of projects in the theory of statistical physics far
from equilibrium will be studied. The growth of random rough surfaces will be
considered; new work is proposed in the description of growth by molecular-beam
epitaxy. An inverse method will be applied to the generic theory of interface
growth, and the Kuramoto-Shivashinsky equation of flame fronts will be
investigated using the same techniques. Three problems related to the diffusion-
limited aggregation model will be studied: the question of lacunarity, a
statistical analysis of the homogenieties of the fractal clusters produced by
the model, and the inverse method will be applied to generate a continuum
equation. Finally work will be done in the field of patterns and fluctuations in
chemical reactions. In the context of two simple statistical models an attempt
to understand the effects of noise and disorder on the formation of chemical
patterns will be undertaken. %%% A series of projects will be undertaken on
systems which are not in equilibrium. Examples of these systems include: the
growth of surfaces in materials, the behavior of flames, models of aggregation
of particles, pattern formation occuring in chemical reactions and the effects
of noise on these systems. Common models which describe these various phenomena
will be studied.