* 9420241
* The Role of Benthic Resting Stages In Phytoplankton         Seasonal Periodicity and Responses to Ecosystem             Perturbations
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Craig Sandgren, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/1998
* USD 94,000.00

9318402 Sandgren This research will provide a rigorous test of predation as a
primary factor in determining prey biogeography. The PI's will test the
possibility that the biogeographical distribution of many groups of algae, such
as chrysophyte flagellates, is primarily the result of strong predator-prey
interactions with the herbivorous zooplankton, Daphnia. There is a strong
negative correlation between the distribution of Chrysophyte algae and lake
productivity. While Daphnia has been identified as a dominant herbivore in lake
food webs, it has not been previously emphasized as affecting the distribution
of chrysophytes among lakes. Alternative hypotheses, such as competition between
algae for nutrients, will be considered, as well. Predictions from these
hypotheses will be tested with a combination of laboratory and field
experiments, modeling competition among algae species, and sampling empirical
distribution of algae, Daphnia, and lake productivity. %%% This research is
important because it will test a novel and important hypothesis regarding the
biogeographic distribution and abundance of species in response to predator
densities and habitat productivity. Because some algal blooms can cause poor
water quality in reservoirs, these results will have important implications for
assessing the biotic factors that contribute to lake water quality. ***