* 9420054
* Molecular Mechanisms Controlling Plant Responses to ElevatedCarbon Dioxide
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Shu-Hua Cheng, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/1999
* USD 242,985.00

9420054 Seemann The concentration of carbon dioxide in the earth's atmosphere is
projected to double by the middle to end of the 21st century. This change will
have substantial effects on natural and agricultural ecosystems, primarily
because of the effect of carbon dioxide on photosynthesis, the major biological
process in the global carbon cycle. In many plant species, long-term growth at
elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide results in the substantial change in both
absolute photosynthetic capacity and the protein composition of the
photosynthetic apparatus. However, the molecular mechanism(s) by which external
carbon dioxide concentration acts at the level of gene expression, are largely
unknown. The overall objective of this research is to link carbon dioxide
effects on photosynthetic physiological processes (e.g. leaf gas exchange) and
biochemical processes (e.g. rubisco protein level and regulation of activity) to
changes in both rubisco gene expression and specific carbohydrate levels in
order to identify molecular mechanisms which control the response of plants to
elevated carbon dioxide. Arabidopsis thaliana (wild-type and existing mutants)
will be used as the model plant system. Specific objectives are: (1) Determine
the effect of atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration during different
developmental stages on rubisco large subunit (rbcL) and small subunit (rbcS)
gene expression, rubisco holoenzyme level, activation state, RuBP pool size and
the response of photosynthesis to intercellular carbon dioxide partial pressure
(Ci) in Arabidopsis thaliana grown at and switched between a number of carbon
dioxide concentrations (subambient, ambient, twice ambient, saturating). (2)
Identify the cellular signal(s) that function(s) in the signal transduction
pathway between atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration and rubisco gene
expression by utilizing (1) mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana with altered source
or sink activities (altered leaf carbohydra te metabolism, no seed production,
altered root:shoot ratio, delayed flowereing time) in studies of carbon dioxide
effects on rubisco gene expression and photosynthesis, and; (2) transient
expression studies of carbohydrate effects on rbcS promoter-GUS constructs.