* 9420650
* Control of Neuronal Growth:  An In Vivo Confocul MicroscopicStudy
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Hollis Cline, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing grant
* Dr. Susan F. Volman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 162,288.00

Nerve cells communicate with one another via a slender cellular process called
an axon. Each nerve cell, or neuron, has a very specific pattern of axonal
connections, and normal function of the nervous system depends on this specific
pattern of connections. Development of the proper pattern of connections in the
brain requires a precise regulation of axonal branching in the vicinity of a
neuron's target cells. The long-term goal of this project is to identify the
mechanisms that regulate axonal branching in the developing nervous system.
Recent studies show that neurons grow by the continuous addition and retraction
of branches. An increase in axonal branching, such as that observed after
activity is blocked, might occur through a decrease in the amount of branch
retraction or an increase in the amount of branch addition. To resolve this
issue, it is necessary to continuously monitor the living axon over time. This
can now be accomplished using laser scanning confocal microscopy. This project
will determine the temporal limits for modifications of axonal structure and
test the hypothesis that blocking synaptic activity increases the rate of branch
initiation. These results will provide important new insights into the
mechanisms responsible for nerve cell form and function.