* 9420809
* Robotic &amp; Magnetic Interface for Force Interactions with    Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1998
* Greg Luecke, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jing Xiao
* 05/31/1998
* USD 210,501.00

The objective of this research is to develop a haptic interface system that
allows force interactions with computer-generated virtual reality graphical
displays. This system is based on coupling the human hand with a robotic
manipulator using electromagnetic principles. The development and interfacing of
the mechanical hardware used to implement the force feedback system is a major
aspect of the research. A six degree of freedom robot manipulator is used as the
motion platform for the force interface device and to provide reactions for the
electromagnetic forces. The robot will hold the magnetic force generation device
near the hand of the user, using position and orientation tracking to follow the
motion of the user's hand. Virtual forces will be computed from the interactions
between objects and the user's hand in the virtual environment and transmitted
to the human by energizing electrical coils attached to the finger tips of the
user. Development of a virtual environment for studying real-time interactions
is also a part of the research. Geometric models of the virtual objects will be
developed and displayed using a head mounted display coupled with a Silicon
Graphics, Inc., Onyx Reality Engine. The position of the user's head will
provide visual orientation of the graphics scene. The motion of the user's hand
will be measured using the relative position of the robot. Finally, strategies
for real time motion and collision detection of the objects in the virtual
environment will be developed.