* 9420862
* Stomatal Respones in Intact Leaves
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Keith Mott, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 09/30/1998
* USD 240,000.00

Mott 9420862 Experiments will be conducted to determine the relationships
between the functioning of a single stoma and the responses of stomatal
conductance in an intact leaf. Recent studies provide evidence that stomata in a
leaf interact in complex and unexpected ways such that changes in whole leaf
stomatal conductance may not reflect proportional changes for all stomata. Two
levels of stomatal interactions will be investigated. First, interactions that
could lead to synchronized behavior of all stomata within an areole (the
smallest area of the leaf surrounded by veins) will be investigated. Several
studies have shown that such behavior is relatively common (e.g., patchy
stomatal closure), and Dr. Mott has proposed a hydraulic mechanism by which the
movements of stomata within an areole could be synchronized. This hypothesis
will be tested using epi-illumination microscopy to observe movements of
individual stomata in a intact leaf. One or more stoma will be induced to open
or close by altering its light environment using small glass fibers. The
response of that stoma and the responses of neighboring stomata will be recorded
using video digitizing equipment. The effect of changes in transpiration for one
part of a leaf on stomatal conductance of other parts of the leaf will be
determined using gas-exchange techniques. Changes in transpiration induced by
changes in humidity, carbon dioxide, and light will be used to evalluate the
role of hydraulically-based mechanisms in producing the conductance responses
observed in preliminary experiments. Fluorescence imaging will be used to
quantify the spatial distribution of stomatal conductance over the leaf surface.
Finally, cellular automaton modeling will be used to simulate interactions among
stomata and among areoles and scale from single stoma dynamics to spatial and
temporal variations in whole leaf conductance. Because the model is
computationally demanding, modeling work will be conduct ed at an NSF
Supercomputer Center. Results from the experiments described above will be used
to structure the model, and model predictions will be compared to experimental
results to test proposed mechanisms.