* 9420049
* Aquisition of Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Stella Coakley, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1997
* USD 91,950.00

Oregon State University (OSU) asks assistance to obtain a field emission
scanning electron microscope (FESEM) with an integrated x-ray energy
spectrometer (XES) to replace an obsolete, deteriorated 18-year-old scanning
electron microscope/x-ray energy spectrometer (SEM/XES) system. Our present
system, the only instrument of this type at OSU, was built in 1976 and was
purchased in used condition in 1981. OSU has taken over 30,000 micrographs and
logged in excess of 6000 beam hours with this SEM. In 1993-94 , 165 campus
researchers from 24 departments in nine colleges used the Electron Microscope
Facility at OSU; the facility is managed by the Department of Botany and Plant
Pathology. Diverse and high quality research by OSU faculty members requires a
SEM with the greater resolution, broader versatility, and better reliability
available in a modern FESEM. Amongst the many users are six investigators, three
each from the Department of Botany and Plant Pathology and the Department of
Zoology, that would be primary beneficiaries of this instrument; each of these
individuals currently have research projects supported by NSF. Dr. Philip
Brownell's research is on sensory neurobiology of arthropods and focuses on
cuticular sense organs and the correlation of fine structure with sensory
function. Dr. Aaron Liston uses herbarium specimens for comparative examination
of morphological features to compare plant species. Dr. Terri Lomax's research
centers on understanding the regulation of plant growth and development at the
level of cellular responses to hormonal and environmental signals. Dr. Robert
Mason studies the reproductive biology and chemical ecology of reptiles. Dr.
Carol Rivin's research focuses on activities and regulation of genes essential
to embryogenesis in maize. Dr. Barbara Taylor's program investigates
intercellular communication between muscles and their innervating nerves during
adult development of fruit flies. In addition to the direct benefits t o these
research programs, our SEM/XES system helps in attracting faculty and students
to OSU, contributes to undergraduate and graduate student training, and is
essential to many other of OSU's basic and applied research programs in: human,
animal, and plant health, pharmacy, and bioengineering; air, water, and soil
ecology, pollution, and resource development and conservation; forest pathology,
productivity, and development and performance of wood products; foods and
nutrition; engineering, advanced metallic, ceramic, glass, and polymeric
materials development, failure analysis, and tribology; botany, entomology,
microbiology, zoology, chemistry, geology, and physics. This new field emission
instrument would significantly improve the research capability at Oregon State
University. The new capabilities for low voltage high resolution examinations of
cell and tissue surfaces allow substantial improvements to image quality and
would allow researchers to apply this improved technology to a variety of
problems.