* 9420543
* Average Case and Probabilistic Setting of Information-Based Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1999
* Joseph Traub, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 05/31/1999
* USD 421,237.00

Problems with only partial or contaminated information arise in many
disciplines: computer science, physics and chemistry, control theory,
statistics, prediction and estimation, scientific and engineering computation,
geophysics, decision theory, and finance. Furthermore, this information is often
expensive to obtain. The goal of information-based complexity is to create a
computational complexity theory for problems with partial, contaminated, and
priced information, and to apply the results to solving specific problems in
varied disciplines. The prime foci of this project are the following: (1)
Breaking Intractability: Many problems in science, engineering, and even
finance, deal with functions that have a large number, d, of variables. However,
typical multivariate problems are intractable in the worst case deterministic
setting. The only way to break intractability is to weaken the assurance by
switching to another setting. Randomized, average case, and probabilistic
settings continue to be studied. In particular, it has been proven that
multivariate integration and approximation are both strongly tractable on the
average. The proof is non- constructive; the problem of how to sample in d
dimensions to achieve strong tractability is being addressed. (2) Software
Development and Testing: Theoretical investigations have led to algorithms for
important problems such as high dimensional integration. To make these methods
widely available, software is being developed and tested. Since these methods
contain a large amount of inherent parallelism, the implementation is being done
on a workstation network. Testing is also planned on parallel computers. Real-
world problems are used for testing. (3) Probabilistic Complexity of Piece-Wise
Smooth Functions: Piece-wise smooth functions arise in diverse areas of science
and technology such as computer vision, image and signal processing, scientific
computation, meteorology, seismology, and to mography. Because of negative
results of the worst-case setting these problems are being studied in the
probabilistic setting. New algorithms for integration, approximation, and
detection of singular points are being studied and implemented.