* 9420744
* Particle Detection in Superfluid Helium:  Sensor            Sensitivity and Electron Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1999
* George Seidel, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* William Chinowsky
* 04/30/1999
* USD 300,000.00

94240744 Lanou The proposed research consists of a series of experiments to
study the use of superfluid helium as a detector of both non- ionizing and
ionizing radiation. The goal of the research is the development of the
technology for a new type of particle detector useful for several important
experiments in neutrino physics and astrophysics. This superfluid helium-based
detector would have the ability to measure the energy and location of a particle
event as well as, possibly track direction. Such a detector would be unique in
being able to detect 20 keV particles in a 10 ton mass of liquid helium.
Superfluid helium is well suited as a target material for detecting low-energy
particles in a very large mass. It is extremely pure, it is inexpensive, and it
can be easily handled in bulk. Specialized equipment already constructed to
investigate the use of helium as particle detector will be employed in the
proposed research. Only minor modifications to an existing cryogenic system and
modest additions to the electronics are required. Work on improving cryogenic
bolometers is to be performed in conjunction with groups in Munich and
Heidelberg who are interested in the same technical problems but have different
research goals. The group at Brown carrying out these experiments is an unique
collaboration among particle, condensed matter, and low temperature
experimentalists. The proposed experimental program, if successful, will provide
the technology to make possible frontier experiments in neutrino and
astrophysics. ***