* 9420972
* Fuzzy Optimization for Power System Scheduling and          Transaction Problems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/1995,10/31/1997
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 10/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9420972 Luh Scheduling power systems and determining inter-utility power
transactions are important activities faced by electric utilities. These two
activities form an integrated problem since they are coupled through system
demand and reserve requirements. The objective is to supply reliable, economic
and clean power. This problem is becoming very important because of the
deregulation trend making the power market more competitive, and because of the
Clean Air Act making utility operating conditions more stringent. The University
of Connecticut, with support from Northeast Utilities Service Company, proposes
to explore three vital and closely linked areas: (l) a Lagrangian relaxation
based fuzzy optimization approach for short-term scheduling and transaction to
handle uncertainties such as transaction and fuel prices and system demand; (2)
transaction and scheduling for a long time horizon up to one year with the
consideration of emission constraints and transmission line capacity constraints
by using the time aggregation idea; and (3) a new class of algorithms to
optimize the concave, piecewise smooth, and non- differentiable Lagrangian dual
functions by exploring their geometric characteristics for improved performance.
These areas form a synergistic research program, with one area leading to the
next and supporting the others. Our aim is to help utility engineers make
effective scheduling and transaction decisions based on sound mathematical
principles, and to advance the state- of-the-art and practice of optimization
techniques for systems characterized by uncertainties in general and power
systems in particular. ***