* 9420727
* Human and Environmental Change in Yucatan:  Linking         Nutritional Assessment to Regional Landscape Changes
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Denis Mudderman, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/1997
* USD 165,758.00

This project supports the research of a multidisciplinary team of cultural
anthropologists, geographers, physical anthropologists and sociologists to study
the effects of changes in property rights on local economic activities, the
environment, and the impact of all this on the health and growth of local
populations in a poor, traditional Mayan Indian area of Yucatan, Mexico. Using
multiple methods including the analysis of remote sensing images of the local
land use patterns, the creation of Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
databases and maps, ethnographic studies of land use, and biological studies of
children's' growth and nutrition, the project will follow ten small communities:
five communities which privatized their communal land holdings and five
communities which retain the communal property rights regime of the past 60
years. The hypothesis to be tested is that privatization of land rights will
lead to increased concentration of property ownership and increased poverty for
the community at large. This research is important because the global pattern of
change is towards private property rights and increased production for regional
and exterior markets. In depth comparative and longitudinal studies such as this
are necessary if planners are to create policies to ameliorate negative impacts
and avoid increasing poverty and inequalities.