* 9420185
* Physical Studies of Xanthine Oxidase and Trimethylamine     Dehydrogenase
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Charles Hille, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1998
* USD 310,000.00

Hille 9420185 A study of the biophysical properties of two oxidoreductases,
xanthine oxidase and trimethylamine dehydrogenase, builds on past success in the
PI's laboratory. The goal of this work is to fully characterize the kinetics of
electron transfer within the two subject proteins and ascertain its role in
catalysis. Xanthine oxidase from cow's milk catalyzes the oxidative
hydroxylation of xanthine to form uric acid, a reaction that takes place at the
molybdenum center of the enzyme. For a variety of reasons, the enzyme has become
the prototypical molybdenum center of the enzyme. For a variety of reasons, the
enzyme has become the prototypical molybdenum hydroxylation of substrate.
Studies of electron transfer among the four redox-active centers of this enzyme
will be pursued along two different lines: (1) pulse radiolysis studies in D2O
and as a function of temperature will be performed with the aim of extending
past work by the PI; and (2) use will be made of a ruthenium center that has
been covalently attached near the molybdenum center of xanthine oxidase to very
rapidly introduce reducing equivalents into the enzyme by flash photolysis. The
advantage of this protocol is that the initiation of electron transfer is an
intramolecular process, making possible studies at cryogenic temperatures. Other
work will focus on several related aspects of trimethylamine dehydrogenase, an
enzyme from the methylotrophic bacterium W3A1 that catalyzes the oxidative
demethylation of trimethylamine to dimethylamine and formaldehyde. The enzyme
possesses a covalently linked flavin mononucleotide cofactor and a 4Fe/4S
(ferredoxin-type) center, and thus represents a useful system with which to
extend past work on xanthine oxidase. The work includes: (1) studies of the
rates of electron transfer between the two redox-active centers using pulse
radiolysis; (2) characterization of the reaction of reduced trimethylamine
dehydrogenase with its physiological oxidant, electron-transfe rring
flavoprotein; and (3) development of a photolabile slow substrate for
trimethylamine dehydrogenase that will be suitable for a Laue experiment in
which the progress of the reaction at the active site is followed by
timeresolved crystallography. %%% The experiments are designed to address two
goals. The first has to do with how protonation/deprotonation events modulate
electron transfer into and out of organic cofactors that are redoxactive (e.g.,
flavins and quinones), using xanthine oxidase and trimethylamine dehydrogenase
as the experimental systems. The second involves a study of how the two
cofactors of the enzyme trimethylamine dehydrogenase interact with one another,
and the role of this interaction in catalytic turnover. This work involves a
combination of kinetic and crystallographic approaches aimed at gaining a more
complete understanding of how this enzyme functions mechanistically. ***