* 9420512
* Structure, Systematics, and Phylogenetic/Evolutionary       Significance of Upper Cretaceous (Turonian) Angiosperm      Flowers
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* William Crepet, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 01/31/1998
* USD 185,000.00

9420512 Crepet Although flowering plants (angiosperms) now dominate Earth's
terrestrial ecosystems, there remain questions about their origins, phylogenetic
relationships, and patterns of evolutionary radiation. Of particular
significance is the history of the flower itself. The characteristics of flowers
are important in establishing taxonomic relationships among all the groups of
angiosperms. They also determine, to a great extent, the modes of pollination--
an important element in reproductive biology and evolution. Thus, discovering
aspects of the timing of appearance of various floral characteristics would
yield important data on the history of key characters and of key adaptations.
This knowledge would help us understand relationships and trends in angiosperm
evolution and provide insight into origins and radiations. Dr. William Crepet
and Dr. Kevin Nixon of Cornell University are investigating a rich assemblage of
fossil angiosperm flowers from Cretaceous deposits of Turonian age collected in
New Jersey. These fossils are unusual because of their diversity and their
excellent preservation. They include forms that constitute the first appearances
of an array of floral characters such as fused petals, viscin threads in pollen
and polyads, and anther modifications. Many of these fossils present a mosaic of
features known from living forms of today, and thus may represent "missing
links" that have considerable bearing on evolution of present lineages. Fossil
studies will document the minimum ages of existing lineages and will contribute
to understanding the appearance of floral features associated with various modes
of pollination. These patterns may prove useful in evaluating broad hypotheses
of relationships among angiosperms and in evaluating trends of evolution in
pollinator specificity. ??