* 9420525
* Collaborative Research:  Coordination and Adaptability of   Rapid Motor Synergies
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Ananda Weerasuriya, Mercer University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 08/31/1998
* USD 151,734.00

9420525 Weerasuriya Fast movements appear to be "stereotyped," yet high speed
videotaping reveals significant variability in stereotyped behaviors. Fast
movements are usually composed of several separate patterns of muscle
coordination called "motor synergies." For example, the rapid movements of a
frog snapping at a worm, which take less than 1/6th of a second, is composed of
a "lunge synergy" (jumping towards the worm) together with the "jaw-tongue
synergy" (the jaw opens, the tongue projects to hit the worm, the tongue
retracts bringing the worm into the mouth and the jaw closes). This study is
designed to understand how the brain coordinates multiple synergies, and how
synergies that occur later in the behavior use feedback to compensate for
inaccuracies of synergies that occur earlier in the behavior. The study will
involve analysis of the behavior by high speed video taping, and recording of
signals from the muscles controlling the behavior and the parts of the brain and
spinal cord controlling the muscles. Studies already done by these investigators
show that both synergies are variable, and that tongue projection can compensate
for inaccuracy in the lunge. Data collected from the study will be used in
neural network modeling of adaptability and coordination of rapid movements. The
results of this study could provide new insights into the control of rapid limb
movements by the brain and control of robots.