* 9420873
* Workshop on cross-linguistic issues in sign languages:      phonology and morphology; Albuquerque, NM, June 26-August 4, 1995
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,11/30/1996
* Diane Brentari, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 11/30/1996
* USD 18,900.00

9420873 ABSTRACT This grant will partially support a six-week research workshop
on cross-linguistic issues in sign language to run concurrently with, and as
part of, the six weeks of the 1995 Linguistic Society of America (LSA) Summer
Institute at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque. The workshop has four
objectives. First it will allow scholars trained as linguists who also are
fluent in a sign language to come together in order to address a well-defined
set of empirical questions about sign language structure and its linguistic
representation. The answers to these questions will take us a step further in
distinguishing what is language-particular about sign structure from what is
common to all sign languages. The group of sign languages targeted in this
workshop are: Italian Sign Language, Norwegian Sign Language, Langue des signes
quebecoises, Sign Language of the Netherlands, Japanese Sign Language, Hong Kong
Sign Language, British Sign Language, and American Sign Language. The second
objective of the workshop is to facilitate the formation of new cross-linguistic
sign language research based on a common set of theoretical tools, to be
presented in the lectures and readings of the workshop. The third objective of
the workshop is to lay the groundwork for an edited volume on the topic of
cross-linguistic issues in sign language phonology and morphology. Finally, by
conducting this workshop at the LSA Summer Linguistic Institute we expect to
open the discussion of cross-linguistic issues in sign languages to interested
groups of students and scholars and to facilitate interdisciplinary work
concerning the analysis of gesture and sign.