* 9420051
* An Investigation of the Evolution of Autotrophic            Endosymbioses in Bivalves By Comparative Molecular          Phylogenetic Analysis of Host and Symbiont rRNA Sequences
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Daniel Distel, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 05/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

9420051 DISTEL Symbiotic associations between animals and bacteria are extremely
diverse and commonplace in nature. In fact, it is difficult to find examples of
animal species whose existence is not profoundly influenced by symbiotic
associations with bacteria. For example, mitochondria (the structures within
human cells that generate the energy for metabolic processes) are thought to
have arisen from ancient bacteria that long ago formed a symbiotic association
with the ancestor of all living animals. The support provided for this project
will allow investigation of a type of symbiosis commonly found in clams and
worms from deep-sea hydrothermal vents (marine hot springs) that can be used as
a model system for studying the questions of how bacterial symbioses become
established and what role they may play in the creation of new animal and
bacterial species. This will be accomplished by comparing the primary DNA
sequence (genetic code) of genes which are found in both symbionts and hosts.
Computer analysis will be used to generate family trees demonstrating the
relationships among symbionts and hosts. Comparison of the branching patterns of
host and symbiont trees should reveal the point(s) in the lineages these hosts
and symbionts first became associated and what impact their association has had
on the diversification of the partner species. This understanding will lay the
historical and conceptual foundation upon which future studies of the physiology
and ecology of animal bacterial associations will be built. %%% Symbiotic
associations ranging from enteric bacteria in the human gut to nitrogen fixing
bacteria associated with plant roots or luminous light organs in deep-sea fish
provide a broad range of benefits to their hosts. Consequently, symbioses
between bacteria and animals are critically important to our ecosystems,
agriculture and health. This study will provide an experimental model system to
address major questions about how bacterial/host symbioses came to exist and wha
t role they have played in the history of life on earth. ***