* 9420164
* Americas Program:  Responses of Red Mangrove to Long-Term   Chronic Petroleum Contamination
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Edward Klekowski, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 03/31/1998
* USD 45,502.00

9420164 Klekowski This Americas Program award will fund a research collaboration
between Dr. Edward Klekowski, University of Massachusetts Amherst , and Dr.
Avril-Siung-Chang, Institute of Marine Affairs, Trinidad -Tobago, West Indies.
They propose to survey, genetically and chemically, selected mangrove
populations in Trinidad, to determine if there is a correlation between sediment
contamination by chemically identified pollutants and enhanced mutation in the
indigenous mangrove forests. The work is an extension of previous studies done
in Puerto Rico by Dr. Klekowsky. The research focuses on a an easily observed
small subset of mutation , albino propagules, with the purpose of extrapolating
the results to the rest of the gnome. The study will be divided into three
parts: genetics, sediment chemistry and pigment fingerprinting. The University
of Massachusetts will be responsible for the population sampling, mutation rate
measurements and the final data analysis. The group from the Institute of Marine
Affairs, Trinidad, will be collecting sediment cores from the mangrove
populations and will do the chemical analysis for the core samples for petroleum
related compounds. The pigment fingerprinting will be done by the Department of
Marine Science, University of P.R. Mangrove forests are a widespread ecosystem
in the tropics with unique features at the interface of land and sea, and form a
protective buffer that cushions against tropical storm surges. They are an
important forestry resource in certain areas and are often nursery areas for
commercially important fish species. Basic information on their component
species and how they respond to stress, will be needed to develop appropriate
conservation or restoration programs and will help focus attention on the long-
term consequences of petroleum-related environmental pollution. Trinidad offers
a unique site for this study with its combination of both controlled
uncontaminated mangrove h abitats as well as habitats that have been chronically
contaminated by petroleum for decades. ***