* 9420062
* Diatom Biostratigraphy and Paleoenvironmental History of    Cape Roberts Projects Cores
* O/D,OPP
* 07/15/1995,12/31/2000
* David Harwood, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 12/31/2000
* USD 183,034.00

This award supports a project to charaaterize the diatom fossils in drill core
recovered by the Cape Roberts Project (CRP). The CRP is a major program within
the international Antarctic earth science community, designed to sample
Antarctic continental margin strata of late Cretaceous through Paleogene age (30
million to 100 million years ago). Drilling operations will include continuous
coring from a sea ice platform at four sites on the flank of the Victoria Land
basin in the western Ross Sea, during two drilling seasons. This particular
project involves initial field-based paleontologic analysis of siliceous
microfossils in Cape Roberts cores. Core sections will be ferried to the Crary
Science and Engineering Center for immediate analysis. Diatoms and other
siliceous microfossils will provide rapid age and paleoenvironmental information
during drilling operations. Each season will include preparation of a
preliminary biostratigraphic/paleoenvironmental report based on siliceous
microfossils. This report will become part of the CRP Initial Reports volume,
which will include the preliminary results from other microfossil groups,
lithostratigraphic, magnetostratigraphic, and other analyses. Analysis of
diatoms and other siliceous microfossils in CRP cores will greatly aid in the
development of an integrated biostratigraphy for this poorly-known interval in
the southern high latitudes. Diatoms will provide evidence of envirolmental
changes in water depth, primary productivity, presence/absence of sea ice, et
cetera. CRP cores will provide an excellent opportunity to study adaptation of
diatoms to strong polar seasonality and diatom evolution. They will also offer
the possibility of gaining a bipolar perspective on Paleogene high latitude
phytoplankton evolution, by integrating CRP studies with ongoing studies of
Paleogene siliceous microfossils in Arctic strata (for example, Ocean Drilling
Program Leg 151).