* 9420373
* Rapid Prototyping:  Computer-Aided Manufacturing of         Laminated Engineering Materials (CAM-LEM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Wyatt Newman, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 06/30/1998
* USD 306,992.00

9420373 Newman This multidisciplinary project addresses software, equipment and
materials processes for achieving high-quality, structural ceramic parts with
complex interior and exterior geometries, produced directly from a computer
aided design description. The technique involves cutting and stacking laminae to
form a structural component. By separating the materials processing steps from
the shape fabrication operations, the method promises to achieve high
dimensional accuracy while achieving monolithic structural integrity. By laser
slicing pre-processed laminae and robotically stacking them into laminated
assemblies, it appears possible to achieve significantly faster fabrication over
direct depositiol techniques. Further, by utilizing surface normal information
to cut laminae at computed tangents, surface quality can be improved. By
cutting-then-stacking, there is the opportunity for complete material removal
from intended voids, as well as assembly of fugitive support structures.
Hardware issues focus on the design, construction and testing of five axis
laser- cutting system. This system will create laminae with the desired outlines
and edge tangents. It will be integrated with a robot for feeding stock sheet,
feeding filler material, removing waste material, and handling and assembling
cut laminae. Machine performance issues include pragmatic cutting speed and
achievable cutting, and assembly accuracies. Software developments will
incorporate existing knowledge and extend capabilities in two areas. Surface
normal information contained within standard files will be used to define laser-
cutter trajectories for tapered edge cuts, thus improving surface finish.
Second, part shrinkage due to post-process firing will be modelled, and "green"
parts will be pre-distorted computationally to anticipate correct final
dimensions. Rapid prototyping to near net shape parts offers numerous advantages
to the manufacturing sector in terms of redu cing cycle time, reducing waste
thus lowering manufacturing cost. This project synergetically combines well
established technologies to come up with solutions to current limitations on
surface finish and part accuracy. While the project focusses on cast alumina, it
has the potential for much broader commercialization as opposed to the current
niche successes of rapid prototyping process.