* 9420141
* RUI:  Mycorrhizal Community Structure and Specificity of    Symbiotic Relationships
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* V. Thomas Parker, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 01/31/1999
* USD 355,000.00

9420141 Parker A pivotal mutualism in the dynamics and productivity of natural
and agricultural ecosystems is the plant/fungus ectomycorrhizal symbiosis. This
study joins two distinct approaches and investigator backgrounds, field ecology
and molecular biology, to provide the first rigorous field test of the
hypothesis that specificity in plant-fungal mycorrhizal interactions may
influence forest succession rates and patterns. Ectomycorrhizal community
structure and plant-fungus specificity patterns will be determined by a
combination of soil coring, seedling bioassays, mushroom collections, and
molecular methods. By working in conifer forests that span a successional age
series, long-term dynamics of the mycorrhizal fungi can be assessed. Experiments
are planned that (1) determine the diversity and dynamics of fungi that can form
ectomycorrhizae in 3 age classes of conifer stands, (2) statistically test
conflicting hypotheses regarding mycorrhizal specificity, (3) test conflicting
hypotheses regarding the nature of early vs. late fungi in a disturbance
ecosystem, and (4) determine whether mycorrhizal fungi are partitioning along
spatial/temporal gradients. This study will provide a first glimpse into
ectomycorrhizal community structure and dynamics in mixed conifer forests on a
regional scale, and will provide insight into its importance in conifer forests.
This research will also provide expanded and refined molecular methods to
investigate mycorrhizae for widespread use by ecologists.