* 9420526
* In Situ Subsurface Remediation Technologies: Integration    into an Interdisciplinary Engineering Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* John Gierke, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9420526 Shonnard ABSTRACT Technology development for remediation of contaminated
groundwater and soils is an area where improvements are critical to the entire
nation, not only from the standpoint of environmental protection and restoration
but also economic competitiveness. A pool of qualified engineers is critical to
the success of remediation strategies and waste management. However, current
remediation engineering practice and teaching lags for behind the results of
recent and current research. To improve the implementation of research
developments in design practice, we propose to develop a new lecture course and
a mesoscale laboratory facility for training undergraduate and graduate
engineering students in in-situ groundwater/soil remediation technologies. The
lecture course will feature a participatory learning environment with
remediation case studeis being provided by industry and national laboratory
participants as a supplement to the lecture materials. The laboratory facility
will contain equipment for experimentation at a range of scales (one-dimensional
bench-scale to three-dimensional mesoscale systems) with a mesoscale apparatus
being the centerpiece of the facility. The experiments conducted in the
mesoscale apparatus will be representative of field conditions, but will not
have the problems inherent in field-scale experiments such as high costs, long
clean up times, and lack of control. The facility will be integrated into
existing and new, undergraudate and graduate curricula, and will realize direct
benefits from ongoing and planned research activities. The educational
activities in the proposed facility will be supported by an interdisciplinary
team of investigators, bringing expertise from Chemical, Environmental, and
Geological Engineering. These courses will be offered in the three participating
departments (Civil and Environmental Engineering, Chemical Engineering, and
Geological Engineering), and will draw from at least 250 senior-level
engineering and 50 graduate students in the three departments. At least 75
students, from the three engineering departments will participate in this new
curriculum each year. In addition, about 30 minority high school or
undergraduate students and one minority faculty will be involved in laboratory
activities each year. This project will yield graduate engineers that are better
able to apply fundamental research developments to in situ remediation
strategies, design more effective and efficient treatment systems, and deal with
complex, interdisciplinary problems. The facility itself, in conjunction with
the educational activities, will lead to further advancements in the application
of remediation research to real world problems. ***