* 9420600
* Precision Micromanufacturing Processes Applied to           Miniaturization Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Win Aung
* 09/30/1997
* USD 236,752.00

9420600 Warrington ABSTRACT "Precision Micromanufacturing Processes Applied to
Miniaturization Technologies," is a three-year project by the Institute for
Micromanufacturing at Louisiana Tech University and will integrate the results
of a very interdisciplinary research program of national importance into the
undergraduate and graduate engineering curricula. The research results, and
course laboratory materials developed for this integration will be suitable for
use in colleges and universities with program from manufacturing technology
through graduate engineering and industry. The research results are from a team
of eight researchers and spans many years. The project is centered around
precision micromanufacturing processes which include diamond machining,
microdrilling, micromilling, micro electrical discharge machining, focused ion
beam micromachining, laser micromachining, and generation of molds for
microparts by x-ray and deep ultraviolet lithography. The results will be
integrated into the curricula by way of a new introductory undergraduate course,
three new graduate courses, and a series of enrichment seminars. The results
will also be integrated into existing undergraduate and graduate courses, in
four eneineering disciplines, which address conventional processes. A comparison
and contrast between micromanufacturing processes and conventional processes
will result. The long-term goal is to develop a complete graduate degree program
in this vital technology and to develop a multimedia database for use by others
interested in doing the same. The course materials developed for the project
will be widely disseminated by way of an interactive CD-ROM tutorial which will
provide both teachers and students the widest possible access to the research
results. The content of the tutorials, as well as the project itself, will be
evaluated by both internal and external experts in the field. The tutorials will
be presented at a national meeting of precision engineers and the comm ents and
critiques will be used to generate the final version for distribution to
university and college teachers. The impact on the academic and industrial
communities will be significant. At present there are no textbooks or other
course materials in the area of precision micromanufacturing processes. The
equipment used in these processes, although not excessively expensive, is very
specialized. Therefore, engineering students do not normally learn about the
processes or equipment which will become a dominant sector in manufacturing into
the next century. The results of the project will provide educators,
technologists, and present and future engineers with a background in a very
diverse field of technical and economic importance. ***