* 9420860
* Granivores and the Composition of Experimental Grass and    Forb Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Henry Howe, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 09/30/1999
* USD 105,000.00

9420860 Howe This study will examine whether seed-eating birds, and seed-eating
and foliage-eating rodents influence community structure of tallgrass prairie.
The objective is to determine whether predictable foraging behaviors have
predictable consequences for composition and dominance in model tallgrass
communities. To do so, the investigators will establish controlled communities
of plant species stratified by seed size, form, and phenology. Plots protected
from vertebrates should show dominance of large-seeded species and dicots. Plots
accessible to rodents should show a depression in cover of seedlings of plant
with seeds favored by rodents, while plots accessible to birds should show a
depression in cover and seedlings of plant with seeds in their optimal handling
range. Plots exposed to both will be dominated by species with the smallest,
least desirable seeds. To refine predictions, the PIs will integrate censuses of
vertebrate populations on and off the treatment plots with selectivity trials of
common birds, mice, and voles on seeds or foliage of 12 plant species. Ranking
of selectivities will determine whether seed preferences conform to predictions
of foraging theory based on seed size and/or encounter rate. Rankings of seed
and foliage selectivities will also provide specific predictions of how key
animal species are likely to influence plant communities in the field.
Concordant evaluation of on-site and off-site vertebrate populations will permit
assessment of influences of treatments as compared with off-site effects of
birds and mammals.