* 9420056
* Development of an Apparatus for Rapid Cryoimmobilization of Living Cells During Light Microscopic Observation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Hans Ris, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 153,712.00

An apparatus has been designed that allows light microscopic observation of
living cell phenomena immediately followed by fast immobilization of these
phenomena with the aid of rapid freezing. Then the ultrastructure of this cell
cryo-whole-mount can be observed in an electron microscope using a cryo-stage.
This apparatus consists of phase contrast, epifluorescence, and polarized light
optical systems assembled onto an optical bench. These optical systems are
integrated into one unit with a specimen carrier assembled onto a sliding
mechanism delivering the specimen into melting ethane. The unique feature of
this apparatus is that it allows us to accomplish the fundamental goal of
ultrastructural studies in life sciences, i.e. direct correlation between images
of a living cell with images of this cell's ultrastructure, thus direct
interpretation of molecular mechanisms in a living cell. Using an apparatus
prototype, we were able to capture early events involved in adhesion of
metastasizing cancer cells. Furthermore, we have been able to discover a very
delicate intranuclear cable network that probably serves as a part of the cell
distribution or signalling system. The goal of this project is to build a
permanent instrument, to refine its operation, and to prepare its expansion
toward new imaging capabilities by making six improvements: (1) addition of an
intensified charge-coupled device (ICCD) camera to allow observations on living
cells labelled with specific probes at low luminance; (2) addition of a filter-
wheel containing fluorochrome excitation and infrared filters, as well as a
multi-band barrier filter to ensure the correct register of images during
recording of images of cells labelled with multiple probes; (3) addition of a
dedicated computer to control shutters and sliders and to link the apparatus to
EtherNet communication; (4) addition of Nomarski optics and motorized specimen
stage to provide us with the capability of optical s ectioning; (5) preparation
for the attachment of a real-time confocal laser-scanning imaging system and
optical tweezers; (6)preparation for the attachment of an atomic force
microscope (AFM). Development of the proposed instrument is now essential to
ensure progress in four research projects; (a) structure and function of the
nuclear pore complex; (b) myofibril assembly in mammalian skeletal muscle and
the role played by expression of titin gene for this assembly, (c) actomyosin
based motility of keratocytes; (d) reduction in Rhabdomyosarcoma malignancy by
forced expression of myoD, myogenin and titin genes.