* 9420195
* Experimental Tests of Within and Between Patch Processes at the Microlandscape Scale:  An EMS Approach Using Microtus   pennsylvanicus
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* James Dooley, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 07/31/1999
* USD 314,774.00

9420195 Bowers There is much information regarding the responses of animals to
changes in the size and configuration of their habitats, but there is little
scientific information concerning which processes underlie those responses.
While much is known about how local populations respond to variation in habitat
quality, and something about how individuals and populations respond to habitat
patches, there has been little experimental work that connects these processes
at the population and landscape scales. This study uses the meadow vole,
Microtus pennsylvanicus, in an ecological model system (EMS) approach.
Researchers will create 12 replicate microlandscapes, each comprised of four
habitat patches, where the ratio of good to poor habitat patches and dispersal
rates among patches are under experimental control. Local patch quality will be
manipulated by adding supplemental food, and dispersal rates will be manipulated
by either mowing or not mowing areas between patches. This design allows one to
tease apart the relative importance of within- and between-patch processes to
local and regional population dynamics. The present lack of information
connecting population and landscape processes greatly hinders the ability to
mange natural systems and to minimize anthropogenic effects involving habitat
destruction and fragmentation. Studies like the present one are critical to
developing process-based, sound species management plants.