* 9420919
* ASBMB Fall Symposium "Mechanisms of Regulated Intracellular Protein Degradation, to be held October 14-17, 1994, in     Whistler, British Columbia, CANADA
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Ralph Bradshaw, American Society of Biolchemistry and Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 09/30/1995
* USD 5,000.00

Bradshaw 9420919 A Symposium on Mechanisms of Regulated Intracellular Protein
Degradation will be held under the auspices of the American Society for
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (ASBMB) on October 14 -17, 1994, in Whistler,
British Columbia, CANADA. Participation will be 200 to 250 scientists (including
speakers and moderators), selected on the basis of their expertise and interest
in this area, and their expected contribution to the success of this scientific
program. Intracellular protein degradation in eukaryotes is clearly a complex
process involving multiple systems and pathways. In part, this reflects the
various types of turnover that must be effected by cells. Some mechanisms are
clearly highly regulated and involve the turnover of the specific proteins and
enzymes in a carefully programmed fashion, whereas other mechanisms respond more
generally to classes of proteins such as internalized ligands or incorrectly
folded or damaged proteins. As compared, for example, to synthetic processes,
relatively little is known about either the proteases involved or the signals
that identify their prospective substrates. This meeting will focus on the
elements in protein structure that are thought to play key roles in the
regulation of both general and programmed protein turnover and the proteases
that are likely to be involved. The presentations and discussions will range
from evaluations of the structure and functional relationships of individual
components to physiologically relevant responses that are known to involve
programmed turnover. Recent advances from a variety of laboratories indicate
that this is a particularly good time for an analysis of our current
understanding of protein degradation signals and mechanisms and to evaluate
future directions. %%% This meeting on Mechanisms of Regulated Intracellular
Protein Degradation will serve as a catalyst for stimulating the interest of
scientists who may already have the tools in hand to approach these problems
with a focus on those young scientists who are yet to initiate a major area of
independent research. ***