* 9420756
* RUI:  Perception and Judgement of Abstract Same/Different   Relations
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Roger K. Thompson, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 06/30/1999
* USD 100,000.00

IBN-9420756 PI: Thompson; Co-PI: Oden Nontechnical Summary 1 Perception and
Judgment of Abstract Same/Different Relations by Monkeys PI: Roger K. R.
Thompson, IBN-9420756 Summary: William James (1890/1981) observed that, this
sense of sameness is the very keel and background of our thinking, vol 1, p
434). The fundamental importance of understanding the perception and use of
same/different relations continues to be recognized today by researchers in both
human and non-human cognition. Only humans beyond infancy and adult chimpanzees
(Pan troglodytes) with a history of language-training can explicitly judge that
a pair of shoes is the same as a pair of say, teacups. That is, they can judge
that the relationship between the shoes (i.e., identity) is the same as the
relationship between the teacups. This ability to judge abstract relations
between relations is fundamental to the ability to reason analogically. Recent
studies by the present investigators suggest that adult rhesus monkeys (Macaca
mulatta) do not even perceive these abstract relations of identity and
nonidentity and therefore they apparently lack the fundamental cognitive pre-
requisite for judging relations between relations. These initial results were
obtained using the same noninvasive behavioral tasks as those used with human
infants and chimpanzees. These findings point to a fundamental disparity in the
ability of humans and apes on the one hand, and monkeys on the other, to
perceive and represent abstract properties of the world. The present research is
designed to confirm and extend these initial findings using standard behavioral
procedures including "paired-comparison" and "habituation/ dishabituation"
preference-for-novelty tasks. Ten adult macaque monkeys will be presented with
pairs of objects or video-images of biologically relevant objects and events.
Sensitivity to abstract relations will be inferred from differences in the time
the animals spend voluntarily inspecting the stimulus materials. The primary
goal in all of the proposed research is not to show that one species can or
cannot perform any given task. Rather it is to clarify the conditions under
which the cited disparity is or is not manifested. Comparisons between closely
related species like human, ape and monkey can also be informative with respect
to understanding the evolution and function of fundamental cognitive processes.