* 9420478
* Board on Chemical Sciences &amp; Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Douglas Raber, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1997
* USD 107,500.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9420478 National Academy of Sciences P. I.: Douglas J. Raber The
National Research Council (NRC) requests partial core support from the National
Science Foundation (NSF) for the continuing activities of the Board on Chemical
Sciences and Technology (BCST) of the Commission on Physical Sciences,
Mathematics, and Applications. The BCST has as its constituency the entire
chemical community, encompassing chemistry, biochemistry, and chemical
engineering, in academic, industrial, and government laboratories. Accordingly,
the Board serves as the focal point within the National Research Council for
concerns and issues affecting chemistry in its broadest sense. Board activities
require extensive planning (including the determination of feasibility,
evaluation of scope, and acquisition of funding) for potential studies,
oversight of ongoing activities, private sector fund raising, and a broadly
directed effort to communicate with the chemical community. All of these are
core activities, which are not chargeable to specific projects. The capacity to
develop a new project, while paying costs partially or fully from core funds,
greatly enhances the freedom and ability of the Board to act responsively to
important issues in the chemical sciences and technology. The requested funding
will allow the BCST to remain a strong and independent body that can operate and
plan in an environment free from some of the pressures and constraints imposed
by funding that is directly tied to specific projects. This core support will
help the Board to maximize its effectiveness in utilizing the scientific talent
available to it through the National Academies and in aggressively launching new
tasks of importance to the community, especially tasks that are time-dependent.
Additional core support will be sought from other federal agencies and the
private agencies and the private sector.