* 9421657
* Evolution of an Oxygen-Binding Hemoprotein in a Unique      Environment: Myoglobin in the Hemoglobinless Antarctic      Icefishes
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2001
* Bruce Sidell, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 01/31/2001
* USD 586,963.00

9421657 Sidell For approximately the last 40 million years, a unique fish fauna
has been evolving in the frigid seas surrounding Antarctica. Physiological
function of these water-breathing animals has demanded many adaptations to
ensure proper metabolism and regulation of biochemical processes at cell
temperatures of about OoC. Among the polar fishes, one family is particularly
unusual, the Channichthyid icefishes. Species in this family lack hemoglobin in
their circulating blood and, at least the majority, do not possess the
intracellular respiratory protein, myoglobin, that is normally responsible for
enhancing movement of oxygen through aerobic muscle tissues. The PI's have
recently found two species of icefish, Pseudochaenichthys georgianus and
Chionodraco rastrospinosus, however, that express myoglobin, but only in one
tissue - heart ventricle. The metabolism of all icefish species is highly
aerobic and is based largely on the combustion of fatty fuels as energy sources.
The field work will consist of a combination of trawling from R/V Polar Duke to
capture icefish species and laboratory work at Palmer Station using tissues from
these animals. At Palmer Station they will conduct experiments and prepare
purified, fixed and or frozen material for shipment back to our CONUS laboratory
for further analyses. Our overall goals are: 1) to test whether to determine
myoglobin protein remains physiologically significant at the cold body
temperatures of Antarctic fishes, 2) to reconstruct the evolution of the
myoglobin gene within the icefish family and, 3) to identify the mechanisms
controlling expression of myoglobin within icefish and related species.