* 9421404
* Workshop: Is the Best Good Enough? Optimality in Syntax,    Spring 1995 in Cambridge, MA
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1995,08/31/1995
* David Pesetsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 08/31/1995
* USD 14,000.00

9421404 ABSTRACT Recent developments In linguistic theory have led to a
reconsideration of the nature and role of optimality considerations in the
overall architecture of grammar. Emerging from this research is the idea that
different components of grammar interact to yield the best choice from a set of
canidates. This idea departs from more traditional approaches to the output of
linguistic levels in generative grammar, by which rules, principles and
constraints interact to determine the grammatical status of each linguistic
object independent of the status of possible competitors. In the past year or
two, interest in the linguistic role of optimality has been sparked by the
sharpened notions of "economy" in Chomsky's Minimalist Program and by Prince and
Smolensky's Optimality Theory, originally developed for phonology. As work on
these notions has explored new analytic possibilities, many questions have
arisen. These include new versions of an old debate between constraints on
derivations and constraints on representations, and entirely new questions about
the nature of the candidate set, in addition to complex and as yet imperfectly
formulated questions about learnability and computability. These sorts of
questions are coming to occupy a center stage in current debate. Nonetheless,
the questions have not been systematically discussed, either in print or in a
public workshop. Therefore, a workshop addressing these issues will convene at
MIT May 19-21, 1995. The explicit aim of the workshop is to compare approaches
and define questions for further research. The discussion will be as focused as
possible, in the hope that genuine scientific progress can be made during the
three days of the conference.