* 9421272
* Management of Technological Innovation:  Encouraging the    Adoption and Effective Use of Tools for Environmentally     Conscious Manufacturing
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Thomas Allen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 01/31/1998
* USD 200,000.00

Proposal # 9421272 Massachusetts Inst. of Technology The key to effective use of
environmentally conscious manufacturing (ECM) tools rests both in the designing
of the tools, and in understanding and designing the organizational context in
which they are implemented. Based on previous research at MIT by the project
team (and by others, elsewhere) on environmental innovation in firms, the latter
aspect, organizational factors, is believed to be the more significant. Using
important new developments that relate information technology and innovation,
coupled with the team's understanding of the use of existing ECM design tools
the project will study the adoption, use, and exploitation of these tools
through a large industry survey and coordinated longitudinal studies at our
industrial partners' plant. The participating firms, UTC and Motorola, both
members of MIT's Leaders for Manufacturing program, have begun to use ECM, but
not at all facilities. The situation poses unique opportunity to examine
different approaches to adoption and use in a pretest-post test format. By
employing multiple methodologies, the research will produce understanding of
both the ECM system and its inner links. The research should: {SYMBOL 183 \f
"Symbol"} Facilitate the adoption of ECM design tools {SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol"}
Improve the use of the tools, and {SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol"} Provide additional
benefits to the firms using them.