* 9421863
* Particulate Materials Center - A New NSF IUCRC
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1994,02/28/1995
* Gary Messing, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 02/28/1995
* USD 10,000.00

9421863 Messing This is a planning grant proposal to conduct a planning meeting
with potential industrial members to establish an Industry/ University
Cooperative Research Center for Particulate Materials at Pennsylvania State
University. To remain competitive with the U.S. as well as internationally,
powder/particulate material industries must actively engage in the technology
improvement and development. An Industry/University Cooperative Research Center
for Particulate Materials could provide a horizontally-integrated, generic
research program for the benefit of the powder/particulate material processing
and manufacturing industries. The major research thrusts include: powder
synthesis, powder handling and flow, grinding and dispersion, press and sinter
systems, and characterization in support of these emphasis areas. Currently,
industry has already endorsed the concept of the Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for Particulate Materials through cash membership from three
companies and equipment donations from three other. A planning meeting is
scheduled to be held on September 27-28, 1994. It is anticipated that over 30
industrial representatives will attend the meeting. The Program Manager
recommends Pennsylvania State University be awarded $10,000 for six months to
conduct this planning meeting.