* 9421615
* Alkane Oxidation Chemistry on Rh(111): The Relationship     between Oxygen Coverage and Partial Oxidation
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Cynthia Friend, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 02/28/1999
* USD 296,000.00

Partial oxidation catalysis is an economically important but scientifically
poorly understood process. The elucidation of the mechanism of partial oxidation
catalysis, particularly the activation of methane and other alkanes, forms the
focus of this research project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program. Model reactions carried out on oxygen covered Rh(111) single crystal
surfaces are used to probe the mechanism of the partial oxidation reaction. High
resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy combined with thermal desorption
spectroscopy provide information about the mechanism and kinetics of alkane
oxidation on the Rh(111) surface as a function of oxygen coverage. A range of
methods for preparing and examining possible radical intermediates in these
reactions are employed in the studies. A better understanding of this process
could have impact on the design of catalysts for utilization of vast methane
energy reserves. An understanding of partial oxidation catalysis, particularly
the activation of methane and its conversion to methanol or synthesis gas, could
have enormous economic impact due to the large reserves of methane available.
This research project works to develop this understanding, by examining the
kinetics and mechanisms of appropriate model catalytic systems.