* 9421925
* Stoichiometry in Consumer-Resource Interactions  Links      Between Nutrient Dynamics and Population Demographics
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Robert Sterner, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 06/30/1999
* USD 290,205.00

9421925 Sterner Consumers and their food resources, imbedded in a complex
ecological web, do not have identical chemical composition. This, in the
conversion of biomass from resources to consumers, considerable chemical
rearrangement takes place. Stoichiometry, or mass balance, constrains consumer-
resource ilteractions in important ways. The proposed research will extend upon
the results so far obtained with an experimental system consisting of nutrient-
limited algae and freshwater zooplankton. Results so far indicate that P-limited
algae are much inferior to algae from other growth conditions as food for upper
trophic levels. Herbivore growth correlates with algal P content. There are
several major goals for this renewal project. For one, direct tests for mineral
limitation in zooplankton growth will be performed using microencapsulated
phosphorus. Tests will be performed under laboratory diets using field algae.
Next, the research will compare the results so far limited to Daphnia to other
species of zooplankton. Stoichiometry, in the form of the chemical content of
different zooplankton consumers, provides a means to make a priori predictions
about which species will be most affected by reduced P content in their food. If
P content is indeed the important dietary factor in these studies, freshwater
copepods, with a low P content in their tissues compared to Daphnia, should be
less affected by low P food than Daphnia. A final major goal of this project
will be to gather a large amount of data on the internal stoichiometry of the
consumer, and develop that into a model of P balance in the animal analogous to
bioenergetics models. Elemental contents of somatic tissue, amictic eggs,
ephippia (resting eggs), and mots will be measured for several zooplankton
species differing in N:P ratio. These results will be compared to current models
of bioenergetics to see how differing chemical composition might influence the
animal's partitioning of energy and other substances under different food cond
itions. %%% This research represents a unique approach to consumer dynamics and
food web structure. The chemical basis of resource distribution is poorly known.
By focusing on how resource supply and composition within the food base affects
the consumer populations, the PI will provide valuable information regarding
species interactions in aquatic communities. This kind of information, however,
provides an important framework for understanding chemical composition of food
resources and nutrition, in general.