* 9421677
* Morphological Signal Processing: Slope Transforms, Max-Min  Dynamics, and Differential Morphology
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Petros Maragos, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/1999
* USD 228,886.00

Morphological systems are a broad class of nonlinear systems that can provide
rigorous and efficient solutions to many applications of image and signal
processing that can benefit from and most often require the use of nonlinear
analysis. Examples include multiscale filtering, feature extraction, image
segmentation, and other geometry-based problems in computer vision. This
research is investigating a range of theoretical and applied problems including:
(1) the modeling of multiscale processing in image analysis, image distance
transforms, and signal envelope detection using morphological systems; (2) the
development of analytic tools for these nonlinear systems both in the time/space
domain and in a new transform domain - the slope domain; and, (3) the
exploration of exciting connections of the above to physics. The unifying theme
is a collection of max-min differential/difference equations modeling the scale
or time/space dynamics of morphological systems, and some novel nonlinear signal
transforms, called slope transforms. Several nonlinear PDEs that model the
evolution of multiscale morphological filters are being studied. These PDEs are
related to the well-known eikonal equation of optics. Solutions based on max-min
difference equations that can compute distance transforms are being examined.
The analysis of the multiscale nonlinear PDEs and the solution of the eikonal
equation through max-min equations constitutes a new area in nonlinear image
analysis that we call differential morphology; many applications are envisioned.
Specific research problems include the development of fast discrete slope
transforms; the study of recursive morphological systems resulting from
discretizing the nonlinear differential equations; the design of discrete slope-
selective filters for signal envelope detection and image distance transforms;
the design of analog slope filters for D/A conversion; multiscale image analysis
using morphological PDEs; and image segmentation and gr idless image halftoning
by solving the eikonal PDE using morphological systems.