* 9421740
* Molecular Analysis of a Drosophila Growth Factor
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Amanda Simcox, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 01/31/1998
* USD 305,000.00

9421740 Simcox A signal transduction pathway involving intracellular Ras is
highly conserved and used by a number of receptor-tyrosine kinases including the
Drosophila EGF receptor (DER). The long term goal of this work is to understand
how signal transduction mediated by ubiquitous DER results in a tissuespecific
response. DER has multiple roles in development and is involved in cell
survival, differentiation and proliferation. Tissue-specific signaling via the
receptor is likely to involve localized aomponents, including ligands. The
candidate ligand defective dorsal discs (ddd) is the focus of this proposal. The
ddd activity is required for ventral patterning in the embryo and growth of the
imaginal wing and haltere discs; ddd transcripts are spatially localized in
these tissues. The genetic characterization of ddd shows it functions
nonautonomously and interacts with DER. DER is epistatic to ddd which suggests
ddd acts upstream of the receptor. Both the nonautonomy and the data also
support this idea. The predicted ddd protein has an EGF-like domain, which is
characteristic of EGF receptor ligands. Ddd also has an Iglike domain. The
neuregulins share this combination of domains. These ligands bind vertebrate
Neu, an EGF-receptor relative. Interestingly, DER is equally similar to Neu and
the EGF receptor. Thus, the genetic and molecular evidence suggest Ddd is a DER
ligand. Here it is proposed to extend the molecular-genetic characterization of
ddd and test the hypothesis that Ddd is a DER ligand. The objectives are: (1) To
determine the phenotypic effects of expression of ddd transgenes. Constructs
based on ddd cDNAs will be used to rescue ddd mutants and to determine the
developmental consequence of ectopic ddd expression. (2) To describe the tissue
and cell distribution of Ddd throughout development. Polyclonal antisera
directed against a Ddd-fusion protein will be used in antibody staining in
animals of all developmental stages. The temporal and spatial expression dom ain
and subcellular or extracellular location of Ddd will be determined. Ddd
expression in other disc mutants will be examined. (3) To test the hypothesis
that Ddd is a DER ligand using cell-culture experiments. The ability of Ddd and
DER to interact molecularly will be tested in ligandbinding and
immunoprecipitation assays. The ability of Ddd to activate DER will be tested by
monitoring receptor autophosphorylation. The highly conserved EGF receptor
pathway regulates cell multiplication and differentiation. Not surprisingly,
genes in the pathway have oncogenic forms. Thus this research on ddd, a
candidate ligand for the Drosophila EGF receptor, which is related to both Neu
and the EGF receptor, will contribute to the understanding of abnormal, as well
as normal, growth control and pattern formation.