* 9421145
* Star Formation Properties of Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/1995,03/31/2000
* Robert Kennicutt, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Susan M. Simkin
* 03/31/2000
* USD 194,780.00

Abstract for Proposal AST 94-21145 P.I.: Robert C. Kennicutt University of
Arizona The objective of this project is to obtain data on the large-scale star
formation properties and evolutionary properties of nearby galaxies. Such data
provide essential ingredients for understanding and modeling the evolution of
galaxies, and for understanding the physical processes that drive this
evolution. They also provide the opportunity to develop and test the diagnostic
methods needed to interpret observations of more distant galaxies at
cosmological lookback times. Specific projects to be carried out include the
following: 1) The determination of the star formation histories of galactic
disks as a function of Hubble type and radius within individual galaxies, based
on Ha and broadband surface photometry of 30 spiral galaxies. 2) A study of the
systematic properties of OB/HII associations in spiral galaxies, based on a
combination of groundbased imaging and spectroscopy and imaging with the Hubble
Space Telescope. 3) An observational study of the stellar populations and star
formation properties of galactic mergers. 4) An investigation of the form of the
star formation rate vs. gas density law in disks, based on CCD observations of a
complete sample of nearly spirals. Gravitational threshold and self-regulating
star formation models will be tested. 5) Studies of the dynamics of the ionized
interstellar gas in Magellanic irregular galaxies. These are directed at
measuring the dynamic interactions between massive stars and the interstellar
medium, and the role of large-scale winds and flows in the evolution of dwarf
galaxies.