* 9421605
* Collaborative Research: Extinction Dynamics and Population  Bottlenecks in an Annual Plant with Seed Bank
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1995,04/30/2001
* Mark McPeek, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 04/30/2001
* USD 39,476.00

9421605 McPEEK Many organisms inhabit environments in which ecological
conditions fluctuate greatly from year to year. In some years environmental
conditions may be benign and therefore foster favorable conditions for
population growth, while conditions in other years may be inhospitable and
consequently result in declining population growth rates. By forcing a
population to very small sizes in some years, such variability will heighten the
chances of total population extinction and promote the loss of genetic
variation. Species inhabiting chronically variable environments often possess
adaptations which should buffer these detrimental effects of environmental
variability. The proposed research will test the effectiveness of one of these
adaptations, the soil seed bank of annual plants. Seed banks are the presence of
dormant, viable seeds stored in the soil. Since all seeds produced in one year
do not germinate in the following growing season, seed banks create age
structure which effectively spreads the regenerative effort (and thus the risk
of extinction) over multiple years. Two studies will be performed. In one,
experimental seed banks will be constructed to evaluate the demographic and
genetic dynamics of seeds germinating from the seed bank over five years. In the
other study, the investigators will establish multiple replicate populations,
experimentally impose adult extinction on half, and leave the other half
unmanipulated. The demographic and genetic dynamics will be quantified for these
experimental populations over five years. From these two studies a complete
description of the genetic and demographic consequences of large environmental
perturbations will be constructed. This research represents one of the first
empirical evaluations of the effects of seed banks on the demographic and
evolutionary processes in natural plant populations. The results of this study
will have important implications for future theoretical development of the
effects of seed banks an d for the conservation of rare and endangered species,
both plants and animals, living in chronically variable and unpredictable
environments.