* 9421759
* Cellular Components of Androgen's Action in Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1995,10/31/1998
* Charles Roselli, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 10/31/1998
* USD 293,894.00

9421759 Roselli Gonadal steroids have profound sex-specific effects on
reproductive function and behavior. For instance, testosterone, which stimulates
a repertoire of masculine sexual behaviors in males, is much less effective in
eliciting these behaviors in females. This sex difference in androgen
responsiveness is established during early life and is believed to be related to
sex differences in brain structure as well as the concentrations of neural
androgen receptors. Less attention has been paid to the possible contribution of
sex differences in neural androgen metabolism. Aromatization of testosterone to
estradiol by the brain is required to activate male copulatory behaviors. The
levels of aromatase activity are sexually dimorphic in medial preoptic area of
the brain which is essential for the display of male sexual behaviors. Dr.
Roselli proposes a model to explain the role of aromatization in the development
of sex difference in behavior. The model predicts that the aromatization pathway
of androgen metabolism is more active in the male than in the female brain
because of increased capacity to up-regulate aromatase activity. Thus, when
adult males and females are given identical stimulation with testosterone, more
estrogen is produced in the male medial preoptic region which contributes the
greater behavioral response in males. Dr. Roselli will investigate whether
perinatal androgen exposure increases aromatase activity and androgen receptor
binding in the brain of females, establish whether testosterone increases neural
estrogen receptor binding more in males than females, determine if androgens
increase brain aromatase synthesis and activity more in males than females, and
examine if estradiol stimulates male behavior in females to the same level as
males treated with testosterone alone. The proposed studies have the potential
to further our understanding of brain-related sex differences in behavior in
mammals, including man.