* 9421194
* Management of Technological Innovation:  Hierarchical       Decision-Making in Life-Cycle Processing and Planning for   Computer and Electronic Products
* ENG,IIP
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Paul Sheng, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 09/30/1997
* USD 212,566.00

Proposal# 9421194 University of California at Berkeley The recent trend of more
stringent government legislation and growing consumerism for "green" product
features have driven manufactures to consider a proactive approach towards
minimizing the environmental impact of their products and processes. Computer
and electronics manufactures have been leading this paradigm shift through
efforts in solvent substitution and selections of packaging materials. However,
these efforts have occurred largely through uncoordinated local efforts, with
only limited transformation into corporate wide environmental strategies. This
proposal presents an multi-disciplinary, integrated analysis of hierarchical
decision-making for the manufacture of computer and electronics products. A key
issue in this analysis is the development of process, product planning and firm
level metrics for measuring environmental performance. At the process level,
analytical models will be developed to evaluate trade-off between effluents,
energy utilization, production rate and quality for metal forming, interjection
molding, board assembly, chassis assembly, disassembly and regrind operations.
The process models and metrics can be combined to evaluate alternative
manufacturing / recycling paths, as well as changes in material selection and
geometric features. Finally, using engineering data, the development of overall
organizational metrics for environmental performance will be explored. The
proposed research will also examine the impact of vertical integration and
influence on vendor environmental performance in decentralized manufacturing and
recycling. The analytical modeling will be complemented by field studies at
production sites of our industrial partners, Sun Microsystems Inc. and Hughes
Aircraft Company, as well as sites of their manufacturing and recycling vendors.
Deployment of research will occur through both on-site case studies of
industrial products and creation of curriculum material in the College of Engi
neering, Haas School of Business Administration and the School of Public Health.