* 9421982
* Transition Metal Catalyzed Carbon-Nitrogen Bond Formation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Stephen Buchwald, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1998
* USD 414,000.00

The focus of this research is the development of new methodology for the
synthesis of aromatic and heteroaromatic amines from the corresponding aryl and
heteroaryl halides, triflates and related compounds using transition metal
catalysts. A wide variety of different catalysts types, including both
homogeneous and heterogeneous ones, will be studied. While the initial system
will utilize stoichiometric aminostannane reagents, a major emphasis will be the
development of more environmentally benign reagents, or to utilize only
catalytic quantities of the aminostannanes. The application of this approach to
several areas of organic synthesis will include: the synthesis of
polysubstituted indole derivatives, the use in conjunction with Heck-type
arylation processes, and the preparation of enantiomerically pure N-aryl amino
acids and other N-aryl amines. Also mechanistic studies will be conducted to
investigate the process of reductive-elimination to form aromatic carbon-
nitrogen bonds. With this award, the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the
research of Dr. Stephen L. Buchwald of the Department of Chemistry at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Professor Buchwald will focus his work on
the development of new synthetic methodology for the synthesis of aromatic and
heteroaromatic amines using transition metal catalysis. This approach offers an
attractive alternative to currently used methods and will be of significant
utility both in academic and industrial laboratories where these amines are used
as intermediates in the preparation of a vast number of compounds of biological
and industrial importance.