* 9421297
* Optimal Design Processor for Structural Systems:  Indo-US   Cooperative Research, Award in US and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1999
* David Goldberg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/1999
* USD 9,476.00

9421297 Goldberg Description: This project supports a cooperative research
project by Dr. David Goldberg, Professor of Engineering at the University of
Illinois and Dr. C.S. Krishnamoorthy, Professor of Civil Engineering at the
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras, India. The project aims to merge
US research results in genetic algorithms (GAs)- search procedures based on the
mechanics of natural selection and natural genetics- and Indian research on
structural optimization and the application of knowledge-based systems, thereby
producing a set of computer tools that can substantially improve the breadth and
efficacy of structural design in both countries. The computer work is viewed as
the development of a prototype GA shell tailored to structural optimization.
When possible, public domain codes such as Genesis and Splicer will be used to
save effort. Scope: This research project is suitable for the objectives of the
Division of International Programs in linking US and foreign scientists with
complementary talents and experiences. The US scientist has experience and
research results in the area of GA that can benefit from the extension of the
methodologies to practical settings in the field of structures. The Indian
scientist at the IIT has experience in knowledge-based design of structures.
This can benefit from applying the current GA theory and techniques. ***