* 9421060
* Synoptic and Mesoscale Analyses of Heavy Precipitation      Events During TAMEX
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Yi-Leng Chen, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 02/28/1999
* USD 235,331.00

9421060 Chen In this project, the synoptic-scale, mesoscale and local processes
favorable for the development of heavy precipitation during TAMEX will be
studied based on the results form numerical models and the data collected during
the Taiwan Area Mesoscale Experiment (TAMEX). As the Mei-Yu front approached the
island of Taiwan, the prefrontal southwest monsoon flow (or the low-level jet)
brought in the warm, moist unstable air from the south. In addition to the low-
level lifting (orographic and frontal), the presence of upper-level forcings
(the upper-level divergence related to diffluent airflow or the frontogenetical
forcing associated with a jet-front system) is required for the development of
widespread rainstorms in the subtropics. In this study, we will diagnose a LLJ
based on the model generated high resolution data. In particular, the link
between the cyclongenesis and the development of LLJ will be further
investigated. In addition, we will study the coupling between the upper-level
and low-level circulations leading to the development of widespread
precipitation. The synoptic-scale circulations regulate whether or not
widespread precipitation will occur, whereas mesoscale circulations, local
circulations and orographic effects govern the details of precisely when and
where the convection will occur. We will study the prefrontal mesoscale airflow
over the Taiwan area based on radar, aircraft and conventional data as well as a
nested grid model. In particular, we will focus on the airflow on the windward
side as the upper-level trough/low-level jet approached. In the prefrontal
southwesterly flow, the deflected southerly jet along the coast and results in a
localized convergence zone favorable for the development of deep convection. As
the front moved over the northern Taiwan, the deflected southerly flow may merge
with the undeflected southwesterly flow in the Taiwan Strait off the
northwestern coast and results in a localized convergence zone favorable for the
development of deep convection. As the front moved over the northern Taiwan, the
deflected southerly flow may converge with the postfrontal northeasterlies and
results in an enhanced frontal convergence zone along the coast. To assess the
effects of thermally driven circulations caused by the diurnal heating cycle on
precipitation, we will study the rainfall characteristics during the diurnal
cycle at different parts of the island. In addition, we will conduct a case
study of local circulations over the island under the prefrontal southwest
monsoon flow based on the data collected during IOP #11.