* 9421743
* Survey and Report of Collegiate Undergraduate Programs      in the Mathematical Sciences Fall 1995
* SBE,NCSE
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Donald Rung, American Mathematical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Mary J. Golladay
* 03/31/1999
* USD 202,498.00

SRS 94-21743 Rung This three-year project will support the seventh in a series
of surveys sponsored by the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences
(CBMS), and conducted by the American Mathematical Society (AMS) to gather data
on activity in academic departments in the mathematical sciences. The surveys
have been conducted at five-year intervals, beginning in 1965. This national
survey of two-year and four-year institutions obtains detailed data on
undergraduate enrollment, faculty counts and characteristics, and general
academic activity. Separate questionnaires are used for four-year and two-year
institutions. A stratified random sample of institutions is selected. Data and
analysis are presented in a survey report appearing in the Mathematical
Association of America (MAA) notes and Reports Series of the MAA, and are
further distributed through presentations at professional meetings and special
articles. This project will be conducted under the direction of a nine- member
committee broadly representative of the academic communities to be surveyed.
Parties involved in significant redesign and restructuring of undergraduate
education in mathematics will be important contributors to planning for this
effort as well.