* 9421532
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  High-Performance Vehicle    with Visual and Deictic Control
* CSE,EIA
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Roger Gans, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tuz C. Ting
* 04/30/1996
* USD 17,100.00

9421532 Nelson This award is to support the research effort for the University
of Rochester's Computer Science and Mechanical Engineering Departments to build
and control a pair of small, off-road vehicles; one human-piloted, and one
computer-controlled. Intrinsically interesting aspects of the equipment are low
cost, off-road capability, and relatively high speeds (50 kph). The two vehicles
will support research on semi-autonomous control, real-time visual processing,
real-time decision-making, control learning, and simulation. The research issues
center around semi-autonomous or "deictic" control in which visual or symbolic
commands are passed to the computer-controlled vehicle for local interpretation.
This control style is increasingly popular for difficult, real-time control
tasks (e.g. telemanipulation) in which neither full autonomy, nor direct
teleoperation is feasible. Rochester will continue working on this topic.
Deictic control does not solve all control problems: control learning can play
an important role. Two aspects of control learning will be investigated:
learning tunable "motor skills" necessary to cope with high-speed situations,
and, at a higher level, learning sequences of appropriate actions. Both types of
learning are already under investigation at Rochester. Today's learning
algorithms often receive initial training in simulation, so sophisticated
simulation work already underway will be used. ***