* 9421326
* Perceptual Representations in Conceptual Tasks
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Lawrence Barsalou, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1998
* USD 218,759.00

The aim of the proposed work is to determine whether perceptual representations
enter significantly into conceptual processing. Subjects will perform conceptual
tasks that have traditionally been explained with propositional, non-perceptual
theories of knowledge, e.g., feature listing (what features are typically true
of a chair) and property verification (e.g., does a chair have a seat). Of
interest will be whether subjects use perceptual representations in these tasks,
even though the task contexts do not require or demand that they do. The use of
perceptual representations will be detected in two ways: instructional
equivalence and perceptual work. Instructional equivalence occurs when subjects
who receive no imagery instructions (`neutral subjects`) perform similarly to
subjects explicitly asked to use imagery (`imagery subjects`). Perceptual work
occurs when performance of both neutral and imagery subjects is affected by
perceptual variables. Initial experiments on feature listing and property
verification provide strong evidence for both instructional equivalence and
perceptual work, indicating that neutral subjects use perceptual
representations. Further studies will replicate and extend these findings. For
feature listing, various experiments examine the roles of perceptual
representations in conceptual combination, event concepts, abstract concepts,
gesture, and production modes. For property verification, various experiments
use distractor relatedness, preparation time, part expectancy, and perspective
to examine the role of perceptual representations. In an additional project on
modality-specific interference, several experiments test the prediction that
perceptual representations of conceptual knowledge should produce specific
patterns of attentional interference. Should these projects provide evidence
that perceptual representations play central roles in conceptual processing,
theories of cognition and intelligence would require significant reformulation.
Most existing theories assume that intelligent behavior reflects the processing
of an abstract, amodal, and arbitrary language of thought, much like the
symbolic computer languages used widely in electronic computation. According to
existing theories, perceptual experience is transduced into a set of conceptual
symbols that bear no perceptual resemblance to their referential origins. An
alternative, and much less explored view, is that conceptual symbols are
fragments of perceptual states, extracted directly from these states via
selective attention. The resulting conceptual representations are not static
holistic 'pictures in the head,' but instead are systems of perceptual symbols
that combine productively to produce infinite conceptual structures.
Additionally, these perceptual symbols are analytic, schematic, multimodal, and
dynamic, offering a rich expressive system for representing a wide variety of
concepts, not just those for concrete objects. Intuitively, such perceptual
symbol systems resemble modern multimedia computing much more than traditional
non-analogue computing. Evidence continuing to indicate the presence of a
perceptual symbolic system in humans, has strong implications for understanding
and applying intelligence as well as theories of the brain's operation and
visions of artificial intelligence. Rather than viewing intelligence as the
manipulation of arbitrary amodal symbols, it would come to be viewed as arising
from a productive system of perceptual symbols.