* 9421963
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Public Culture of      Science in Germany
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Ann La Berge, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 01/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

As was demonstrated by the recent decision to end funding for the super-
conducting super collider, scientists--even physicists--can no longer assume
public support for their scientific endeavors. Scientists must capture the
interest of the public. And, as Ms. Moira Rogers is investigating in her
dissertation under the direction of Professor Ann LaBerge, scientists cannot
expect that the public will passively accept everything that scientists pass on
to them. Ms. Rogers is carrying out her investigation in the context of the
German Enlightenment; but as she is discovering there, the public interest in
science is aroused in extremely complex, dynamic ways. Understanding of this
complex dynamic is essential for the continued public support of what may seem
to be esoteric scientific research. Ms. Rogers is studying the culture of the
Enlightenment which was marked by the public ascendance of science to a position
of cultural authority. Complex literary and socio-political processes converged
in the excitement and satisfaction of a public taste and curiosity for science.
"It is from Saxony that the light of science has spread through Germany and
other countries" was a common contemporary opinion. The fairs, publishing
industry, and the university made of Leipzig a key center for the German
Enlightenment. Records of public meetings, periodicals for lay publics,
advertisements diaries, popular science books, poetry newspapers, letters,
invitations to public performances and many others, if subjected to careful
historical analysis, can help to portray the public face of science as seen by a
variety of social groups within the reading and listening publics. Science
spread through society as the result of the common efforts of printers and
servants, philosophers and instrument-makers, Clergyman and ladies, children and
censors etc. The processes that made science transcend the boundaries of
academies and universities were not merely "transmission" of ideas to
essentially passive and receptive audi ences, but complex dynamics that
contributed to the promotion of broader Enlightenment interests in German
culture. This study will provide with an account of the cultural status of
science in the German Enlightenment