* 9421427
* SGER: Biomolecular Analysis of Microscopic Trophis          Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Neo Martinez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1996
* USD 45,000.00

9421427 Banks Rapidly advancing biotechnology affords new opportunities for
increasing the power and productivity of environmental biology. This research
will apply cutting-edge biotechnology towards the resolution of previously
insoluble environmental problems. Specifically, advanced DNA-based biomolecular
techniques will be developed to identify and quantify cryptic species and
trophic interactions at an unprecedented level of precision. Quantitative
estimation of DNA concentration using the polymerase chain reaction (QPCA) is
currently being incorporated into a highly replicable automated technique which
facilitates application to difficult questions. This research will test whether
recent developments in this technique, already being successfully applied to
biomedical questions, enable reliable estimation of population sizes of two
strains of bacteria (Escherichia coli). Density estimates will be evaluated for
E. coli populations on plates with known different ratios of two strains. These
will be compared with results obtained from gut extractions of a bactivorous
nematode (Caenorhabditis elegans) fed on replicate E. coli plants. Positive
results would indicate that these procedures not only estimate population sizes,
but also estimate trophic flows from different prey species to their predators.
When possible, estimates such as these are currently extremely difficult and
involve radioactive reagents. This development will avoid such hazardous
reagents and use the latest equipment and procedures to increase the ease and
the statistical power in such determinations. %%% Recent work has employed more
highly resolved trophic data to overturn several long held beliefs about food-
web structure and offers more successfully predictive hypotheses in their place.
These novel analyses of microscopic trophic interactions will assist further
advances in trophic ecology. Beyond trophic interactions, this technique will
likely have broader application since they may be used to quantify DNA extracted
from water, soil, and other ecologically important environments. The species-
specific population and biomass estimates that these procedures may enable will
greatly enhance our ability to address new and long-standing basic and applied
issues concerning ecosystem, community, and population ecology of microbes,
fungi, and micrometazoans.