* 9421967
* Workshop on Quantum Measurement:  Decoherence and Modal     Interpretations, to be Held in Minneapolis, Minnesota,      May 4-7, 1995
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1995,05/31/1995
* Richard Healey, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 05/31/1995
* USD 10,000.00

Drs. Hellman and Healey are conducting a small, interdisciplinary conference on
"Quantum Measurement: Decoherence and Modal Interpretations." The workshop is to
take place at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis, May 4-7, 1995. Their
goal is to bring together leading physicists and philosophers of science who
share a common interest in the problems of quantum measurement so that each
group may become better acquainted with work of the other group. Both groups
have been actively pursuing research programs that may represent genuine
progress on this long-standing, deep problem-area in the foundations of quantum
mechanics. Participating philosophers of science are concentrating on various
recently proposed "modal" and "interactive" interpretations which, consistently
with known limitations, allow assignments of definite values of measurable
quantities in certain circumstances (including measurement interactions) in
which such values are not recognized according to the conventional
interpretative framework. Participating physicists are concentrating on both the
evidence for a genuine problem at the macroscopic level and on the role of
environmentally-induced decoherence of the state in bringing about definite
values of measurable quantities. All participants should seek to understand how
these proposals are related to one another and to what extent any promising
approach to the measurement problem emerges from them. The conference can
stimulate interdisciplinary cooperation in the continued pursuit of answers to
these related questions.