* 9421706
* Conference on New Directions in Vestibular Reseach:         June 25-27, 1995:  New York, New York
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1996
* Stephen Highstein, New York Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 05/31/1996
* USD 7,500.00

The vestibular system includes part of the inner ear used for balance and
locomotor control called the labyrinth, made of tubes and pouches containing
fluids and the otolith organs. These receptors send nerve inputs to various
targets in the brain including the brainstem, the cerebellum, and centers for
control of visual gaze; there also is an efferent pathway from the brain to
modulate the receptor activity. Recent advances have been made in the
understanding the development of the labyrinth and vestibular brainstem, the
contribution to information processing of ionic currents in the hair cell
mechanoreceptors and the primary afferent nerves, the expression of molecular
markers by vestibular neurons, and the cellular and systems processes
responsible for motor learning. Modeling has assumed new importance in directing
experiments, and there is a new emphasis on the impact of the otoliths and of
spatial orientation on gaze, posture, and locomotion. This meeting reviews newer
approaches to the study of the vestibular system, specifically to encourage
dialog among workers bringing experience from a range of approaches and
disciplines of vestibular work, and specific support is for younger students and
researchers to attend. This conference is likely to hate an impact beyond simply
vestibular neurobiology, into areas of computational neuroscience and modeling,
visual neuroscience, and behavioral neuroscience.