* 9421910
* NSF/ONR:  Atomic Layer Epitaxy of Superconducting Oxides and Heterostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Tobin Marks, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 12/31/1998
* USD 225,000.00

In this project, part of the joint ONR/NSF Program on Interfaces to
Superconductors and supported by the Divisions of Chemistry, Materials Research,
and Electrical and Communications Systems, Professors Chang and Marks of
Northwestern University are studying the properties of interfacial growth
regions between films of high-temperature superconducting (HTS) materials and
insulating metal oxides. Atomic layer epitaxy (ALE) will be employed using a
pulsed organometallic beam epitaxy system which is capable of growing metal
oxide films with atomic layer precision but is also adaptable to large-scale
low-temperature conformable metal oxide films growth as required in
manufacturing. Superconductor/insulator heterostructures will be investigated
under a variety of growth conditions and microstructures and interdiffusion
properties will be evaluated by a variety of physical techniques, including
various electron and atomic-force microscopies. Surface chemical processes will
be directly monitored as a function of growth conditions during ALE. Improving
the nature of interfaces in high-temperature superconducting materials and
insulating metal oxides is a crucial barrier which must be surmounted before HTS
materials can be successfully incorporated on a large scale into electronic
device technologies. This study will provide the information needed to fabricate
key structures for HTS-based electronics and an accurate evaluation of the
potential of different growth techniques in this arena.