* 9421876
* Combined Acoustic and Optical Imaging of Crustacean         Macrozooplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Jules Jaffe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 03/31/1999
* USD 579,477.00

9421876 Jaffe This ocean sciences technology development project continues
development of a 3-dimensional sonar imaging system to be used in zooplankton
dynamics and ecological research. Work will be undertaken to fabricate an
Optical-Acoustic Submersible Imaging System (OASIS), that will allow tracking of
zooplankton diel cycles, migrations and nocturnal activity patters. These
behavioral data will help to model predator-prey encounters, euphausiid
bioenergetics, and diel vertical migration behavior under realistic
environmental conditions. The system will be deployable from a remotely-operated
underwater vehicle and will simultaneously record both the target strength
(acoustic) and a high resolution optical image. This combined technique will
help verify acoustic survey information and allow extrapolation of past and
present data. Acoustical backscattering will be correlated to animal orientation
and this relationship, as well as other optically verified correlations, will
permit a better interpretation of in situ acoustic data. The acoustic system has
been deployed successfully. Limited trials with camera imaging systems have also
been completed. This work combine these two systems. The optical system is to be
operated in a strobe mode, triggered from the sonar imaging system. In this way,
when a target is found in the sonar image at the appropriate location, the
strobe light will be triggered, and an optical image will be recorded.