* 9421658
* Neuropeptide Control of Steroid Hormone-Sensitive Functions and Behaviors
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Geert DeVries, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/1999
* USD 328,734.00

DeVries, Geert IBN 94-21658 The brain employs a host of chemical substances to
facilitate communication between cells resident therein. One class of effector
molecules are small proteins called neuropeptides and although, the presence of
these molecules has been known for sometime, their true function as messenger
molecules remains ambiguous. There is virtually no neuropeptide system for which
the inputs and outputs are mapped; for which the stimuli that regulate activity
are identified; and of which the physiological and behavioral consequences of
changes in its activity are known. Dr. DeVries will utilize a unique, well
characterized and sexually dimorphic biological system to unravel the role of
vasopressin, a neuropeptide, as messenger molecules in the brain. Vasopressin-
containing neurons have been implicated in a variety of functions, such as
thermo- and osmoregulation, sexual behavior, aggression and memory. Dr. DeVries
will characterize the in- and outputs of subsets of vasopressin-containing cells
and the response of these subsets of neurons to various stimuli associated with
vasopressin-mediated behaviors. In addition, because the vasopressin-containing
neurons are sexually dimorphic, the gonadal steroid milieu dictates the activity
of the neurons. This feature of these neurons will be employed to examine the
role of these neurons in several physiological functions and behaviors in a
coordinated manner. These studies will characterize the anatomical and
physiological importance of a well-characterized neuropeptide system of the
brain. Potentially, this basic information about neuropeptides will enhance our
understanding of animal behavior and may facilitate animal husbandry.
Additionally, these studies have immense implications in the diagnosis and
treatment of human psychopathological disorders where multiple physiological and
behaviors are disrupted.