* 9421254
* Cellular Automation Simulation of Muscle Fibers
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Guangzhou Zou, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 03/31/1999
* USD 268,606.00

; R o o t E n t r y F ZpÕ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l ZpÕ ZpÕ 0 ! " # $ % & ' ( ) * + , - . / 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; < = > ? @ A
B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; e = e z z p p p p p p z & 1 x W T 3 & p & p p p p p x p p p p
. Estimation of genetic relatedness, including identification of parents, is
central to many kinds of biological studies. Relatedness and parentage can both
be estimated through the use of genetic markers, though the rarity of good
markers has limited this approach for many organisms. However, new kinds of
markers, including multi-locus fingerprints, minisatellites, microsatellites,
and RAPD's, now make accurate kinship assessment a practical goal for just about
any species. This award will result in two computer program becoming generally
available to the research community. The first, RELATEDNESS, focusing on
statistical estimates for genetic relatedness, will be a rewritten and
restructure version of a program that has been available for several years. The
second program, PARENTAGE, will be specifically for paternity and maternity
analysis. It will be designed to make maximum use of the different kings of
prior information available in studies of vertebrates, social insects, plants
and other organisms. This award is being supported by the Computational Biology
Activity, Animal Behavior, and Population Biology programs. { S u m m a r y I n
f o r m a t i o n ( Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Estimation
of genetic relatedness, including identification of parents, is central to many
kinds of biological studies. Relatedness and parentage can both be estimated
through the use of genetic markers, though the parity of good markers has
limited this Bertha L. Luster Bertha L. Luster @ G Õ @ @ G Õ @ Microsoft Word
6.0 2 ; y z u c y z !. ! K @ Normal a c " A@ " Default Paragraph Font { z .
Bertha L. Luster \\CLM2\BIRWORK\QUELLER.ASC @HP DeskJet 500 LPT1: HPDSKJET HP
DeskJet 500 D L f , , d s HP DeskJet 500 D L f , , d s 1 Times New Roman Symbol
& Arial " V h { e { e $ 3 Estimation of genetic relatedness, including
identification of parents, is central to many kinds of biological studies.
Relatedness and parentage can both be estimated through the use of genetic
markers, though the rarity of good markers has limited this Bertha L. Luster
Bertha L. Luster ; ;