* 9421719
* Spectroscopy and Reaction Dynamics of Open-Shell Complexes  and Atmospheric Aerosols
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Marsha Lester, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 01/31/1998
* USD 443,500.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Marsha I. Lester of the University of Pennsylvania will study the
spectroscopy and reaction dynamics of open shell complexes in order to: 1) map
out the intermolecular potential energy surfaces between a free radical and a
collision partner by accessing intermolecular vibrations via stimulated emission
pumping and infrared overtone excitation; 2) examine the change in the
intermolecular interaction between a free radical and a collision partner due to
the orientation of the orbital containing an unpaired electron; and 3) induce
chemical reaction within a complex composed of a hydroxyl radical and a
molecular partner by surmounting the activation barrier to reaction via infrared
overtone excitation of that radical. Detailed understanding of reaction
chemistry at the molecular level requires knowledge of the behavior of the
reaction partners during the short duration of the reaction process. Free
radicals, i.e., atoms or molecules with an unpaired electron, play an essential
part in reaction processes but because of their short lived existence are
difficult to study in themselves and, especially, in a reaction process. The
present research will provide fundamental knowledge and insight into the process
of chemical reactions taking place in the gaseous state.