* 9421420
* The Role of Phytochrome Genes in Photoperiodic Ecotypes of  Black Cottonwood
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1999
* Wesley Hackett, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 03/31/1999
* USD 225,000.00

94221420 Howe Daylength, or photoperiod, is one of the most important
environmental cues controlling the onset of dormancy in perennial plants. Short
days induce growth-cessation, the initiation of cold-acclimation, and the
formation of a terminal bud. By responding to daylength, the initiation of
dormancy can be closely synchronized with the end of the growing season and
plants can begin acclimating prior to the onset of low temperatures in the fall.
Because the length of the growing season varies latitudinally, photoperiodic
ecotypes have evolved in species with large latitudinal distributions. In the
northern hemisphere, for example, trees from nothrern locations respond to
longer photoperiods and initiate dormancy earlier in the season than do southern
genotypes. Differences in response occur even when the ecotypes are grown in
common-garden tests under the same photoperiodic regime, demonstrating that
photoperiodism is under strong genetic control. The long-term goals of this
project are to determine the genetic basis of photoperiodic ecotypes in
perennial plants and to characterize the early events in short-day induced bud
set, using black cottonwood as a model species. This research will integrate
information on photoperiodism at the populational, whole-plant , and molecular
genetic levels in order to understand the evolutionary processes leading to
ecotypic variation in plants. Because both the timing of bud set and plant
architecture are important determinants of plant productivity, this research has
important implications for plant breeding. This research will also add to our
understanding of the ecological role of phytochrome in plants.