* 9421398
* Management of Technological Innovation:  Research,          Development and Industrial Testing of a Systainability      Impact Assessment System
* ENG,IIP
* 10/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Simon Levin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/1997
* USD 200,000.00

Proposal # 9421398 New York University This project proposes a program of
transdisciplinary collaboration and synthesis. Engineers, ecologist, and
organizational scientists at NYU, MIT and Princeton and corporate managers at
AT&T. Bristol-Myers Squibb, Digital Equipment Corporation, and Phillips
Electronics, will research, develop and field test a Sustainablity Impact
Assessment System (SIAS). This system will help industrial users to
comprehensively identify, project measure, evaluate and communicate the effects
o proposed or ongoing industrial actions on environmental and socio-economic
systems, using absolute standards of sustainablity rather than relative measures
of environmental "friendliness" or "consciousness." It should be applicable to
all phases of technology management, including the evaluation, forecasting,
planning, and transfer of technology. It should also help to inculcate in
corporate managers a new set of societally desirable values regarding the
appropriate role of technology in a sustainable world. The project will consist
of three phases. During the conceptual development phase, the project team will
develop core sustainablity standards, review the state-of-the-art in assessment
methodologies, survey industrial firms on their assessment usage, and develop a
SIAS prototype. Then during the systems construction phase the project team will
convene a sustainablity assessment conference, develop detailed sustainablity
metrics and scales, prepare a methodology manual, and hopefully an experimental
software package. Finally, during the field testing and deployment phase, the
project team will implement and test the system in various industrial
organization, documents and analyze the results, and refine and publish them.