* 9421257
* Management of Technological Innovation:  Assessing          Life-Cycle Environmental Impact of Discrete Part            Manufacturing
* ENG,IIP
* 10/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Gerald Nadler, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

Proposal # 9421257 University of Southern California This research proposes to
develop a comprehensive methodology for capturing the life-cycle impacts of
environmental unfriendliness in discrete part manufacturing. The output of this
research is a means by which businesses can obtain the environmental status of
their operations. Status may be defined by the collective life-cycle impact
(measured appropriately) of the products/process under the manager's authority.
For example, environmental life-cycle impact status of a particular products
line produced by current physical process could be visualized as a vector of
measurable attributes, categorized under the taxonomy of human impact,
ecological impact, and socio-economic impact, that are aggregated at the
business unit level. The life-cycle impact include impacts caused by
purchasing/selling processes (including
parts/materials/supplies/services/finished goods), receiving/storing/maintaining
processes (including parts/materials/ supplies/ equipment/ finished goods)
production process (including assembly and packaging), transportation process
(including purchased items/work-in-process/finished goods/equipment/waste),
disposal process (including parts/materials,supplies/service/finished
goods/equipment/ waste). Also considered, will be the effects of product use,
recycling/ reuse/ remanufacturing environmental impacts. The methodology
developed will be transformed into a computer-based tool that managers will be
able use to determine trade-off and manage technological innovations to improve
environmental friendliness of their products and process. This research will be
conducted with the help of TRW and Motorola, who will contribute detailed
operations-related information on products as well as help in the development/
implementation of measures, methodology and tools in a corporate setting. The
tools developed will be used to assess the environmental implications of three
products, two at TRW and one at Motorola. The produ cts at TRW include Airbag
System and Diagnostic Module unit used in automotive airbags, currently in
production and the Remote Convenience System which will be in the production in
1996. The product at Motorola is the pager.