* 9421585
* U.S.-Switzerland-Germany Cooperation in the Semi-Atomistic  Simulation of Macromolecules
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1998
* Wayne Mattice, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 02/28/1998
* USD 24,600.00

9421585 Mattice This award supports Professor Wayne Mattice and a postdoctoral
fellow and a graduate student from his research group at the University of
Akron, to collaborate in materials research with Professor Kurt Binder of the
Physics Institute of the University of Mainz, German, and Professor Ulrich
Suter, of the Polymer Institute of ETH, Zurich, Switzerland. The objective of
their collaboration is to develop improved methods for the study of polymers.
Combining the strengths of the three research groups and avoiding duplication of
effort will facilitate efficient development of algorithms and software for
simulating physical properties of these macromolecules. The new software should
be particularly robust because it will combine the special strengths of the
three laboratories. Simulations of the physical properties of macromolecules
generally are much more difficult than simulations of small molecules. These
challenges arise from differences in the numbers of conformations, distance
scales and time scales. There are several current approaches for the design of
simulations, each of which have only limited application to selected
circumstances. For example, fully atomistic simulations are severely limited in
the time and space scales of the physical phenomena that can be addressed,
while, on the other hand, simulations on lattices can incorporate large scales
of time and distance, but cannot incorporate sufficient structural detail so
that the chains in the simulations can be identified with real polymers. The
proposed U.S.-European collaboration is intended to develop methods that combine
the best attributes of both these techniques, so that the simulations will have
greatly improved usefulness. ***