* 9421146
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Development of Rules for  Synthesis of Hindi Speech, Award in U.S. and Indian         Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Kenneth Stevens, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 11/30/1998
* USD 23,111.00

Description: This project supports a cooperative project by a US scientist, Dr.
Kenneth Stevens, from the Research Laboratory of Electronics at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA and Dr. S.S. Agrawal of the
Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute (CEERI) in New Delhi, India.
The two scientists plan to conduct synthesis of Hindi speech by computer, and to
develop rules for synthesis and concatenation of basic Hindi phonemes to
generate words and sentences. The results of these studies would be subsequently
used to develop a text-to-speech synthesizer for the Hindi language. The
KLSYN88, a cascade-parallel format synthesizer developed at MIT will be used as
the basic tool to analyze and synthesize the sounds. Since Hindi speech posses
several types of special sounds that differ from the sounds in European
languages, the most important of these are the stops and affricates, special
attention will be paid to the analysis and synthesis of these sounds. In
addition to the two senior scientists, a post doctorate and a junior researcher
from MIT will also participate in the research and will work with the Indian
scientists in the New Delhi Laboratory. Scope: This project allows cooperation
of two well known scientists whose capabilities complement each other to do
important scientific work. The major experimental work related to analysis and
synthesis of Hindi speech will be carried at CEERI, while some experiments will
also be conducted at MIT. There will be frequent exchange of ideas, review of
data, techniques and results through correspondence and through exchanges of
visits by the P.I.'s and by the U.S. junior scientists. This project meets the
objectives of the Division of International Programs in fostering international
collaboration and increasing the exposure of young scientists to the
international scientific scene.