* 9421803
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Robert Spencer Jennings,   Tracy M. Sonneborn, and the Career of American              Protozoan Genetics
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Frederick Churchill, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 02/29/1996
* USD 4,990.00

The founders of the American protozoan genetics program, Herbert Spencer
Jennings and Tracy M. Sonneborn, were highly respected leaders in the twentieth-
century biological community. The research program they created and their
primary research organism, Paramecium aurelia, however, have not impacted
significantly the corpus of this century's genetic thought. The goal of Ms.
Judith Schloegel's dissertation which is being written under the direction of
Professor Churchill is to illuminate the circumstances underlying this
paradoxical disparity between the success of these researchers and their
experimental program. This research serves as the basis for a triple biography
of Jennings, Sonneborn, and the unicellular organism, the Paramecium.
Examination of the staunchly anti-reductionist mode of experimental inquiry of
Jennings and Sonneborn, and the social and political commitments which they
embraced, will illuminate the career of Paramecium in genetic research. It will
also enable comparison of the protozoan research program with other relevant
organismic programs. Extensive archival research will elucidate the important
role of numerous relationships, between student and teacher, between competing
research programs, and between researcher and genetic organism, for the mode of
experimental inquiry practiced, and the type of knowledge produced by an
organism. Discerning these relationships will contribute to a richer
understanding of the development of genetic knowledge in twentieth-century
America.