* 9421603
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Design  of Analog-Digital Integrated Circuits
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1994,09/30/2001
* John Ringo, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 09/30/2001
* USD 803,719.00

9421603 Ringo The Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for
Analog/Digital Integrated Circuits was started as a multi- university Center in
1989 with Washington State University and the University of Washington. Oregon
State University became an additional research site in 1991. The State
University of New York, Stoneybrook is being added as another research site of
the Center. Since only two companies are currently being added to the Center in
association with the new research site, the State University of New York -
Stoneybrook is being added tot he Center as an affiliate. The Center's research
agenda is being expanded by the new research site by studies to: 1) Develop new
methods for the design of analog integrated filters; 2) Develop design and
simulation tasks for emerging technologies; and 3) Investigate the analog
behavior of high performance digital circuits. The Center's researchers are
imminently qualified to perform the Center's research projects. The Center has
been coordinated with Dr. Deborah Crawford, Solid State and Microstructures
Program. Additional funding is provided for two supplemental awards to the
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Design ofAnalog-Digital
Integrated Circuits at Washington State University. The first is a Research
Opportunity Award (ROA) to provide an opportunity for two Assistant Professors
at Cogswell College North and Seattle University, both predominantly
undergraduate instituttions, to work on research in the area of Simulation and
Magnetic Modeling for Power Electronics. No review is required for a Research
Opportunity Award, however, Dr. Vijay Vittal, Program Director, Electrical and
Communication Systems provided an internal review. His comments were very
favorable and strongly recommended support of the project. The research work
performed through this award will professionally benefit everyone involved in
the project; the two women faculty members, CDADIC researcher s, industrial
sponsors, and the undergraduate students who will participate in the project.
The second program provides support for two undergraduates through the Research
Experiences for Undergraduate Research Program. These students will work with
two Assistant Professors on the research project being supported through the
Research Opportunity Award and through this experience will be provided a
research experience which they otherwise would not have access to at their
institution. The Program Manager recommends Washington State University be
awarded $143,186 for the first year of a five-year continuing award. An
additonal $50,000 is recommended for 24 months for an Researchy Opportunity
Award and $10,000 for one year with funds provided by the Research Experiences
for Undergraduates Program. Near the end of each 12-month period the Program
Manager and/or the Division Director of the Engineering Education Centers
Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of renewal criteria
including the following: 1) the extent to which the industry/university
interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which the support base is
developing; and 3) the extent to which robust research program is developing. If
the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend support for the
next period of this continuing award.