* 9421140
* Seasonality Determinations from Archaeological Oyster       Shells:  An Experimental Evaluation of Incremental Shell    Growth
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Gregory Waselkov, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1997
* USD 113,024.00

Waselkov With National Science Foundation support Dr. Waselkov and his
colleagues will study the growth patterns in Eastern oysters (Crassostrea
virginica) to determine the relationship between growth and seasonal changes in
water temperature. The goal of the work is to determine whether analysis of
oyster shells will permit determination of the season when the oyster was
collected. Preliminary evidence indicates that such an approach is possible in
temperate waters where significant seasonal variation in temperature occurs. It
is less clear whether the same pattern holds in warmer areas such as the Gulf of
Mexico. The investigators will examine oyster growth from two locations, Alabama
and Maryland, with several methods. Oysters will be marked and grown under known
conditions for two years before being harvested. Temperature will be
electronically logged. Both wild and hatched spawned oysters (of known) age and
will be stained with tetracycline in a sequence that will allow spatio- temporal
identification of growth patterns throughout the annual cycle. Analytic methods
will include traditional optical micrometry, digital image analysis with time
series analysis and use of a scanning proton microprobe. The successful
development of this technique will have important archaeological implications.
Oysters formed a major dietary item in many areas of prehistoric North America
and are widely found in archaeological sites where they are well preserved.
Scientists wish to understand how prehistoric peoples with simple technologies
subsisted in a wide range of environments and made use of available natural
resources. To do this, they attempt to determine the seasons and length of time
individual sites were occupied. This can be extremely difficult to do and the
proposed oyster shell study will, hopefully, provide a technique to accomplish
this.