* 9421448
* Specification of Two Classes of Sympathetic Preganglionic   Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Cynthia Forehand, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/1999
* USD 245,000.00

9421448 Forehand Homeostasis is the process by which the body maintains
temperature, blood pressure, digestion, and a variety of other physiological
functions necessary for life. Homeostasis is controlled unconsciously through
connections of the autonomic nervous system. Control centers in the brainstem
regulate organ function via their connections with neurons in the spinal cord
and peripheral ganglia. It is clear that optimum organ function can be achieved
only by a fine matching of command neurons with their targets, yet it is unclear
how cells in the developing autonomic nervous system convey to one another
critical information about their position and destinations. Recent studies have
begun to elucidate the organization of embryonic preganglionic thoracic neurons
into discrete groups of cells. These neurons are located in the spinal cord and
send information from the brain to a series of autonomic ganglia via processes
called axons. This research is designed to determine how these axons find the
appropriate autonomic ganglia so that the message is received by the correct
ganglion cells. Preganglionic axons must contact a number of ganglia located at
the rostral end of the body (towards the head) or at the caudal end of the body
(towards the tail or feet). Some preganglionic axons project rostrally and
others project caudally; no axon splits to project in both directions. The
immediate goal of the proposed research is to determine the way in which these
axons make this choice. One set of experiments will determine the way in which
the appropriate numbers of axons that are to project in each direction are
established. In other experiments, the way in which the axons bundle together to
project to the ganglia will be examined to determine if axons destined to
project one direction selectively bundle with like axons. The results of these
experiments will elucidate factors that lend a unique identity to individual
pools of preganglionic neurons. Ultima tely, this research will define
functional cell groups of the preganglionic cell column relative to their
topographic targets and the organs they regulate. This experimental paradigm has
the potential to provide a unique situation for studying the general way in
which topographic maps of the body are matched to various levels of the nervous
system .