* 9421481
* Workshop on Environmental Management of the McMurdo Dry     Valleys of Antarctica, March 14-17, 1995, Santa Fe, New     Mexico
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Robert Wharton, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 06/30/1997
* USD 85,006.00

9421481 Wharton An invitational workshop focusing on the environmental
management of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems in the McMurdo Dry Valleys of
Antarctica will be held March 14-17, 1995 in Santa Fe, New Mexico. The purpose
of the workshop is to bring together 30-40 scientists with expertise in the
Antarctic and comparable ecosystems in Arctic and temperate regions to discuss
the approaches to management of the McMurdo Dry Valleys in an environmentally
responsible manner. Workshop discussions will encompass the conduct of research,
environmental monitoring, and potential effects of tourism. The impetus for
holding this workshop includes: (1) assessing the potential environmental impact
of the on-going research programs in the dry valleys, (2) the current
ratification process for the Environmental Protocols of the Antarctic Treaty
System, and (3) the arrival in 1992 of the first tourists to visit the McMurdo
Dry Valleys. The major objectives of the workshop will be to develop: (1) an
ecosystem- based approach for managing the conduct of scientific activities in
the McMurdo Dry Valleys, (2) a code of environmental conduct for scientists
working in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, (3) recommendations for an environmental
monitoring program, including suitable indicators, that can address project
specific impacts and cumulative impacts, and (4) recommendations for management
plans for regions within the dry valleys or for the McMurdo Dry Valleys as a
whole. In addition to scientists from the United States, numerous foreign
scientists will be invited. The workshop will be structured to allow
participants an opportunity to provide input and discussion on each topic. A
report will be published and distributed following the workshop.