* 9421362
* Studies in the Phonological Structure of Bantu languages
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1995,09/30/1998
* David Odden, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 09/30/1998
* USD 177,000.00

9421362 The Bantu languages of Africa have played a major role in the
development of current phonological theory. One reason for the continued
importance of the phonology of Bantu languages is that de- spite a basic
similarity between the languages, the abstract building blocks of grammars are
arranged differently in each language, so that every language poses new
empirical puzzles. Bantu languages are particularly rich in the area of prosodic
phenomena tones, vowel length and syllabification and often have highly
developed systems of prosodic rules that apply at the sentence level. While
quality descriptions of the phonology of perhaps a dozen Bantu languages are
available, there are around 400 Bantu languages spoken in Africa, so one can
accurately say that the surface has only been scratched in studying the
phonology of Bantu languages. The goal of this three-year project is to provide
a more solid empirical foundation for the study of the grammatical structure of
Bantu languages, focusing on problems in the phonology of certain languages
spoken in Southern Kenya, Northern Tanzania and Southern Uganda. Four languages
are targeted for extensive investigation in this project, specifically Kikerewe,
Runyankore, Bukusu and Kikamba. None of these languages has received adequate
attention in terms of their phonological systems, especially in terms of tone
and syllable structure. Working with native speakers of these languages, the
research team will elicit lexical items and grammatical paradigms, including
inflectional paradigms and phrasal constructions, to determine the range of
phonological alternations attested in these languages. Simultaneously these data
will be analyzed; hypotheses will be formed regarding the principles which
explain the distribution of the available data. By collecting and analyzing the
data simultaneously, errors and omissions in the data will be detected quickly
and hypotheses can be tested against a wider range of const ructions. The data
and analyses generated by this project will then be disseminated as a special
issue of the Ohio State University Working Papers in Linguistics, and through
journal articles and monograph-length publications.