* 9421480
* Interdependence and Category-based Responses
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Susan Fiske, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/1997
* USD 122,198.00

This program of research tests the PI's theory that powerful perceivers are
vulnerable to stereotyping others because: (a) their outcomes are not so
contingent on those subordinate others; (b) their capacities are limited by
overload; and (c) they can be personally motivated by a dominance orientation.
The powerful perceiver's control motivations (lack of contingency on others and
possible dominance orientation) make them less careful and combine with
overloaded capacity to encourage stereotyping. These dynamics have practical
significance because the use of stereotypes by powerful decision makers has more
impact than their use by the less powerful. They have theoretical significance
because the lowered social contingency (lack of reciprocal outcome dependency)
of powerful people paves the way for more autonomous motives to guide their
impression formation (e.g., values, individual differences, relationships
external to the power relation). The relative lack of contingency of the
powerful also creates a greater challenge for influencing them. Six studies will
test the PI's theor y utilizing two paradigms supported by preliminary data.
These paradigms employ both manipulations of power and individual differences
and include a range of stereotyped targets varying in ethnicity, race, and
gender. The first three studies test the hypothesis that the powerful do not
need to attend to their subordinates. One implication of this perspective is
that the powerless may become anxious, a prediction supported by previous work.
To examine this implication, three additional studies investigate the dynamics
of power and control feelings to test a related hypothesis: Some kinds of power
do not make the powerless anxious, and so avoid the debilitating interpersonal
effects of anxiety. Together, these six studies examine situational and
personality dynamics of the relationship between power and stereotyping, as
mediated by control feelings and capacity limitations. Studies of power and
stereotyping are critical to the nation's effective use of its human capital.
Stereotypes ignore the merits of the individual. Thus, powerful decision makers
who stereotype their subordinates will make uninformed, inefficient, and
ineffective decisions. Yet the PI's theory, tested in this program of research,
suggests that the powerful are especially vulnerable to stereotyping. It also
suggests that a dominating, stereotypic leadership style undermines subordinate
performance. This research will reveal how the powerful can avoid the
debilitating effects of stereotypes and make the best use of the available human
resources.