* 9421604
* Transcriptional Regulation of Steroid Gene Networks
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Roger Miesfeld, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 03/31/1999
* USD 260,923.00

9421604 Miesfeld Steroid hormones control cell function by turning on and
turning off specific sets of genes. The genes controlled by testosterone and
other androgenic hormones are androgen-dependent tissue. To better understand
how androgens control the expression of specific genes in the rat ventral
prostate, Dr. Miesfeld has developed an in vitro model system using a novel rat
prostate cell line that was isolated during the course of NSF support. One of
the paradoxical observations that he has been studying is how similar steroid
hormones elicit such distinct cellular responses in vivo given that the steroid
receptor proteins are capable of binding to the same gene sequences when studied
in vitro. He has proposed that prostate cells contain special androgen receptor
"adaptor" proteins which aid in discriminating between androgen action and that
of glucocorticoids which bind to a related steroid receptor. By understanding
more about these cell-specific steroid responses, it should be possible to
uncover the molecular basis of gene-selective transcription. In this proposed
research, Dr. Miesfeld intends to focus his efforts on three specific aims.
First, he will use two model androgen regulated genes, and either liver cells or
prostate cells, to map promoter- and cell-specific requirements for androgen
receptor sequences that may interact with putative adaptor proteins. These
proteins may act as "activators" in prostate cells or as "inhibitors" in liver
cells based on earlier observations that androgen receptors function 10-20 times
better in prostate cells. Second, he will use yeast cells to set up a genetic
screen to identify new mutations in the androgen receptor that affect these
promoter- and cell-specific responses. One prediction from the hypothesis is
that different proteins will interact with the modulatory domain of the androgen
receptor in distinct ways such that mutations should be able to distinguish
between them. Third, he will use biochemical techniques to physica l isolate
proteins from prostate cells that specifically interact with the androgen
receptor modulatory domain. The characterization of these proteins should
provide new information regarding mechanisms of steroid-regulated gene
expression. ***