* 9421662
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Precision Spectroscopy of  Atomic Cesium in High-Gradient and High-Intensity           Electromagnetic Fields
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Carl Wieman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1998
* USD 7,822.00

9421662 Wieman This award provides funds to permit Dr. Carl E. Wieman,
Department of Physics and Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics,
University of Colorado, to pursue with Dr. Donghyun Cho, Department of Physics,
Korea University, for 24 months, a program of cooperative research involving
high-precision spectroscopic measurements on spin-polarized cesium atoms which
are subjected to various electromagnetic fields. The collaborators will use
apparatus which they developed to study phenomena produced when these cesium
atoms are subjected to very intense, tunable, narrowband, laser light at 540 nm.
In addition to producing high-precision data about the cesium atom itself, the
proposed research will use new ideas and techniques that will have general
application in the field of measurement science. The collaborators have a common
interest in high precision spectroscopy of atomic systems. Dr. Cho has
participated in construction of the apparatus to be used at the University of
Colorado and will develop, in Korea, additional equipment which will lead to
improved sensitivity in the proposed experiments. This project is relevant to
the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and
engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean
participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF). ***