* 9421190
* Odor Transduction in an Olfactory Epithelial Slice
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1999
* Vincent Dionne, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Avijit Chaudhuri
* 03/31/1999
* USD 200,163.00

Olfactory transduction is the physiological process of smell in which receptor
cells transform their reception of an odorant into a nerve signal to send to the
brain. The mechanisms involve modulation of ion-selective components of the
membrane conductance in the olfactory receptor cell, to trigger excitation of a
nerve impulse from the cell. Membrane properties often are studied in cells that
have been dissociated and isolated in a dish, where they are easily accessible
for physiological recording with micro- electrodes. This project uses a novel
"slice" preparation of sensory epithelium, so that micro-electrode studies will
allow characterization of the membrane properties of olfactory cells in a more
normal environment, and determination of how the membrane conductances are
modulated by odors. This preparation offers unique opportunities to study
spatial interactions within the sensory epithelium, and the role of non-neuronal
neighboring cells in modulating the neural response. Using patch-clamping
techniques of electrophysiology, the chemosensory properties of two distinct
morphological forms of olfactory cells are compared, along with the
physiological properties of three classes of non-neuronal cell types in the
epithelium. Results will have an impact on our understanding of how peripheral
chemosensory function depends on the integrated activity within the receptor
organ, as well as the properties of individual receptor cells. These results
will be important to sensory neuroscience in general, in analyzing the
capabilities for detecting, discriminating and encoding by a network system of
neurons in a sheet of epithelium.