* 9421048
* Past &amp; Present: Mapping the Cold War Terrain of Science &amp;   Technology &amp; the New World of Post-Cold War Science &amp;       Technology , Santa Fe, New Mexico, September
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* David Hounshell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 08/31/1997
* USD 54,997.00

Professor Hounshell is convening a workshop of natural scientists, policy
makers, historians, social and behavioral scientists to establish the dimensions
of the impact of the Cold War on science and technology. With an understanding
of how the Cold War shaped the development and institutions of science and
technology, the participants will then turn to formulation of realistic science
and technology policies for the post-Cold War era. This workshop will be held at
the Santa Fe Institute near to Las Alamos, the site where the first atomic bomb
was developed and one of the premier Cold War institutions. The workshop will be
held from September 19-20, 1994. The Cold War altered the course of science and
technology (S&amp;T) in both the United States and the Soviet Union. The pursuit
of knowledge became an instrument for ensuring national security. Government
policies for funding S&amp;T shifted dramatically as did the methods of
producing new knowledge. National security establishments burgeoned and brought
into being new institutions for the manipulation of knowledge. With the collapse
of the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc, the rationale for the existence of
many of the institutions, structures, patterns of thought, habits, culture and
mentalities collapsed as well. As we move to a post-Cold War S&amp;T policy, a
full understanding of the development of these patterns is essential in order
most effectively to replace them with policies to meet the new situation. This
workshop will provide the background for the construction of these new policies.