* 9421733
* Radiative Transfer Through Inhomogeneous Clouds:  Stochastic Modeling Using Cloud Structure Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Frank Evans, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/1998
* USD 179,255.00

Evans/Abstract The objective of this research is to increase the understanding
of how cloud structure affects radiative properties and to improve methods of
computing radiative transfer in inhomogeneous clouds for parameterizations an
remote sensing. This research will focus on using stochastic radiative transfer,
in which ensemble mean radiative properties are computed directly from
probability distributions that describe cloud inhomogeneity. Stochastic modeling
is appropriate because information about cloud structure is inherently
statistical. Data from millimeterwave radars and cloud probes on aircraft will
be used to characterize spatial structure in liquid water clouds, including
within cloud variability, in terms of the stochastic transfer probability
distributions. Radiative transfer modeling will be done to learn what aspects of
cloud inhomogeneity are most important for the mean radiative effects and how
these may be best expressed with a few simple parameters. The modeled radiances
and fluxes will be compared with aircraft and ground based radiometers. An
approximate method of using these inhomogeneous cloud parameters for rapidly
computing stochastic radiative transfer for use in cloud radiation
parameterizations will be sought. Deterministic radiative transfer modeling will
also be done to investigate relationships between the statistics of upwelling
radiances and the underlying inhomogeneity for use in remote sensing of clouds.