* 9421880
* American Life:  Biologists and the Shaping of a Nation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Philip Pauly, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Fixed Amount Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 06/30/1997
* USD 80,000.00

A. PROJECT SUMMARY American Life: Biologists and the Shaping of a Nation
Professor Pauly is examining the interrelations between the history of American
biology and the biohistory of North American with the aim of clarifying the
degree to which the goals of American biologists have been linked to national
goals. Professor Pauly hopes to delineate the biotic foundations of the
development of the life sciences in the U.S. to uncover how biologists'
activities affected the continent's organisms (plant, animal, and human), and to
show how these interactions influenced biologists' identities, work experiences,
and social relations. The project will explicate how biology and biologists were
pivotal in interpreting and advancing what was singular about America. More
specifically, Professor Pauly argues that the enduring aim of American
biologists was to coadapt diverse populations within a unique and seemingly
malleable geographic setting. He describes three movements: 1) A small group of
scientists built a bureaucratized network that would, in conjunction with the
federal government, identify and manage the plant, animal, and human populations
of much of North America. 2) Then, laboratory biologists turned to new subjects
of inquiry that seemed intellectually deeper and personally more fulfilling;
this academic work soon led to significant reflections regarding the links
between the organization of nature and the organization of democracy. 3) And
finally, biologists sought new paths through which they could effectively
influence American populations. They found different challenges in agriculture,
medicine, eugenics, and education. Professor Pauly's research highlights the
variety of ways in which biology was a contested and unclear science. Its
definition and boundaries were contested. Biologists seemingly conflated
thinking about their objects of study and themselves. The involvement of
biologists with such contentious ideas and practices as evolution, sex, and viv
isection led to difficult relations with members of the public. The relations
between universal knowledge claims and national facts and interests were
obscure. Professor Pauly argues that these difficulties were not liabilities;
rather they formed crucial resources for scientific and political creativity.