* 9421558
* Real-Time Multiplexed Signal Transduction in Microbial Environmental Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1994,03/31/1995
* Keith Wood, Promega Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 03/31/1995
* USD 99,923.00

Proposal #9421558 Wood Biologically relevant environmental monitoring can be
achieved using the genetic responses of microbes to environment conditions as
sensors, particularly the specific and generalized responses to toxicity. The
generalized toxicity response may be especially important when prior knowledge
of the type of toxin is unavailable. Real-time transduction of the genetic
responses is most commonly provided by coupling a gene encoding a bioluminescent
protein to the system. The information content of a single luminescent signal
generally is insufficient to compensate for the complexity of living systems,
however. The Promega Corporation proposes development of a system based on
multiplexing by wavelength to increase the information content of the signal
transduction process. Their research has shown that the color of light emitted
by beetle luciferases can be controlled by changing less than 1% of their
primary structures. This unique situation should allow incorporation of
functionally equivalent but distinguishable signal generators into a single
sensor, thus granting internal control of the sensor response. The product of
this work will be a platform design for a signal transduction system to provide
reliable and robust performance microbial sensors. The general and fundamental
nature of design will make it widely portable into different sensor
configuration.