* 9421477
* Management of Technological Innovation:  A Strategic        Management Approach to the Commercialization of Technology  in Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing
* ENG,IIP
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Alfred Cunningham, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 09/30/1997
* USD 200,000.00

Proposal #9421477 Montana State University A team of Montana State University
(MSU) engineering and business researches will join with managers and engineers
from Woodward-Clyde Consultants to strategically manage the application of off-
gas bioremediation technology in firms seeking effective air emissions treatment
as a means to achieving environmentally conscious manufacturing. This new
technology promises to be less expensive, less intensive, and cleaner than
existing emission control methods. The MSU team will assess the state-of-the-art
in off-gas bioremediation, facilitate Woodward-Clyde management in developing
applications of the innovative technology, and will develop a case history of
the Woodward-Clyde management strategy in applying innovative technology. The
management strategy identified for study in the project focuses on strategic
technology management to integrate the many participants impacted by or involved
in the innovation of off-gas bioremediation. Key participants include research
and productions, regulators, and industry. The findings of this case study will
be shared through workshops and other materials made available to industry,
consultants, researchers, and managers with an interest in environmentally
conscious manufacturing. The potential impact from this project is enormous with
the promise of commercialization of off-gas bioremediation and developing a
universal model for practicing strategic environmental technology management in
the U.S.