* 9421695
* Androgen-Dependent Plasticity of Motoneurons
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* William Collins, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 04/30/1998
* USD 184,878.00

9421695 William F. Collins The ability of the central nervous system cells to
reconfigure their structure and contacts as result of environmental or chemical
queues is paramount to learning, memory, behavior and brain function, in
general. Reconstruction occurring in the central nervous system is defined as
plasticity. Moreover, the impact of gonadal hormones, such as androgens, on
brain structure and function is only beginning to become evident. However, other
studies suggest that these powerful hormones are essential for the normal
function of neurons and their loss results in atrophy and cell loss. Dr. Collins
will use a well-characterized motoneuron model system to explore the anatomical
and electrophysiological consequences of gonadal androgen deficiency on central
nervous system motoneurons. Initially, Dr. Collins will assess the
electrophysiological properties of motoneurons and their anatomical structure
before and after androgen withdrawal, in some cases up to 6 months after the
last exposure to androgens. Specifically, androgen dependence among dendrites
will be examined. Finally, Dr. Collins will examine the efficacy of synaptic
inputs to the identified motoneurons by electrically driving presynaptic cells
and assess their post-synaptic influence in the presence or absence of
androgens. These studies will reveal novel mechanisms of steroid hormone action
on brain motoneurons and begin to elucidate mechanisms of androgen-dependent
neuron plasticity. While little is understood about the role of neural
plasticity in brain function, gonadal steroid hormones are effective in their
ability to reorganize the critical brain centers that may be essential for such
critical tasks as learning and memory in man and all species alike.