* 9421881
* The Effects of Human Activity and Climate Variation on Fire Regimes in Northern Patagonia, Argentina: An Analysis Across Multiple Geographic and Temporal Scales
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 02/28/1999
* USD 254,464.00

9421881 VEBLEN The influence of climate variation on vegetation are most evident
at coarse spatial and temporal scales. The effects of climate change on
vegetational dynamics have been less clear at time scales of decades to a few
centuries, however. Foremost among the issues that have hindered research at
this scale are problems in separating climate-related from human-induced changes
and methodological problems in spatial and temporal scaling. One line of
research that has offered great promise are analyses of the role of fire as a
factor influencing vegetation change at scales ranging from local to regional.
This project will continue collaborations by U.S. and Argentine scientists, who
have been studying the impacts of climate and human activities on fire regimes
in northern Patagonia over the last 700 to 1,000 years. Past research by these
investigators have focused on a single transect ranging from Andean rainforests
to Patagonian steppes. This research documented the influences of humans on fire
regimes over the last 250 years, and it analyzed the influences of seasonal and
annual climate variations on fire regimes. The research to be supported through
this award will expand on this base. Research methods that will be used include
the dendrochronological dating of past fires, climatic reconstructions through
analyses of tree rings, analyses of fire- regime variations over at least 700
years in relation to climatic variation, and evaluation of archeological and
historical data focusing on human influences on fire regimes. These analyses
will be conducted in three different study areas (at 38-, 41-, and 43-degrees
South latitude), which have different histories of human occupation but common
regional climatic variations. As a result, human impacts should be
distinguishable from broader- scale climatic influences on fire regimes. This
research will complement previous research on the dynamics of fire regimes by
incorporating the effects of climate variation across a broad range of temporal
scales and by broadening the geographic perspective to a regional scale. This
integration will be a significant contribution to the challenge of relating
research on local-scale processes to climatic and human influences on vegetation
at landscape and regional scales.