* 9421957
* NSF/ONR:  Proximity Effects, Tunneling and Spin-Injection in Yttrium-Barium-Copper-Oxide Films as a Function of         Crystallographic Orientation
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1995,01/31/2000
* Laura Greene, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/2000
* USD 210,000.00

9421957 Greene Non-Technical Abstract: This is an experimental research project
directed at measuring electronic and spin transport across interfaces to high-
temperature superconductors as a function of crystallographic orientation. High-
quality, superconducting films of yttrium-barium-copper-oxide are grown in-situ
in four different crystallographic orientations, and layered, in most cases in-
situ, with normal metals ( superconductors above their superconducting
transition temperature), insulators and ferromagnetic metals. Our primary goals
are to establish the existence and magnitude of a proximity effect in these
materials, perform proximity electron tunneling spectroscopy to extend our
knowledge of the intrinsic gap parameter properties and to study the spin
transport across the superconducting interface. The latter measurements will be
performed in collaboration with scientists at the Naval Research Laboratory,
Washington, D. C. %%% Technical Abstract: This is an experimental research
project directed at measuring electronic and spin transport across interfaces to
high-temperature superconductors. These experiments will be performed on four
different crystallographic orientations of the high-temperature superconductor
yttrium- barium-copper-oxide. High-quality, crystallographically oriented
superconducting films are grown and layered with a variety of materials,
including insulators, normal metals and magnetic materials. Our primary goals
are to understand the leakage of superconducting pairs into a juxtaposed normal
metal, determine details of the intrinsic superconducting state and to measure
spin transport across the superconducting interface. The spin injection
experiments will be done in collaboration with scientists at the Naval Research
Laboratory. ***