* 9421600
* I/UCRC in Pharmaceutical Processing
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Steven Nail, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1995
* USD 10,000.00

9421600 Nail This project funds a meeting to have industry/university
interaction to explore the potential to form an Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for Pharmaceutical Processing at Purdue University. The meeting
will try to identify the possible projects of most significance to industry. It
will also determine if there is sufficient interest and funding potential to
establish this Center. Research areas being proposed for this potential Center
include: 1) a continued focus on development of proteins, peptides, and other
biotechnology-based therapeutic and diagnostic agents; 2) development of more
potent therapeutic agents which are effective in ever smaller doses; 3) more
sophisticated pharmaceutical dosage forms such as novel vaccines, liposomal
formulations, and other complex disperse systems; 4) continued emphasis by
regulatory agencies worldwide on using the best available technology to improve
sterility assurance of injectable products, and 4) productivity improvement by
using higher speed equipment, particularly for solid oral dosage form. The
researcher are well qualified to hold an industry/university meeting to explore
the potential for an I/UCRC. The possible Center has been coordinated with Dr.
Fred Heineken of the Division of Bioengineering and Environmental Systems. The
Program Manager recommends Purdue University be awarded $10,000 for one year for
this meeting.