* 9421004
* Transfer of the LACM-AHF Polychaete Collection to the       Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Kirk Fitzhugh, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1998
* USD 248,918.00

9421004 Fitzhugh The Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History (LACM)
maintains one of the foremost polychaete annelid collections in the world. The
collection is the largest of its kind the western United States and second
largest in the country, with the most diverse representation of eastern Pacific
polychaete taxa in the world, and is well known for its cosmopolitan coverage.
Research based on the collection extends back to the last century and collection
use has clearly continued to increase through time. Donated to the LACM in 1988
from the University of Southern California's (USC) Allan Hancock Foundation
(AHF), the collection still resides in the AHF. Subsequent to this acquisition,
however, the LACM hired a collection manager and curator specifically for this
collection. Unfortunately, the collection has been subjected to extremely
cramped conditions, severely limiting adequate curation. Two very significant
events have occurred during the past two years in that the LACM completed
construction of polycaeete research and collection facilities, and an NSF-funded
compactor system has been installed in the latter area. The current proposal
requests funds for two years to (1) employ a curatiorial assistant and temporary
personnel to help move the collection from the AHF to the LACM, as well as
participate in the desperately needed upgrading of the collection, (2) purchase
such moving supplies as cardboard boxes, bubblewrap, and packing tape, (3)
purchase jars and closures, shell vials, carboys, alcohol, label paper, and
magnetic labels to effect collection upgrades directly related to specimen care,
(4) complete this upgrade program with the purchase of several types of shelf
padding to protect against specimen loss as a result of breakage of glass
containers, and (5) purchase a microscope slide cabinet and two platform ladders
of use in the collection room. The continued utilization and growth of this
collection is completely dependent upon its timely transfer to the LACM and the
immediate replacement and/or upgraded of curatorial supplies.