* 9421035
* US-Indo Collaborative Research: Design and Analysis of      Highly Available Distributed Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Satish Tripathi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 10/31/1998
* USD 15,300.00

9311483 Tripathi Description: This proposal will support linkage costs of a
collaboration between Satish K. Tripathi, Chair, Department of Computer Science,
University of Maryland and Pankaj Jalote, Dept. of Computer Science, Indian
Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur. This project addresses a number of design
and analysis issues relating to replicated systems. Its basic goal is to enable
the designer to analyze replicated systems for the purpose of predicting
performance and tuning them to obtain the highest availability. The most
important issues include: availability analysis, the effect of parameters such
as degree of replication and node/network reliability, parameters to maximize
system availability, and preferred protocols. Scope: Considering the growing
need for computer systems that offer high availability, this research is timely
and has broad application potential. The P.I.s have complementary expertise in
two areas critical for the research. Jalote is internationally known in fault-
tolerance and software engineering. Tripathi is an accomplished computer
scientist and well known for his work in performance evaluation. Computer
science is an area of exceptional strength in India and the IIT Kanpur one of
the top research institutions in this field. The collaboration should be
productive with many mutual benefits anticipated. ***