* 9421755
* Collaborative Research:  Scaling Theories of the 3-D        Geometry and flows of River Networks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* John Rundle, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2000
* USD 283,849.00

9421755 Gupta One of the classic problems in fluvial geomorphology and river
basin hydrology is prediction of flows from ungauged river basins. This is a
very difficult problem because not only does it ilvolve notions of dynamics via
the conservation equations, but also that of geometry via branching of river
networks, and of probability due to the presence of fluctuations in river flows
and river networks. Since these notions recur across a broad range of spatial
scales, the focus of our proposed research is on developing and empirically
testing scaling invariance ideas and theories. For the past several years, both
the PIs have been extensively involved in exploring a scaling framework to study
spatial rainfall, peak river flows viewed as channel forming discharges, and the
3-D structure of river networks. Several unexpected and significant developments
in this line of research within the last three years show that the scaling
invariance ideas provide a very rich framework to tackle this problem. In this
proposal our objectives are: (1) to develop a geometric-statistical scaling
theory of river networks, (2) to develop a statistical-dynamic scaling theory of
river runoff, which are viewed as channel-forming discharges, (3) to develop a
geometric-statistical-dynamic scaling theory to connect the 3-D geometry of
river networks and flows and (4) to carry out tests of the theories in
Objectives 1,2, and 3 via spatial data analysis and simulations. This proposed
research addresses how different notions of scaling, namely, geometric, dynamic,
and statistical, can be woven together into a single, coherent theoretical
framework to understand the physics of this problem and interpret space-time
hydrologic data. It has applications to a variety of hydrologic problems
spanning a broad range of space and time scales.