* 9421729
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Social Science, School     Segregation, and the Courts
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1995,08/31/1996
* Arthur Norberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 08/31/1996
* USD 5,000.00

9421729 Norberg This is an historical investigation of the research and advocacy
of the group of social scientists active in the NAACP litigation campaign to
desegregate public schools during the late 1940s and early 1950s. No study has
yet been made of these social scientists and their work. The proposal requests
funds for travel to examine unpublished manuscript sources of Kenneth B. Clark,
and the NAACP, deposited at the Library of Congress, and of Stuart Cook and
other psychologists active in the litigation, all of which are deposited at the
Archives of History of American Psychology in Akron, Ohio. %%% Thirty-one
prominent social scientists, primarily social psychologists, were involved with
the NAACP litigation campaign to desegregate public schools during the late
1940s and early 1950s. These social scientists served as expert witnesses
testifying to the psychological harm of school segregation. Based on their
research, they wrote and signed an appendix to the NAACP brief to the United
States Supreme Court. In BROWN V. BOARD OF EDUCATION the Court cited their works
as proof of the harm of school segregation to minority school children. This
study will investigate the following historical questions: How did these
scientists choose to study school desegregation as a scientific problem and what
were their methods and results? How did the social scientists define for
themselves roles as experts in their society? How did the scientists maintain
their persona as scientific experts in the highly adversarial campaign to
desegregate public schools? In answering these questions, the study will lead to
a better understanding of (1) how social scientists were able to use scientific
expertise to create what they viewed as a more just society, (2) the role of the
ongoing professionalization of psychology that set the context for their work,
and (3) how society influences science. ***