* 9421433
* MRPG:  Racial Identity:  Issues of Saliency, Self-Esteem    and Academic Performance in African American College        Students
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Robert Sellers, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9421433 Several hypotheses regarding the psychosocial consequences of racial
identity are derived from a multi-dimensional model of racial identity. The
proposed research focuses on generating stimulus materials and pilot data that
will permit the PI to test these hypotheses in two studies to be proposed in a
subsequent grant application. The goal of the first pilot project is to refine
stimulus materials (video-tapes of violent behavior and group composition) and
dependent measures of racial and gender identity salience for use in a future
study of contextual influences on racial and gender salience. A sample of
African American female college students will watch a video-tape of either a
black male (race salient), white female (gender salient), or white male
(neutral) being beaten by a white male and complete the dependent measures of
racial and gender identity salience. Feedback from the subjects will be used to
assess the effectiveness of the stimuli in making race or gender salient as well
as to standardize the level of violence experienced. Also, estimates of
reliability and inter-measure consistency will be produced. In a second pilot
project, survey instruments designed to measure racial identity, self-esteem,
and educational efficacy will be given to approximately 450 African American
college students from two universities. The reliability and underlying structure
of the measures will be assessed using exploratory and confirmatory factor
analytic techniques. These measures will be used in two future studies
investigating (1) the relationship between racial identity and self-esteem and
(2 ) role of racial identity in academic beliefs and performance of African
American college students. This research consists of two pilot studies which are
designed to improve the methodology of two future studies which will investigate
the racial identity of African American college students. This research is
important in it's potential for developing a sophisticated, multi-dimensional
mod el of racial identity which will contribute to our understanding of: a) the
situational factors that make racial identity salient; b) the relationship
between racial regard and self-esteem; and c) associations between racial
identity and academic performance.