* 9421911
* NSF/ONR:  In-Plane Aligned Buffer-Layer Interfaces for High Temperature Superconductors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* David Shaw, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 07/31/1998
* USD 90,000.00

9421911 Shaw This three-year study of high temperature oxide superconductor
(HTS) thin-film growth on polycrystalline and amorphous substrates will further
understanding of the biaxial alignment of a-b planes and the related nucleation
and growth mechanisms in two HTS thin films, Y-Ba-Cu-O and Tl-Ba-Ca-Cu-O (1223
phase), selected for this study. Two methods, ion-beam assisted deposition and
graphoepitaxial growth, will be used to fabricate integrated film-buffer-
substrate composite systems. The ultimate goal of this project is to develop and
optimize processing techniques for the fabrication of long HTS thin films with
high critical current densities on both metallic and glass substrates using ion-
beam assisted deposition. Initially, biaxially aligned buffer layers of yttrium-
stabilized zirconia (YSZ) will be deposited on Hastelloy. The orientation of the
YSZ film will then be studied as a function of ion-beam angle, ion/atom flux
ratio, ion-beam energy and chamber pressure. The effect of ion-beam assisted
deposition on alignment and etching will be investigated: and scanning and
transmission electron microscopy will be used to establish the relationship
between the deposition conditions and the film-growth mechanism. Graphoepitaxial
methods will also be employed to produce biaxially aligned HTS films on
Hastelloy. As critical length is a crucial parameter of biaxial alignment, the
relationship between critical length and interfacial shear strength, surface
film thickness, and fracture strength will also be addressed. Results will be
compared to theoretical prediction. Improvements in crystalline growth and
alignment resulting from this work are expected to significantly improve the
electric and magnetic properties of high temperature superconductor thin films.
Further, by gaining better insight into the physical processes and by optimizing
the deposition parameters, this work should foster the development of practical
applications. Discovery of high temperature superconductors years ago promised
major commercial applications in electrical machineries and electronic devices
due to enormous increase in the efficiency of transmission of electricity.
However, progress has been hampered by two features: (1) superconducting
temperatures are still well below room temperature and (2) processing of
practical devices remain relatively slow and its impact on properties are not
fully understood. This research offers the opportunity to bring the technology a
little closer to larger scale commercialization of superconductors. ***