* 9421332
* Detailed Tests of a Production System Theory of Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1995,01/31/2000
* John Anderson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 01/31/2000
* USD 391,436.00

The goal of this project is to provide a detailed test of the ACT-R theory. The
ACT-R theory is a production system theory of human cognition that concerns
itself with how cognitive problem solving skills (for example, algebra equation
solving) are organized and acquired. It is a computer simulation program which
is capable of modeling in detail the steps of problem solving. The experiments
in this project will test three new aspects that augment the ACT-R theory. These
are: (1) a detailed theory of how people scan visual information and how this
relates to higher-level processing; (2) a theory of how attentional limitations
affect success in retrieving information needed to solve problems from memory;
and (3) a theory of how new problem-solving skills are learned by analogy. The
ACT-R theory has played a major role in translating psychological research into
educational applications. For instance, computer-based tutors, which incorporate
ACT-R models, have been developed for teaching mathematics. While such
applications are already successful in improving educational achievement they
could be even more successful if they were based on a more detailed
interpretation of student behavior. The new theoretical developments that the
present experiments will test provide the requisite level of detail in the ACT-R
theory; the present research will determine the accuracy of these theoretical
extensions.