* 9421751
* Analyses of the La Chimba Faunas
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* John Athens, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1998
* USD 43,158.00

Stahl With National Science Foundation support Dr Peter Stahl will analyze a
large collection of archaeological fauna from the site of La Chimba which is
located in the Pichincha Province of Ecuador. The site, which was excavated in
the 1970s and 1980s is important because its stratified deposits are extremely
rich in well preserved faunal remains as well as other materials such as
ceramics and stone tools. Based on radiocarbon dates, it spans an almost 1,000
year interval and includes the period when domestic animals first appeared in
the region. Dr. Stahl will conduct an extensive faunal analysis and focus on
both the guinea pig and the camelids (which include a number of species). He
will categorize all identifiable pieces by species, body part and cultural
treatment. We will also xray a number of specimens to determine bone density
which determines the probability that a type of bone will be preserved. On this
basis he hopes to gain insight into the introduction of these important
domesticates into their northerly end of their prehistoric range and to
determine the effect they had on local economy and other aspects of culture. The
South American Andean region saw the rise of one of the great prehistoric
civilizations of the world. Anthropologists wish to understand the processes
which underlay the rise of civilization and, because of the wealth of
archaeological information available, have focussed on this region. They know
that the domestication of plants and animals is an important factor in this
process. It is unlikely that either camelids or guinea pig were domesticated
this far North but were rather they were probably introduced in already
domesticated form. Through his study of the La Chimba faunal remains Dr. Stahl
will be able to assess in a direct manner the social effect of these
introductions. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
data of interest to many archaeologists and will also increase our understanding
of ho w complex societies develop. Finally the density measurements will be
widely used by faunal analysts in a number of contexts.