* 9421889
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The MOS Transitor
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Michael Mahoney, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 01/31/1998
* USD 5,000.00

In the early 1970s the advent of large scale integration using the MOS (metal-
oxidesemiconductor) transistor made possible the entry of semiconductor
electronics into whole new fields--semiconductor memories for computers,
electronic watches, and inexpensive electronic calculators which led to the
microprocessor. But when the MOS transistor was first described in 1960 by Kahng
and Atalla of Bell Labs, it had attracted little attention, apparently because
it violated a number of tenets of the junction paradigm for transistors, of
which William Shockley's bipolar junction transistor was the outstanding
example. Mr. Bassett, under the direction of Professor Mahoney, is examining how
the MOS transistor came to occupy a central place in semiconductor electronics
by the early 1970s will concentrate on three themes. The first is the relation
between the MOS transistor and the dominant bipolar transistor. While the MOS
transistor was different enough from the bipolar transistor to make engineers
and scientists think in new ways about what transistors were and how they were
to be fabricated, at the same time the MOS transistor was close enough to the
bipolar transistor to be able to take advantage of the large knowledge and skill
base that had developed around it. Furthermore, the MOS transistor will be used
as a way to study the nature of technical knowledge and skills in post-World War
II America and how they were diffused. Finally this study will examine the
institutions involved in the development of the MOS transistor--large
corporations and their industrial research laboratories, startup companies,
universities, and the military--and show what role each of them played in
shaping the development of this new technology.