* 9421199
* Causes for Slow Development of Old-Growth Associated        Epiphytic Lichens in Douglas-Fir Forests in the Cascade     Range
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Bruce McCune, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 08/31/1999
* USD 140,760.00

9421199 McCune The dominant epiphytes in old-growth forests develop very slowly,
thus epiphyte communities differ greatly between old-growth forests and young
forests (<150 years old). This study evaluates three alternative, but not
mutually exclusive, explanations for the slow development of old-growth
associated epiphytes: (1) old-growth epiphytes demand the particular
microclimate created by the structure of old forests, (2) old-growth epiphytes
are dispersal limited; i.e., suitable habitats are underused by epiphytes
because of poor dispersal abilities, and (3) colonization is slow because of a
shortage of suitable substrates in young forests. These objectives will be met
by two experiments: a growth experiment based on transplanted individuals, and a
dispersal/establishment experiment based on artificially sowing propagules onto
different substrates in contrasting environments. This proposed work will not
only make a contribution to the basic science of epiphytes, it also has great
potential to influence forest management. Management options greatly expanded in
1993 because of the move away from clearcutting to "green-tree retention"
cutting. Forest managers urgently need information from ecologists on the
consequences of alternative densities and spatial arrangements of remnant trees.
The alternative outcomes will influence not just epiphytes, but all of the other
ecosystem components that depend on epiphytes, either for food, mineral
nutrition, nesting materials, or habitat.