* 9421460
* Social Power as a Regulator of Caregiving Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Daphne Bugental, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/1998
* USD 199,988.00

9421460 The proposed research, using concepts and theories drawn from social
psychology, tests hypotheses regarding factors that create risk for family
violence and other dysfunctional caregiving. The ways in which parents and
children interact and process social information are expected to be influenced
by interpersonal power perceptions. Parents who perceive children as having more
social power than self are predicted to be highly reactive to apparent
"challenge" from children--responding with negative affect and defensive
arousal. These responses, in turn, mediate (a) information-processing deficits
and biases, and (b) defensive interaction strategies, e.g., power assertion or
social derogation. Adult "power repair" efforts subsequently lead to elevated
arousal, avoidance responses, and performance deficits in children. Predictions
are tested within studies that include both naturalistic and experimental
designs. The first study focuses on information-processing patterns of high and
low power adults attempting to teach responsive versus unresponsive children.
The second study focuses on spontaneous interaction between high and low power
parents and their own children. The third study assesses the responses
(emotional, behavioral, and cognitive) of children to the teaching style of
adults with high or low perceived power. The proposed research tests predictions
regarding factors that create risk for family violence and other types of family
conflict. Parents who believe that they have low power or control in their
caregiving role are expected to be at risk for more conflictual interactions.
When confronted with "difficult" child behavior (e.g., slow response to parental
directives), "low power" parents react maladaptively (e.g., they show increasing
heart rate, they interpret the child's behavior as deliberately defiant, and
they attempt to regain control by verbal derogation of the child or physical
threats to the child). Children, in turn, react to this parenting style with
responses that lead to escalating conflict. For example, they avoid or "tune
out" the parent as a way of managing their own distress. Additionally, they show
signs of internal distress (e.g., higher heart rate and other signs of fear).
These child responses are likely to have a negative impact on their ability to
understand or comply with parental directions. Ultimately, then, a vicious
circle emerges in which parents become increasingly coercive and children become
increasingly unresponsive. These predictions are tested by observing spontaneous
interactions of parents and their own children, as well as by observing teaching
interactions between adults and unrelated children. Findings will have
implications for the design of programs designed to prevent and remediate family
violence.