* 9421431
* Gonadal Hormone Effect on Neural Organization in vitro
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Robert Lustig, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 12/31/1998
* USD 249,194.00

Proposal Number: 94-21431 Principal Investigator: Lustig, Robert H. The brain
consists of billions of neurons which must interconnect to form specific cell
groups and fiber tracts. The gonadal hormones, estrogen and androgens, have
profound effects on specific cell groups in the brain. It is believed that the
gonadal steroid environment during brain development dictates the organization
of the brain and results in sex differences in brain organization. Participating
in these sex differences may be the influence of the androgens and estrogens on
the development of neural contacts through the nerve cell axons and dendrites.
However, studies of these connections in the intact developing brain are
difficult at best. Therefore, Dr. Lustig has elegantly proposed to address the
question of gonadal steroid modulation of axon and dendrite development using in
vitro cell lines endogenously expressing receptors for the steroid hormones, or
genetically altered to express androgen or estrogen receptors. The proposed
studies will investigate the effects of androgens and estrogens on axon
outgrowth and arborization, on dendritic spine and gap junction formation in
vitro, and assess the molecular events involved in cellular morphology and
connectivity. These studies will provide new information on the manner by which
estrogen and androgen elicit the cell biological events necessary for
appropriate interneuronal connectivity during development. Such studies may
serve as a basis for beginning to define the etiology and ontogeny of brain
sexual dimorphisms, and the role of sex hormones in the development of cognition
and behavior.