* 9421176
* Gas Phase Ion Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1994,11/30/1998
* Michael Bowers, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 11/30/1998
* USD 744,289.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. Michael T. Bowers of the Chemistry Department of the University of
California at Santa Barbara will engage in a continuing series of investigations
in the field of gas phase ion chemistry, specifically ion chromatography of
transition metal ions, and will start new work on the determination of the shape
of bio-molecules in the gaseous phase. Earlier work on the ion chemistry of
first row species will now be extended to the second row, these involving iron,
cobalt, and nickel ions reacting with propane; the clustering of transition
metal ions to hydrogen; cluster assisted sigma-bond activation; and studies of
carbon based clusters and of transition metal composites. The chemistry of
transition metal ions is one of the forefront areas of contemporary physical
chemistry. Fundamental work in this field is of great importance owing to the
critical role played by transition metals in catalysis. Related to this are
questions of the mechanism of the formation and structure of transition metal
carbon composites owing to their possible technological usefuleness. The
function and the degree of activity of many biological molecules are believed to
be intimately related to their structure. The determination of the structure of
bio-molecules in the gas phase, i.e., free molecules unperturbed by effects of
an environment, is therefore of importance for providing bench mark data for the
development of quantum mechanical models that relate their structures and
activities. The research done in this project will contribute to a better
understanding of these issues and thereby assist in the application of this
knowledge to technological problems.