* 9421735
* Laboratory Studies of the Evolution of Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/1995,07/31/2000
* Kenneth Beard, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 07/31/2000
* USD 450,000.00

Ochs/Abstract Laboratory studies are being conducted on collisions between
cloud-size and precipitation-size drops in free fall to obtain the collection
efficiences critical to the formation and evolution of precipitation in warm-
base clouds. Unique laboratory equipment are being employed for generating drops
at terminal velocity and studying subsequent collisions. The research is focused
on two problems: obtaining critical collision efficiencies needed to calculate
the rates for 1) autoconversion and 2) self collection, processes that control
the initiation of rain and spread of the raindrop distribution. For the
autoconversion problem, an experiment is being used to measure the collection
efficiency for cloud-size drops of minimal charge for comparison with previous
laboratory data at moderate charge and with theoretical collision efficiencies
for uncharged spheres. The influence of turbulence on the collision efficiency
is also being studied. For the self- collection problem, several experiments are
being employed to measure the collection efficiency for small precipitation-size
drops as a function of temperature and ppessure. Other experiments are focused
on extending the physical scaling parameter to predict collection efficiencies
for a wide range of drop sizes. Numerical cloud models employed to evaluate the
influence of the laboratory results on the formation and evolution of
precipitation.