* 9422575
* Autoregressive Conditional Duration, Arch, Common Features  and Cointegration
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Robert Engle, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Catherine C. Eckel
* 06/30/1998
* USD 197,941.00

SBR-9422575 Robert Engle As computers increase in power and memory it becomes
feasible to collect and analyze data at higher and higher frequencies. Data sets
that record every transaction-- the highest frequency possible-- now exist for
many financial data sets as well as microeconomic transactions such as telephone
calls and credit card purchases that are recorded by computers. The analysis of
such data sets poses new and interesting econometric challenges, one of them
being the choice of the proper interval of time within which to aggregate the
data so as to generate a data set with observations spaced evenly apart. The
problem with fixed interval analysis is that it can leave the investigator with
many uninformative data points or disguise the periods of most interest. The PI
proposes an alternative to fixed interval analysis which he calls autoregressive
conditional duration. Instead of selection a fixed interval for analyzing the
data, it is proposed to let the interval between transactions be the random
variable to be analyzed. Thus the data set becomes a list of durations and
characteristics of each transaction. This procedure models the time intervals
directly without using auxiliary data or imposing assumptions on the causes of
the time flow. The ACD model is used to analyze the price, volume and duration
process for IBM stock transactions. This research can help institutions forecast
market liquidity and volatility on a high frequency basis. It can also have
implications for government interventions in financial markets either through
transactions or through circuit breakers. The research also includes a number of
other projects. One project examines non-linear business cycles. The nature of
the non-linearities is always difficult to extract because there are relatively
few cycles in recent history. However, if sectors and final goods categories
regions of the country all participate in the business cycle, then the non-
linearities ought to be common and easier to detect. An economic model is
developed to motive these ideas. Another project involves using ARCH models of
volatility to produce a term structure of volatility forecasts. These forecasts
can be used to construct a portfolio whose value is unaffected by portfolio
shocks. Such portfolios provide a new dimension in which to examine the accuracy
of volatility forecasts: Is the term structure of volatility adequate to reduce
the variance of such multiple maturity portfolios?