* 9422625
* LANDSCAPES:  Visions of Programming Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Steven Reiss, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1999
* USD 265,000.00

This project involves the development of practical programming tools in an
integrated and open framework. Tools that support modern programming must deal
with large systems, multiple programmers, multiple languages, a mixture of
existing and new code, and multiple processes and threads. The work combines a
variety of tools in an open, extensible, and powerful setting using control
integration and a simple form of data integration based on fragments. Fragments
are semantically significant portions of a program artifact: definitions or
scopes in a source file, sections of documentation file, rules in a
configuration description, etc. The approach to integration identifies such
fragments and keeps references to them in a simple and small central database.
This information is augmented with the data necessary to identify fragments
using database queries, essentially usedef chains and small amounts of tool-
specific information. In addition to fragment and control integration, the
environment provids common facilities for defining and managing the files and
contexts that make up a project, and a common editor for all software artifacts.
The project manager serves as a front end for managing version control,
configuration management, and multiple programmers. The common editor provides
high quality typography along with support for hypertext links and graphics. On
top of this environmental framework, this project investigates the development
and utility of a variety of programming tools. The research extends
visualization tools using a 3D visualization package developed under a previous
NSF grant. A single front end would allow the programmer to specify both what
information (from a variety of sources) should be visualized and how it should
be presented for each particular application. Experiments measure the
ffectiveness of visualizations for understanding both the static structure and
the dynamic behavior of complex systems. A third set of tools involves editing.
The project would extend an existing editor to allow programmers to view the
system as a single electronic document with dynamic and static links connecting
the various software artifacts. These links would be defined either by built-in
queries (e.g. go to the definition of a name), by user-defined queries, or by
static links.