* 9422633
* The Professional Norms of Researchers in Cellular and       Molecular Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1997
* Neil Wenger, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1997
* USD 164,090.00

As the credibility and professional integrity of scientific investigators have
come under question, academic institutions have developed policies and
guidelines regarding the ethical conduct of research. But the policies may not
be consistent with the norms of scientists or the exigencies of research
careers. The specific aim of this investigation is to characterize the
professional norms of researchers and compare them with those expressed by
institutional representatives. The investigators will develop a quantitative
scenario-based survey methodology to evaluate scientists' beliefs regarding
norms of professional ethics. They will administer the survey to a sample of NSF
awardees in molecular and cellular biology. The results will be compared to
those of a group of institutional representatives with expertise in research
ethics. The survey instrument will be designed with the help of three four-hour
focus groups, two consisting of active scientists and one of representatives.
The instrument will use scenarios in which several factors can be varied
systematically. Subjects will be asked to give ratings of the scenarios, from
fully ethical to highly unethical, and to indicate what actions, among a list of
possibilities, should be taken in response. Results will be published in
articles and presented at professional meetings. The study will lead to
increased understanding of the ethical beliefs held by persons in research
environments at colleges and universities. It may assist in the development of
policies and guidelines by these institutions and federal agencies and, if
effective, provide a tool for further study of norms in other fields of science.