* 9422730
* The Sustainable Management of Civil Infrastructure: A       Methodology and Testbed to Bridge Information Technology    and Application
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Stephen C-Y. Lu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 09/30/1995
* USD 422,801.00

9422730 Lu This award is made in support of the NSF initiative ENG-CISE-IITA94,
National Challenges. It is a joint initiative between the Engineering
Directorate and the Computer Information and Engineering Directorate. Civil
infrastructure systems are large, complex, heterogeneous, distributed, dynamic
systems that affect, and are affected by, technological, environmental, social,
political, and economic factors. Examples include communication systems, roads,
bridges, and the distribution of water, gas and electricity. The life cycle of
such systems includes design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair,
rehabilitation, and disposal. Throughout these phases, coordination among
distributed, diverse groups of experts is required to yield efficient, cost-
effective, and sustainable practices and outcomes. To meet these challenges,
successful information technology applications must address issues that are both
technical (the design and implementation of information technology) and social
(involving consideration of human problem solving, work practices,
communication, and organizational structures). The solution addressed here is
the Team Engineering Analysis and Modeling methodology for design and
application of information technology in organizations, and the integration and
extension of previous work in information infrastructure; including the System
Workbench for Integrating and Facilitating Teams (SWIFT), Agent Collaboration
Environment (ACE), and engineering management systems developed by the U. S.
Army Construction Engineering Research Laboratory (CERL). This army laboratory
has developed ACE and a suite of software applications related to the design and
management of civil infrastructure in a military context. These existing
software systems provide a significant base for the development of the propoqed
information infrastructure technology. The team engineering methodology focuses
on the modeling of activity and communication within human teams, in the context
of avail able media, technology, and organizational structures; and the evolving
interrelationships between technological possibilities and communicative and
work practices. This project applies this methodology to the specific case of
the sustainable management of the gas pipeline and road systems of Fort Gordon,
Georgia, which is designated by the Army as a "Model Installation" for the 21st
century and is thus committed to the use of advanced information technology.
This "controlled" environment provides an outstanding opportunity to conduct
experiments in the application of information technology to the problems of the
sustainable management of civil infrastructure. The objective of this project is
to support the sustainable management of civil infrastructure via (1) a
methodology for team engineering -- both the study of work practices, problem
solving, coordination, and use of technology in an organization, and the
deployment and management of new technological infrastructure; (2) the
integration and further development of advanced information technology to
support team decision making and information sharing; and (3) the application
and demonstration of this deployment methodology and information technology to
the civil infrastructure system at Fort Gordon, Georgia. This project
contributes to (1) fundamental knowledge of human coordination and interaction
with technology in complex systems, (2) a paradigm of information infrastructure
design and deployment applicable to other large-scale complex systems, and (3)
the practical application of this methodology and technology to an issue of
National importance, namely the sustainable management of civil infrastructure.