* 9422245
* Seismic Rehabilitation of Non-ductile Concrete Columns      Using Advanced Composite Jacketing
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1999
* James Ricles, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/28/1999
* USD 163,151.00

9422245 Ricles In many regions of the United States there exists several
reinforced concrete frame structures constructed in the 1950's and 1096's which
were designed primarily for gravity load effects. The construction details used
in these structures can cause non-ductile structural failure under seismic
loading. As a result, the performance of these structures is considered suspect
for moderate to severe seismic loadings. This study focuses on seismic retrofit
of the columns of these frames, which are the major reason for their non-ductile
behavior. These column have insufficient lap splices in the flexural hinge zone
as well as a lack of transverse steel reinforcement along the length of the
member, making them prone to lap-splice, shear, and axial-flexural compression
failures. Advanced fiber-epoxy composite jackets will be used to enhance the
strength and ductility of these columns: (l) in the laps- splice zone to create
a confining pressure on the splice, (2) along the member to enhance the shear
capacity through a truss mechanism, and (3) in plastic hinge zones to provide
ductility by confining concrete in compression and increasing shear capacity.
Experimental testing will be conducted to assess adtanced fiber- epoxy composite
jacket retrofit designs considering the parameters of material type, fiber
orientation, jacket stiffness, active vs. passive jacket pressure systems, and
cyclic uniaxial lateral loading combined with axial load. The performance of the
jacket retrofit will be compared with that of corresponding as-built non-ductile
columns under cyclic loading. The research program will develop practical
methods for successfully retrofitting columns using the fiber-epoxy wrap
composite material, and will develop guidelines for retrofitting non-ductile
columns that can be applied by practicing engineers. ***