* 9422292
* Dense Water Transport Off Arctic Continental Shelves:       Numerical Studies of Shelf-Basin Interaction
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1999
* David Chapman, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 03/31/1999
* USD 434,506.00

9508333 Chapin A Doctoral Dissertation Award to the University of California
Berkeley will support a project to determine the mechanisms by which different
plant growth forms integrate to control water and energy balance at the
ecosystem level in Arctic tundra on the Alaskan North Slope. This study is
important because it will provide an explanation of how plant growth form
properties can be scaled up to ecosystem level water and energy fluxes. The
study will take place in conjunction with a larger Global Climate Change study
that is examining the regional flux of greenhouse gases from the tundra. This
project provides a unique opportunity to determine the role of plant growth
habit on energy balances in the climatically sensitive Arctic tundra within the
context of the regional output/uptake of greenhouse gases. The study amy provide
new information on ecosystem response to climatically-induced changes of
greenhouse gases. *** 9422292 Gawarkiewicz Investigators at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution will undertake research to increase the complexity of
computer model simulations of the formation of dense high-salinity water that
leaves the Arctic continental shelf and flows to the deep Arctic Ocean. The
flows are capable of carring nutrients and sediments from the continental shelf
to the deeper ocean and may play a major role in the transfer of heat between
the atmosphere and deep ocean. Fluctations in the formation of the cross-shelf
flow could affect the transfer of heat from warm deep water in the Arctic Ocean
that is produced in the Atlantic Ocean. Heat from that warm deep flow controls
the formation of sea ice in the climatically sensitive Arctic Ocean. The
improved computer models will for the first time take into account the effects
of coastal currents, topographic complexities, and water-mass stratification of
the continental slopes so that the models may begin to approach real world
conditions. The improved models are necessary to understand how the Arctic
ocean-atmosphere-ice system operates to affect, and be affected by, global
climates. *** ??