* 9422768
* Institutional Responses to Market Imperfections in the      Supply of Credible Medical Effort and Health Insurance in   Africa
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1997
* David Leonard, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/28/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9422768 Leonard Without an adequate framework the market for medical services in
Africa is inhibited, privatization can not fully develop, and patients and
clinicians are unable to consummate relations that would benefit them both. The
African state has a determining influence on these institutional structures.
This research investigation explores how the existing institutions surrounding
African medical practice do and could work and the political dynamics of their
change. A model is developed of the demand for "credible medical effort" which
is based on the value of future working potential. Incentive aligning contracts
between the patient and the clinician are shown to achieve a superior solution
to 'classical' markets in this unobservable good. The introduction of an
institution which can collect 'hostages' of value to the clinician in a
renegotiation-proof manner also is shown to be able to achieve a yet superior
solution. Theoretical investigation on the necessary characteristics of such
institutions identifies a range of possible alternatives. The project's model of
the economic costs of illness allows examination of the role of emergency and
long run credit as well as insurance in the purchase of health care. The role of
the extended family in the willingness to pay for health care is tested.
Traditionally viewed as an insurance scheme, it is hypothesized that the
extended family may function as a source of emergency credit. This potential
distinction has direct policy implications. Given these two economic tests,
research is proposed at three sites. The structure and success of clinics in
Tanzania, which are operated on a franchise basis, will be investigated. It is
hypothesized, first, that the franchising observed is indeed an economic
institution designed to provide credible medical effort, and, secondly, that
patients exhibit patterns of use which are consistent with their awareness of an
willingness to pay for its provision. Hou sehold surveys in Cameroon and
Ethiopia will be administered to investigate both the awareness and willingness
to pay for credible medical effort and the role of the extended family in the
ability to pay for health care. At all three sites the politics of institutional
change and the issue of what institutional structures are consistent with the
managerial capabilities of the African state will be explored. ***