* 9422071
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Parallel Programming on     Clusters of Multiprocessor Workstations
* CSE,EIA
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Michael Quinn, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 04/30/1996
* USD 59,352.00

9422071 Crowl This award is to purchase ATM networked multiprocessor workstation
equipment which will be dedicated to support research in computer and
information science and engineering. The equipment will be used for several
research projects, including in particular: the abstraction techniques for
parallel programming; the task-parallel programming environment; and the data-
parallel programming environment. In the first project, the proposed equipment
will enable the researchers to design, implement and evaluate abstractions that
can simultaneously exploit fast shared-memory communication and tolerate slow
message-based communication. Furthermore, the proposed equipment will also
enable researchers to do controlled experiments to determine application
tolerance to communication latencies. In the second project, the proposed
equipment will enable researchers to investigate and develop a parallel
programming environment for shared-memory multiprocessors clustered over a high
speed ATM network. They will also develop schemes for partitioning and mapping
of tasks and data for scheduling as well as load balancing. In addition, they
will also be able to study the performance of scientific application programs.
In the third project, the researchers will be able to synthesize a new C*
compiler that generates code for a high-speed network of multiprocessor
workstations. They will evaluate language extensions and, in particular, will
incorporate explicit data decomposition directives, more general control flow ,
and parallel I/O into the language.