* 9422010
* Upgrading In-Plane Strength of Existing URM Walls by Fiber  Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1997
* Subhash Goel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/28/1997
* USD 79,856.00

9422010 Goel Recent earthquakes have demonstrated the life safety hazard posed
by unreinforced masonry (URM) wall structures. It is proposed to strengthen the
URM walls by fiber composites. The flexibility, light weight and high tensile
strength of composites makes them an ideal material for strengthening masonry
structures. A recent study has demonstrated that significant increases in
strength and ductility could be achieved for static loading. The primary
objective of this research project will be to study the in-plane cyclic behavior
of unreinforced masonry (URM) walls strengthened with fiber composites and to
develop analysis and design procedures or seismic strengthening of existing URM
structures. Six wall specimens,each approximately 8 ft wide and 10 ft tall, will
be tested. Two different height to thickness ratios (h/t = 14 and 28)
constructed of one or two wythes of bricks will be examined. Composite fabrics
epoxied to the wall will either fully cover both faces of the wall, or will be
applied as vertical strips spaced apart and staggered on the opposite faces of
the wall. Test results will be used to develop design guidelines for
retrofitting of URM structures. The proposed research will be closely
coordinated with a parallel research investigating the out of plane cyclic
behavior of fiber reinforced URM wall at the University of Arizona. ***