* 9422598
* Investigations of the Cage Effect and Aqueous Organometallic Radical Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* David Tyler, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 03/31/1999
* USD 370,500.00

Dr. David R. Tyler, Chemistry Department, University of Oregon, is supported by
the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division for studies on the reactivity of organometallic free
radicals. As one portion of the investigation the cage effect, i.e. the effect
responsible for the greater reactivity of a radical pair in solution than in the
gas phase, will be probed. A variety of `cage efficiency factors`, a number that
expresses the efficiency of radical cage pair combinations, will be accumulated
for a variety of radical pairs which differ in mass, size, and shape. These data
will provide predictive understanding of the cage effect. The second part of the
project involves an investigation of the reactivity of 17- and 19-electron
organometallic species in aqueous solution. New methods for generating water
soluble organometallic radicals will be developed and the fundamental reactivity
and catalytic properties of the radicals will be systematized. Each electron in
a chemical compounds is usually paired with another. However, there are some
compounds which contain an unpaired electron. These are called radicals, they
often are quite chemically reactive, and there is a growing realization that
they are involved in many chemical processes. The object of this project is to
uncover the principles which control the chemical behavior of metal containing
radicals and to develop radicals which can dissolve in water. Since water is an
environmentally friendly solvent, the ability to generate radicals in aqueous
solutions will permit reactions which normally must be carried out in organic
solvents to be performed in a less polluting medium.