* 9422170
* Cloud Condensation Nuclei in the Small Cumulus              Microphysical Study
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/1995,06/30/2000
* James Hudson, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 06/30/2000
* USD 286,311.00

Hudson/Abstract Two research aircraft will be coordinated with the CP-2 dual
wavelength radar, which will direct the aircraft to clouds with developing
coalescence and will provide a time history of cloud outline and liquid water
content. Detailed cloud droplet and drop spectra measurements from the two
aircraft will trace the development of coalescence. The two DRI instantaneous
CCN (cloud condensation nuclei) spectrometers with calibration equipment will be
mounted on the NCAR C-130. At times these two instruments will redundantly
monitor the ambient aerosol but for most of the time one spectrometer will
monitor the counterflow virtual impactor (CVI) in order to determine the
spectrum of nuclei within cloud droplets. This will help ascertain the effect of
entrainment on the cloud droplet spectrum and will help differentiate
homogeneous, inhomogeneous, and entity mixing processes. Comparisons of the CCN
spectra and the spectra of updraft velocities will determine the influence of
the aerosol on droplet spectra. This basic cloud forming experiment with
comparisons of model predictions of droplet spectra with observations of droplet
spectra will yield a better definition of CCN--the important critical
supersaturations (Sc). Detailed comparisons of drop (>50 Mm) and droplet (<50
Mm) spectra will determine the influence of each on the other. The fact that
these measurements can be made in time sequence before and after coalescence
(before and after the existence of drops) allows cause and effect to be
separated with respect to droplet and drop spectra. After coalescence has taken
effect the CCN spectra will be affected. SCMS will yield the opportunity to
follow in time sequence so that the aerosol can be traced before and after
coalescence scavenging has occurred.