* 9422755
* The Market for Congressional Votes
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1997
* Thomas Stratmann, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/1997
* USD 43,071.00

9422755 Stratmann This project introduces a new approach in studying whether
campaign contributions are used to influence legislative decisions. If Political
Action Committees (PACs) contribute to legislators in exchange for a vote
favoring their interest, legislators, who are expected to vote against
constituency interests, have incentives to both accept contributions and to
cheat on the vote-for-money agreement. Contracts between PACs and legislators
are not legally enforceable - no third party penalizes reneging or cheating. One
expects that in the absence of a third party enforcer of vote-for-money
contracts, market arrangements are sought, providing a cheap method to guarantee
contract performance. This project is an empirical examination of those market
arrangements. This project focusses on time patterns of contributions and
whether these patterns are consistent with the hypothesis of a quid pro quo
between legislators and PACs: it is shown that legislators who have incentives
to cheat on an agreement with a PAC, specifying a vote-for-money exchange, are
expected to receive contributions after performance of the agreed to task. The
project is a study of the timing of contributions by PACs representing a number
of industries. Detailed, previously unemployed data, specifying the date on
which contributions were received by legislators, will be used in this project.
Patterns of contributions over the entire election cycle will be examined and
related to Congressional votes, primaries, and general elections. The
distribution of contributions in months prior and after Congressional votes will
be analyzed. Legislators who have incentives to renege on a vote-for-money
contract are expected to receive contributions after the vote- if they voted in
a PAC's interest. Differences in contribution patterns for votes that could be
well anticipated and votes that could not be as well anticipated, will be
examined. Further, leads and lags of election yea r contributions will be
studied; for example, whether contributions in 1986 (an election year) reflected
votes in 1985 or influenced votes in 1987.