* 9422241
* Implicit Attitudes, Implicit Stereotypes, and Predjudice
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Mahzarin Banaji, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/1998
* USD 106,313.00

9422241 This grant builds on the PIs' previous finding of implicit gender
stereotyping, whereby an apparantly unconscious process of incorrectly assigning
fame to familiarized male names generalizes only weakly to familiarized female
names. The major goal of the renewal period is to develop efficient individual-
difference measures of implicit attitudes and stereotypes. This effort will
build on findings from the initial project period that, together with recent
findings from other laboratories, suggest that judgment- latency methods are
most likely to prove successful for this purpose. The statistical technique of
confirmatory factor analysis will be used to examine sensitivity, reliability,
and validity of the newly developed measures. Efficient theory-based measures of
implicit traits should be of great value not only to future research on this
project, but also to many other researchers and, ultimately, in applied
settings. The research is designed to contribute to the goals of NSF's Human
Capital Initiative, specifically in the social context of disadvantage.
Consistent with these goals, a program of research examines basic processes
involved in categorizing people into groups and in the stereotyping associated
with those social categories. By elucidating the role of implicit stereotyping
in sustaining discrimination and by developing and validating measures of
implicit stereotyping and prejudice, the proposed research will contribute basic
tools that will be useful in applied research aimed at overcoming discrimination
and disadvantage.