* 9422942
* Models of Socio-Economic Change:  Social Learning and Social Integration
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Abhijit Banerjee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2000
* USD 245,037.00

SBR-9422942 Abhijit Banerjee During the last fifty years, there have been many
empirical studies about the specific process by which ideas, innovations, fads
or new behaviors spread through a society. By contrast, the theoretical
literature on social diffusion is much smaller and more recent and follows two
approaches: the IO approach that emphasizes network externalities, and the
approach that emphasizes social learning: that is, the phenomenon of economic
agents learning from each other's actions. The research to date has shown that
change can be both inefficient and abrupt and that the outcome can be dependent
on the choices made by a small number of poorly informed early decision-makers.
The latter property is sometimes called "herding" behavior. This has made social
learning models very attractive for explaining the volatility of collective
behavior. Given this interest, it is important to understand the underpinnings
of the herding results. The current research does this by examining a model of
social learning which is a natural alternative to the herd behavior model. The
key assumption dropped in the new research is that everyone knows all the
choices made in the past. If, instead, every agent gets to sample only a small
number of previous decisions, then cascading to an inefficient outcome may no
longer occur. The research goes on to examine the effect of forgetting and
reporting and perception biases on the social diffusion process. This helps to
get a clearer idea of the environments in which herding occurs and those in
which it does not. The second project looks at the relationship between a
traditional rural sector and an industrial urban sector. The previous literature
assumed that the rural peasants were not economically rational and that urban
wages were not flexible downward. Because of this, the literature fell into
disrepute. The purpose of the research here is to revive the distinction between
urban and rural sectors without assuming irrationality of persi stent
disequilibrium. This is accomplished by finding a compensating differential that
accounts for the difference in wages in the two sectors: that differential is a
lower cost of borrowing in the rural sector due to better monitoring. The model
is capable of answering many questions about the pattern or income distribution
and the evolution of the rural-urban wage differential.