* 9422223
* Design, Characterization, and Evaluation of Elastomeric     Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1995,12/31/2000
* James Mark, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2000
* USD 627,500.00

9422223 Mark End linking of functionally-terminated polymer chains will be used
to obtain elastomers of known and controlled structures. Some will contain
dangling-chain irregularities, and others unimodal and multimodal distributions
of network chain-lengths. Included will be trimodal networks and unusually broad
pseudo-unimodal networks obtained by combining separately-prepared batches of
polysiloxanes of widely varying molecular weights. Additional elastomers will be
produced under conditions giviing structures that are unusual in other respects,
for example by cross linking in solution or in a state of strain. Experiments
will be performed for identifying strain-induced crystallization, in elongation,
biaxial extension, shear, and torsion. Simulations will also be carried out to
characterize the crystallization occurring in some new polysiloxane chains of
unusually high stereoregularity. Elastomeric gels will also be studied,
including some involved in processing techniques giving liquid-crystalline
polymers of enhanced orientation. Gelation kinetics will be studied, as will
diffusion coefficients of solvents into and out of swollen networks. Novel
reinforcing fillers will be prepared by the hydrolysis, photolysis, or
thermolysis of organometallic materials such as silicates, titanates,
zirconates, aluminates, and simple metal salts such as ferric chloride. Of
particular importance will be identifying the particle size that maximizes
reinforcement, and characterizing the effects of particle shape. The resulting
filler-reinforced elastomers will be characterized primarily by mechanical
property measurements, electron microsocpy, and by X-ray and neutron scattering.
Simulations will also be carried to elucidate reinforcing mechanisms in filler-
reinforced elastomers in general. Finally, experiments will be carried out to
exploit the ability of elastomeric domains to improve the impact resistance of
polymer-ceramic hybrid composites in which the cer amic is the continuous phase.
%%% The primary significance of these projects is the achievement of a better
molecular understanding of rubberlike elasticity and the ways in which fillers
reinforce elastomers. The results should provide importance guidance for
producing elastomeric materials and elastomeric- modified ceramics having
unusaully attractive mechanical properties.