* 9422153
* Conference on The Role of Prosody in Sentence Parsing,      Tucson, Arizona-March 1995
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1995,08/31/1995
* Kenneth Forster, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 08/31/1995
* USD 8,000.00

9422153 This grant will support a special session on "The Role of Prosody in
Sentence Parsing" at the Eighth Annual CUNY Conference on Sentence Processing,
to be held at the University of Arizona in March, 1995. Up until recently, by
far the majority of sentence-processing research has used visual presentation of
stimuli, in part because this makes it possible to timelock the input to the
subject's response. But more recently, as computers and speech editing software
have increased in capacity and reduced in price, researchers have begun to
examine the role of prosody during the processing of auditorily-presented
sentences. This new wave of research circumvents a common worry in visually-
presented stimuli: orthographic representations of language do not adequately
represent many of the non-segmental properties of speech and, obviously, speech
is the more natural modality for human language. Intuitively, prosodic cues--
changes in the pitch, amplitude and duration of syllables and changes in pause
length--should be useful to listeners. Whether they actually are is an empirical
question which a number of researchers are currently investigating. The goal of
this special session of the CUNY Sentence Processing Conference is to bring
together researchers who are studying the on-line effects of prosody on sentence
parsing to present and synthesize recent results, and to raise points of
controversy. We intend to publish these papers as part of either a special issue
of the Journal of Psycholinguistic Research or a book.