* 9422288
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Specialized Equipment for   Vision and Image Processing
* CSE,EIA
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1997
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/1997
* USD 39,203.00

9422288 Lobo This award is to purchase a real-time vision system to assist
research in three projects: 1) Classify Human Age from Faces; 2) Visual Gesture
Recognition; and 3) Multi-frame Order Statistics in Image Processing. In the
first project, the research addresses the limited task of age classification of
a facial image into a baby, young adult, and senior adult. It addresses the
difficult issues of age classification of faces that are engaged in activity,
i.e., not simply mugshots. The second project investigates performing gesture
recognition based on motion information. The current library of gestures
contains seven gestures: Left, Right, Up, Down, Rotate, Grab, and Stop. It is
proposed to extend the method to 3-D gesture recognition. A 3-D hand model using
Generalized Cylinders, will be employed and motion parameters will be estimated
to compute 3-D hand trajectories. Gesture recognition becomes more realistic
with a 3-D, rather than a 2-D, approach. The third project deals with the real-
time performance of multi-frame order statistics involving median filtering. It
is proposed to extend median and order statistic based filtering to 3-D by using
spatio-temporal filtering (multiple successive images). It is also proposed to
extend methods for suppression of narrow-band (periodic) interference to 2-D
(for images).