* 9422542
* Languages and Verbal Arts of Ethnic Groups in Laos and      Vietnam Speaking Northern Mon-Khmer Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Frank Proschan, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 03/31/1999
* USD 246,780.00

9422542 The remote mountainous areas of Northern Laos and Northwestern Vietnam
are home to a number of little-known ethnolinguistic communities speaking
languages of the Northern Mon-Khmer family. Internationally isolated for
decades, the area remains until now a virtual terra incognita to western
scholars of linguistics, ethnography, folklore, and history. This project- to be
carried out by an interdisciplinary, international team of researchers, working
closely with colleagues from Lao and Vietnamese research institutions- will take
advantage of new opportunities for collaborative field investigations in the two
countries. The focus of study will be several ethnolinguistic communities whose
members speak languages within the Khmuic and Palaungic branches of the Mon-
Khmer family (i.e., the Northern Division of Mon-Khmer). The research, primarily
descriptive and empirical in approach, will include eliciting lengthy word lists
suitable for comparative study, as well as gathering other linguistic data;
recording linguistic texts including songs, folktales, myths, ritual languages,
play languages, and other traditional verbal arts; and interviewing community
members about the traditions and history of each ethnicity. The research
promises to make important contributions to understanding the linguistic and
ethnographic history and relations not only of the particular ethnic groups
studied, but of the region as a whole. The languages to be studied will also
provide rich data for consideration of problems of interest to general
linguistics such as the relations of register and tone, tonogenetic mechanisms
and processes, person-referring forms (pronouns, kinship terms, and so on) and
group-referring forms (ethnonyms and glossonyms), play languages and speech
surrogates, and reduplication and parallelism.