* 9422161
* Investigation of the Effects of the Nortridge Earthquake of 17 January 1994 on Muncipial Solid Waste Landfills
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Edward Kavazanjian, GeoSyntec Consultants
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 08/31/1995
* USD 46,788.00

9422161 Kavazanjian Federal regulations required that municipal solid waste
landfills located in seismic impact zones be designed to resist earthquake
hazards. The seismic response of waste repositories is of concern because
dynamic loads may produce relative movements within the waste, liner and cover
systems, foundation and their interfaces. These movements could damage the liner
systems, with a consequent loss of sealing, and/or disrupt the function of the
leachate and gas collection systems. There is a relative lack of field data
regarding landfill performance during earthquake shaking, particularly with
respect to seismic performance of waste fills constructed with composite liner
systems containing geosynthetics. The 1994 Northridge Earthquake provides
important observational data on the response of landfills to strong levels of
earthquake shaking. Landfills which experienced strong levels of shaking (peak
bedrock accelerations of 0.2 g to over 0.5g), including two with geosynthetic
liner systems, were inspected by the research team immediately after the event.
None of these landfills showed any signs of major instability, but several
experienced damage due to cracking. Because of the difficulties associated with
laboratory evaluation of the dynamic properties of waster materials, these field
observations present an invaluable opportunity to back-calculate dynamic
strength and deformation properties. One of the landfills (OII) is well
instrumented with survey monuments, inclinometers and a pair of strong motion
recording stations. The objectives of the project are to: 1. Gather
observational data documenting the seismic performance of solid waste landfills
strongly shaken by the 1994 Northridge earthquake. 2. Organize existing landfill
characterization data, including characterization of the waste fill properties
(composition, age, unit weight, moisture content, strength, and shear wave
velocity) and landfill geometry. 3. Perform preliminary one-dimensional (1-D)
equivalent linear and nonlinear dynamic response analyses of five important
landfill case records and 2-D equivalent linear dynamic response analyses of the
OII landfill. Perform pseudo-static limit equilibrium and Newmark-type seismic
deformation analyses to back-calculate minimum dynamic strength values and to
calibrate prevalent seismic design procedures. ***