* 9422505
* Institutional Support for Innovations in Econometric and    Statistical Computation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Daniel McFadden, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Catherine C. Eckel
* 06/30/1998
* USD 214,351.00

SBR-9422505 Paul Ruud and Daniel McFadden The use of advanced statistical and
econometric techniques by economists doing empirical research has always been
constrained by the computational resources available to them. For example, until
the invention of the PC about twelve years ago, most economists were limited by
the limited availability and high cost of mainframe computers to using ordinary
least squares. In recent years the computational power available to most
economists has grown so rapidly that the econometric techniques that are
computationally feasible have advanced well beyond the ones used in day to day
research by most practicing economists and taught to most cmllege students.
There is a growing need to bring the many newly feasible econometric methods to
the attention of applied researchers. Such dissemination is the purpose of this
set of conferences on innovations in statistical and econometric computation.
These conferences will provide a focal point for the dissemination of research,
for the closer interaction of researchers in statistics and econometrics, for
the demonstration of state-of-the-art software, and for instruction of graduate
students. These conferences have three objectives. The first objective is to
bring together statisticians and econometricians. Statisticians can learn of the
methodological and computational problems facing econometricians and
econometricians can learn of new methods developed by statisticians. The second
objective it to foster the development of new computational algorithms. This is
done through "hands-on" demonstrations of new computational methods by those who
have invented them. The third objective is to introduce graduate students and
junior faculty to the statistical and econometric community. The relatively
small size of the conferences creates an intimate atmosphere conducive to lively
interaction.