* 9422660
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Constructions of Citizenship and Peoplehood in Guam's Quest for Commonwealth
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1995,10/31/1996
* Kim Lane Scheppele, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 10/31/1996
* USD 8,500.00

9422660 Schepple The objective of this project is to investigate important
questions about the rights and basic meaning of citizenship through a case study
of the people of Guam. This study views citizenship as a set of practices
(juridical, political, economic, and cultural) that embody a wide range of
modernizing processes in law, politics and culture. It views peoplehood, or
indigenous identity, as a set of practices that resist, appropriate, and
transform citixenship practices. The research draws together new theoretical and
methodological approaches to narrative studies in law and in social science
history with empirical studies in citizenship. This study involved the
solicitation and collection of narratives through individual and focus group
interviews and through document study in Guam and selected mainland sites. These
narratives will be examined for what they reveal about how the people of Guam
understand their political status and how they represent their identities in
making rights claims. The study will focus on episodes of rights claim seeking
that will enable a critical analysis of the applicability of T. H. Marshall's
theoretical narrative of the evolution of civil, political and social rights.
%%% This study will investigate how the people of Guam are seeking a change in
their political status to achieve an enhancement of the benefits and
constitutional protections of the citizenship status granted them in 1950. It
will also analyze how the Chamoru people are working to achieve federal
recognition of their status as the indigenous people of the island and of their
right to self-determination, It will seek to explain why these two sets of
possibly conflicting claims to rights are converging, what are the historical
and institutional contexts in which these claims are made, how these contexts
affect how the people of Guam understand their political identities, and what
Guam's quest for commonwealth status signifies for the meaning of citizenship,
membership, and sovere ignty in the United States and its territories. ***