* 9422548
* Coalition Politics:  Simulation of a General Model of       Multiparty Competition
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Norman Schofield, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/1997
* USD 123,701.00

Scholfield Forty years of theoretical research has produced a generally accepted
basic model of two-party electoral competition. This basic model is
fundamentally premised on the overriding objective that parties wish to win the
election. Given that the formal structure of the model is understood, it is
possible to examine variants of the model through incorporating more
sophisticated behavior on the part of the electorate, or varying degrees of
competence on the part of candidate. Most theories of pre- election behavior in
competitive elections have focussed on "policy-blind" models where parties
compete to maximize votes or to maximize the expected number of seats. Other
models focus on "coalition risk" that assume parties care about policy and form
specific coalitions based on policy agreements. The proposed research builds on
the investigators previous work on an equilibrium model of multiparty
competition which incorporates the beliefs of political parties concerning both
electoral risk and coalition risk. This work will refine the general electoral
risk-coalition risk model. Two major questions will be examined: (1) Do parties
simply maximize the expected number of seats or do their preferences incorporate
variances in the electoral response? and (2) Does the incorporation of policy
concerns provide a superior explanation of party declarations? It is envisioned
that this research, through using computer simulation and econometric analysis
in combination, will not only advance understanding of democratic theory but
also provide a strong methodological tool that will suggest general techniques
for modelling two stage differentiable games. ****