* 9422123
* Instrumentation Grant for Research in CISE:                 Telecommunications in Virtual and Real Environments
* CSE,EIA
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Bruce McCormick, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 04/30/1996
* USD 101,232.00

9422123 Volz This award is to purchase equipment to support research in
distributed real and virtual environments, including: 1) Attentive Model for
Video Telecommunication -- A framework for video analysis utilizing visual
attention theory and eye movements is expected to yield high compression ratios;
2) Attention-Based Graphical Display of Complex Virtual Environments -- An
attentive display-time compression strategy will be developed, which tracks the
viewer's eyes and matches the imagery to the perceptual limitations of the human
visual system; 3) Intelligent Control in a Telerobotic Network Using Predictive
Simulated Reality -- To counteract problems over long distances, predictive
simulation and intelligent control are planned, in which the operator enters a
virtual world corresponding to the real world; 4) Developing a General Framework
for Natural and Precise Gestural Manipulations -- A logical hand device to
support precise and natural hand manipulations in virtual environments, e.g., a
general framework to compose and manipulate 3-dimensional widgets and a sub-
gesture alphabet to tokenize American Sign Language are presently being
developed; 5) Rehabilatory Head Mounted Display Applications for the Physically
Challenged -- Virtual Reality technology are used to aide in the diagnosis and
monitoring of subjects participating in physical rehabilitation and training
programs, through the use of body tracking devices and Augmented Reality
displays. ***