* 9422199
* RUI:  Communication Complexity of Distributed Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Pengyuan Chen, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 04/30/1998
* USD 68,132.00

This project concentrates on the study of communication complexity, an
important aspect of distributed computing, using a continuous model of H.
Abelson. It focuses on the development of a general method for establishing
lower bound results on communication complexity as well as to obtain lower
bounds for some important concrete problems. For that purpose, a study is
conducted to understand the geometric structure of continuous distributed
computations and to seek a mathematical characterization of communication
complexity. Relations of the mathematical structure of the computational problem
to its complexity are explored. Connections between the characterization of
communication complexity and the classical Pfaff's problem and between the
design of distributed algorithms and Hilbert's 13th problem will also be
investigated. Several conjectures about lower bounds are tested with the hope
that a proof or disproof will result. The tools and techniques used in this
study come mainly from several branches of continuous mathematics such as
analysis, differential geometry, and topology. To aid the computation of lower
bounds on communication complexity, a Mathematica symbolic computing software
package is expanded and refined. This package is important for performing
experiments in order to formulate and help prove conjectures about the lower
bounds for various problems. An important part of this project is the summer
research experience for undergraduate students under the NSF Research
Undergraduate Institutions Program, who are directly involved in various aspects
of this research.