* 9422619
* Dynamics of Electron Hopping and Translational Diffusion in Monolayers at the Air/Water Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Marcin Majda, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 02/28/1999
* USD 394,349.00

The modelling of organized molecular systems such as biological membranes, using
monolayer assemblies at the air/water interface, forms the subject of this
research project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program.
Electron hopping in organized multimolecular structures, and lateral
translational diffusion of molecules on the water surface are the two main
topics of investigation in this work. Langmuir-Blodgett techniques, Brewster
angle microscopy, and 2D electrochemistry involving "line" microelectrodes are
the principal experimental tools used in these studies. The dependence of
electron hopping rate on orientation of the donor- acceptor pair in these
organized monolayers will be determined. The effects of hydrodynamic coupling
and viscosity of the interfacial layer on the diffusion of surfactant molecules
on the water surface will be investigated as well. This information will help to
develop an understanding of molecular and electron transport through
biologically important membrane systems. Molecular monolayer assemblies formed
at the air/water interface are the focus of the research of this project. The
lateral motion of electrons and surfactant molecules in these model systems will
be explored using a variety of optical and electrochemical methods. This
information will be useful for developing models of membrane transport of
importance in biological and electroanalytical systems.