* 9422030
* The structure and change of affect-based and cognition-based attitudes
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Kari Edwards, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 02/28/1998
* USD 114,169.00

9422030 Although early theories recognized the multi-component nature of
attitudes, only in recent investigations has clear empirical evidence been
provided that attitudes that originate in feelings are very different from those
that originate in thoughts and beliefs. By creating new attitudes in the
laboratory, where the affective or cognitive origin of the attitude could be
experimentally controlled, past research has revealed that affect-based
attitudes, unlike their cognition-based counterparts, are (a) expressed with
more confidence and (b) more susceptible to affective than to cognitive means of
persuasion (Edwards 1990; Edwards & von Hippel, 1994). Because many of the
attitudes that are especially consequential for social behavior have been in
existence for some time, the current program of research investigates pre-
existing attitudes to elucidate the mechanisms by which affect- and cognition-
based attitudes develop and change. The main objectives of the proposed research
are to: (1) ascertain whether the effects previously obtained for newly formed
attitudes are short-lived or persist; (2) determine whether the confidence and
attitude change effects observed in past research on newly formed attitudes
reflect differences in the way in which affect-based and cognition-based
attitudes are represented in memory; (3) identify the way in which pre-existing
affective and cognitive attitudes are represented in memory and ascertain the
conditions under which they are most likely to be modified; (4) examine the
similarities and differences between newly formed and pre-existing affective and
cognitive attitudes by inducing new attitudes and then monitoring their
transition to "mature" attitudes over time. Multiple means of inducing and
assessing affect and for assessing the dominance of attitudinal components will
be employed in order to capture the range of ways in which affect can contribute
to the evaluative character of attitudes. Taken together, the results of this
resea rch will contribute significantly to our understanding of the multi-
component nature of attitudes, the factors that enhance their susceptibility to
influence, and the importance of viewing affect as a distinct determinant of
attitudes - in both the early and the late stages of their development. Although
early social psychological theories recognized that attitudes have multiple
components, only in recent investigations has clear empirical evidence been
provided that attitudes that originate in feelings (affect-based) are very
different from those that originate in thoughts and beliefs (cognition-based).
Affect-based attitudes, unlike their cognition-based counterparts, are (a)
expressed with more confidence and (b) more susceptible to affective than to
cognitive means of persuasion (Edwards (1990; Edwards & von Hippel, 1994). The
recent investigations have relied exclusively on the creation of new attitudes
in the laboratory where the affective or cognitive origin of the attitude could
be experimentally controlled. Since, many of the attitudes that are especially
consequential for social behavior have been in existence for some time (e.g.,
attitudes toward ethnic groups, attitudes toward various social policies), the
current research investigates pre-existing attitudes. Evidence from the study of
both newly formed and pre-existing attitudes will elucidate the mechanisms by
which affect- and cognition-based attitudes develop and change. The results of
this research will contribute significantly to our understanding of the multi-
component nature of attitudes, the factors that enhance their susceptibility to
influence, and the importance of viewing affect as a distinct determinant of
attitudes - in both the early and the late stages of their development.