* 9422195
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Equipment for Developing    Object Recognition Modules
* CSE,EIA
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Glenn Healey, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/1996
* USD 15,872.00

9422195 Healey This award is to purchase computer equipment which will be
dedicated to support research in computer and information science and
engineering. This equipment will be used for several research projects,
including in particular: 1) Image modeling and segmentation; 2) Algorithms for
estimating illumination-invariant properties of objects; 3) Algorithms for
estimating geometry-invariant properties of objects; and 4) Algorithms for cue
integration for object recognition. The four workstations will be used for the
development of new color image models and associated algorithms for the
estimation of object properties which are invariant to an object's environment.
New random field models will be developed that describe physically relevant
interactions within and between bands of a color image. These image models will
be parametrized by surface properties and scene conditions and will be used for
image segmentation. Algorithms will also be developed which compute
illumination-invariant and geometry-invariant properties of objects. These
models and algorithms will be used by methods that rigorously combine estimated
properties for object recognition. The proposed equipment will also allow
experimentation with the developed models and algorithms on large databases to
characterize performance and to suggest areas for future research. ***