* 9422459
* Testing a Novel Function for Several Lea Proteins of Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Leon Dure, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1996
* USD 35,000.00

9422459 Dure The P.I. will examine the roles of several plant proteins in
allowing plant cells to become desiccation tolerant/drought resistant. These
proteins accumulate to high levels in plant seeds and in water-stressed tissues
of mature plants. Genes for these proteins have been isolated and a continuous
supply of these proteins in pure form is insured by their synthesis in and
purification from transformed bacteria. In particular, the possibility will be
tested that these proteins promote cell survival in the water depleted state by
electrostatically coating cell constituents (enzymes, membranes, etc.), thus
mimicking the solvation role of water in the hydrated state. Such a "solvation"
may be necessary for cell constituents to be preserved in their biologically
functional structure in the reduced water environment. The efficacy of these
pure proteins, singly and in combination, in maintaining enzyme activity,
membrane organization and organelle integrity during a round of dehydration-
rehydration will be experimentally determined. %%% Plant seeds are subjected to
severe dessication. Other types of plant cells are also able to withstand severe
and prolonged dessication. In the early stages of drying out, seeds and other
plant tissues produce proteins that allow plant cells to tolerate the
extraordinary loss of cell water. The P.I. has named these LEA proteins, for
late embryogenesis abundant. The objective of this project is to understand what
these proteins do that allow plant cells to survive the loss of up to 90% of
their water. The function of these proteins has ramifications in the
agricultural engineering of greater drought resistance in crop plants and in the
food and dairy industry which seeks to improve the texture and nutritional
qualities of preserved or dried products.