* 9422194
* Financial Markets and Financial Intermediaries
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Douglas Gale, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1997
* USD 147,423.00

9422194 This project advances our understanding of industrial organization in
three areas: financial markets and financial intermediation, the timing of
investment decisions, and general equilibrium with incomplete information. The
first part of the project studies the striking differences between the financial
systems of different countries. In the U.S., for example, financial markets are
highly developed; in other countries such as Germany, intermediaries play a much
larger role. These cross- country differences raise questions about the
optimality of different financial systems and the costs and benefits of
convergence. The object of this study is to compare the relative performance of
financial markets and intermediaries in providing risk sharing, information, and
allocative services. The work involves developing models of intermediation and
comparing their welfare properties with those of financial markets. The second
part of the project studies the timing of business investment decisions. When
making investment decisions, firms often have an incentive to delay in order to
gather information about what other firms are going to do. This leads to
strategic behavior, since every firm prefers to make its commitment after others
have made theirs. This project shows how endogenous delay in business investment
decisions can prolong recessions and increase the amplitude of fluctuations in
economic activity, and produce cycles in the introduction of new technology. An
important function of the market system is to economize on the amount of
information required to achieve an efficient allocation of resources. However,
markets may not function well when some agents are able to exploit private
information. The third part of the project builds on and extends earlier work
which modeled equilibrium in market systems with private information. Two
applications, one concerning financial regulation and one concerning
securitization of contracts, motivate the deve lopment and analysis of a richer
class of models to investigate how well the market system copes with private
information in these environments.