* 9422526
* Dissertation Research: Shorebird Populations and Fragmented Wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Lewis Oring, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/1996
* USD 6,500.00

9422526 ORING The study of habitat fragmentation has been built upon
understanding how lost habitat, isolation of habitat patches, and increased
habitat edge lead to declines in populations. This understanding has, in turn,
formed the foundation for principles of reserve design in conservation biology.
In order to design reserves in the future, traditional studies of fragmentation
must be augmented. This study will evaluate the effects of fragmentation using a
population of American avocets (Recurvirostra americana). Research will be
conducted at three scales. At the individual scale, mark/resighting methods will
be used to understand individual movement patterns. At the population scale,
system dynamics modeling will be used to construct a population model. At the
landscape scale, data will be used to develop a spatially explicit understanding
of the relationship between patches. Research conducted will make theoretical
and applied contributions to the field of conservation biology. First, it will
provide direct answers to applied questions about reserve design and
conservation of inland wetlands. Second, it will evaluate the importance of
wetland loss versus wetland degradation for avian populations. This
understanding is critical to the basic principles of scientific reserve design
wherever loss and degradation of habitat are occurring, and findings will have
application to reserve design worldwide.