* 9422411
* Utilizing Remote Sensing and GIS Technologies to Meet       Management Objectives for the Ross Sea Region, Antarctica:  U.S.-New Zealand Junior Investigator Fellowship
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Keith Croteau, Individual Award
* Fixed Amount Award
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 09/30/1996
* USD 50,960.00

9422411 Croteau This award will provide a research fellowship for Keith Croteau
to spend a year at the International Center for Antarctic Information and
Research (ICAIR) located in Christchurch, New Zealand. While at ICAIR, Mr.
Croteau will be working under Dr. Steven M. Smith, the Director of the Center,
which is primarily concerned with assembling, processing and supplying research
and general information relating to Antarctica and its environs. During the past
few decades, the Ross Sea Region of Antarctica has witnessed increased
utilization by both the scientific and non-scientific communities. In order to
minimize negative impacts to the region, ICAIR is developing a management plan
for Ross Island. Integral to the design of this plan is the use of remote
sensing and geographic information systems (GIS) technologies. Specific
objectives to be addressed by Croteau are to identify and evaluate available
data for the Ross Sea region, to develop a GIS database for this area, and to
conduct preliminary GIS analyses relevant to the development of a management
plan for Ross Island. The benefits of this project extend beyond the cooperating
countries of New Zealand and the U.S. An effective management plan will assist
in coordinating the activities of all nations utilizing the Ross Island region.
A well designed digital database will help facilitate the exchange of
information concerning the Ross Sea region and perhaps may also set a precedent
for the entire Antarctic region. The travel is supported under the U.S.-New
Zealand Junior Investigator Research Fellowship activity.