* 9422040
* Voltage Independent Calcium Channels in Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Judith Strong, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1996
* USD 181,546.00

9422040 Many cellular functions are activated by calcium, which enters cells
through specialized, highly regulated proteins (calcium channels) in the cell
membrane. In neurons, calcium entry alters the cell's electrical activity,
secretion of neurotransmitter, and growth or regeneration of neuronal processes;
it also activates several calcium-dependent enzymes which in turn can generate
the type of long-lasting changes in neuronal properties thought to underlie
learning and memory. The proposed experiments will investigate a novel and
poorly understood calcium entry pathway in neurons. This class of calcium
channels can be activated experimentally by forming a small cell free patch of
membrane. Although such channels are found in high density in several different
neurons and muscles, their physiological activators are largely unknown.
Physiological functions of the channels are also unknown, although some evidence
suggests they may help mediate the large, damaging calcium influxes seen under
certain pathological conditions. Recent experiments indicate that these channels
may be rapidly activated by Nerve Growth Factor, a protein which causes neuronal
differentiation and neurite outgrowth in several types of neurons. The proposed
experiments will examine the biochemical mechanisms by which Nerve Growth Factor
and related molecules activate this class of calcium channel. Additional
experiments will examine a possible role of the channels in neurite outgrowth,
and will attempt to isolate specific peptide blockers for these channels. The
primary techniques used are electrical measurement of the currents flowing
through the channels, and rapid measurement of intracellular calcium
concentration in single cells using fluorescent indicators. These two techniques
can be used simultaneously in a single cell. The ability to study these pathways
at a single channel level, coupled with direct measurement of one of their
primary physiological effects (elevation of intracellular calcium), should
contribute to the understanding of this widespread but poorly understood calcium
influx pathway. The experiments will also contribute to an understanding of the
actions of peptide growth factors.