* 9422514
* Racial and Ethnic Differences in Family Retirement          Expectations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Marjorie Honig, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1999
* USD 61,469.00

SBR-9422541 Marjorie Honig Twenty five years ago the most important influences
on the decision by married women of when to retire were the husband's health and
retirement status and family income. In contrast, factors related to their
reward for work-- wages, pension benefits, and social security entitlements--
were found to be insignificant in explaining when women left the labor force.
Because of the pervasive changes in the labor force behavior of women since 1970
and the dramatic increases in the rate of divorce, it is likely that the current
generation of working women can no longer count on their husband's asset and
pension incomes to provide economic security in retirement. This is a matter for
public concern because of the implications for the economic well-being of women
after retirement. Black and Hispanic women are particularly vulnerable since
they are less likely to emerge from divorce or separation with significant asset
holdings, given the low levels of wealth accumulation in those households. The
PI uses a new longitudinal data set, the Health and Retirement Survey, to
examine the retirement expectations of women workers. This analysis allows the
PI to measure these women's expectations of their likely retirement income and
well-being. These expectations are also used to test the validity of three
popular family labor supply models: the neo-classical joint utility model, the
individual utility model, and the traditional family model.