* 9422176
* Core Support for the International Human Dimensions of      Global Environmental Change Programme (HDP)
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Ellen Wiegandt, Graduate Institute of International Studies
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/1998
* USD 275,000.00

9422176 WIEGANDT The complex, wide-ranging nature of global change research
requires international collaboration among scientists from many different
disciplines. To facilitate this collaboration, three major international
programs have been established. Two of these, the International Geosphere-
Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), have
been in existence for some time. A third program, the Human Dimensions of Global
Environmental Change Programme (HDP) was established in 1990 under the
sponsorship of the International Social Science Council (ISSC). This award will
use funds gathered from agencies participating in the Subcommittee for Global
Change Research of the U.S. Committee on Environment and Natural Resources
(CENR/SGCR) to facilitate development of a more detailed science plan for the
HDP through the conduct of meetings of the HDP Steering Committee and working
groups that are developing focused research programs. Most funds will go to pay
participant support costs for meetings of the HDP Steering Committee and for
meetings of working groups planning new core research projects. Topics for which
core research projects are being planned include the production and consumption
of energy, environmental security and sustainable development, perception and
assessment of global environmental change, and industrial growth. One working
group also is engaged in planning for a global omnibus environmental survey. In
addition to travel reimbursement, some funds will be used for communication and
staffing needed for successful operation of these groups. Scientific and
technical reports of the work of these groups will be prepared and distributed.
Funds for this award have been provided by the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration as part of its contribution to distributed- cost activities of
the U.S. Global Change Research Program. The outcomes of these planning
activities will be core international, coll aborate research projects that will
provide input into the analysis, modeling, and interpretation of global change.
HDP core research projects also should assist policy makers in the U.S. and
other nations in exploring options for adapting to and mitigating global change.