* 9422428
* Superpositions of Chiral Amplitudes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Robert Harris, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Komornicki
* 03/31/1996
* USD 42,113.00

Professor Robert A. Harris at the Department of Chemistry, University of
California at Berkeley, is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program at NSF for theoretical research related chiral
coherences. There are several topics where research is required in order to
establish fundamental understandings of these coherences and of the special
chemistry which may arise from them. One important topic concerns the
investigation of methods to prepare chiral coherences; in particular, to
identify methods which will have a high degree of coherent behavior. Another
important topic concerns the measurement of this coherence; here, research to
asses the usefulness of neutron scattering as a way of making such measurements
could lead to a valuable experimental tool. In addition, research is required to
develop a suitable theory of second harmonic generation in order to interpret
and explain the activity of chiral adsorbates on surfaces. The concept of
chirality, the notion of left handed and right handed chiral molecules, has been
known and studied by chemists for sometime. The recent discovery that excited
states of molecules can be used to create coherent superpositions of chiral
molecules opens the way to a range of new phenomena. In particular, it may open
the way to the discovery of systems which have a new chemistry governed by the
principles of superposition and parity conservation.