* 9422883
* Collusion in Exchange Networks:  An Experimental Study
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Phillip Bonacich, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1998
* USD 118,160.00

This is a study of collusion in exchange networks. A series of laboratory
experiments, using a variety of networks of exchange and communication, will
test hypotheses about the positions in social networks most likely to develop
coalitions with each other, and the shapes of networks most conducive to
coalition formation. This research springs from the theoretical work of Richard
Emerson, who proposed that power in exchange networks tends to equalize. Those
initially with less power have strategies available to increase their power,
among which is the possibility of forming countervailing coalitions. Individuals
with less initial power can increase their power by forming a single bargaining
unit. The designs of previous experiments have precluded this possibility by
preventing non-bargaining subjects from communicating with each other. The
present research project suggests a model predicting which positions will form
coalitions in exchange networks, and a series of experiments will test the
model. The model is an advance over Emerson's in two respects. First, it implies
that coalitions may form between weak positions that do not share a common
trading partner, and it predicts that coalitions may form between classes of
positions that are quite remotely connected in the network. Emerson's model was
limited to weak positions that shared a common trading partner. Second, it
describes a new incentive for forming coalitions: the reduction of uncertainty
in unstable networks. Unlike coalitions of the weak, these are coalitions
between exchange partners. %%% This project is fundamental research on the ways
that coalitions may affect the power of individuals in social networks of
various shapes, and thus it addresses crucial questions in theories of social
capital. The work is connected to emerging new theories of latent classes that
can be tested in the laboratory and then extended to help explain degrees of
inequality in actual communities. The structure of social networks may turn out
to be a major factor shaping the rewards individuals receive in social
exchanges, quite apart from the effect of their skills or other previously
recognized attributes of human capital.