* 9422958
* Short-time Optical Processes of Coherent Molecular States   in Condensed Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1996
* Jeffrey Cina, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Paul S. Bagus
* 03/31/1996
* USD 98,000.00

Professor Jeffrey A. Cina at the Department of Chemistry of the University of
Chicago is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
Program at NSF for theoretical research which interprets and predicts phenomena
associated with time-resolved optical excitations. Work is being carried out on
several different topics, all involving matter in the condensed phase. A major
theme of this work is the study of coherently organized states of matter. One
kind of coherence involves spatially localized states where, for example, left
handed and right handed geometries, or conformations, are distinguished; other
kinds of coherences involve the vibrational motions of the nuclei. Another major
theme of the work is the study of solvent effects on the excitations of
molecules in solution. Ultra-short pulses of laser light provide a powerful
means to place matter into unusual states, far from thermal equilibrium. These
states may have unusual chemical or material properties quite different from
those of condensed matter in its more normal states. The work under this grant
involves theoretical studies which explore the properties of these unusual
states as well as how they may be prepared and how they may be detected. The
work is being carried out in close and direct contact with people who are making
related experimental studies. In this way, the understanding coming from the
theoretical work is being applied, in the near term, to the analysis and
interpretation of experimental data.