* 9422011
* U.S.-German Cooperative Research on the Applications of     Organolanthanides in Organic Synthesis
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1995,08/17/1999
* Gary Molander, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 08/17/1999
* USD 29,860.00

9422011 Molander This award supports the establishment of a collaboration
between Professor Gary Molander of the University of Colorado, Boulder, and
Professor Herbert Schumann of the Institute for Inorganic and Analytical
Chemistry at the Technical University of Berlin. These investigators will join
their diverse expertise in organic and inorganic chemistry in a joint effort
focused on the design and synthesis of organolanthanides and certain other
organometallic compounds, and the exploration of their use as catalysts in
selective organic synthesis. The team led by Professor Schumann is one of the
strongest in the world in the synthesis and structural determination of
organolanthanides. It will play the lead role in designing new organometallic
complexes for study in the catalytic reactions and it will provide experimental
procedures to prepare the catalysts. It also provides important skills in the
handling of air-sensitive materials. The research group headed by Dr. Molander
brings expertise in synthetic organic chemistry. The U.S. group will provide the
insights into important organic reactions which might benefit from the
organometallic compounds produced by the German group, in effect, providing
specifications for the catalysts to be explored. They will synthesize the
organic substrates needed for the catalytic reactions of interest and carry out
the organic reactions and study them in detail. Reciprocal visits of
postdoctoral fellows and advanced graduate students for several months per year,
funded by NSF and its German counterpart, the DFG, will enable the two groups to
share and transfer their expertise in various aspects of organometallic
chemistry. Because of their unusual properties, organolanthanides offer
interesting possibilities as promoters and catalysts for organic reactions.
Until now, there has been very little systematic work by synthetic chemists to
study applications if the whole range of organolanthanides in organic synthesis.
Now that inorganic chemists su ch as Dr. Schumann have succeeded in producing a
range of lanthanide catalysts, it becomes possible for an expert in organic
synthesis such as Dr. Molander to suggest characteristics for new "designer"
catalysts that will greatly improve specific synthetic processes. Thus this
collaboration will provide an outlet for the chemistry developed in the
inorganic laboratory, with the promise of practical uses for the many
organometallic complexes designed and synthesized there. ***