* 9422049
* Cooperative Molecular Motions in Polymer Glasses and Their  Effects on Structure and Deformation Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Albert Yee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/1998
* USD 267,000.00

9422049 Yee At ordinary use temperatures - temperatures well below the softening
temperature of polymers - the origin of the viscoelastic behavior is thought to
be local molecular motions in the frozen solid. The occurrence of secondary
relaxations in a polymer is often related to ductile behavior. To achieve an
understanding of this complex relationship, a series of research projects will
be aimed at uncovering some fundamental relationships between molecular
structure and molecular mobilities. The basic material used in these studies,
BPA-polycarbonate, has been chosen for its well-known ductility. The synthesis
of several series of homologous copolymers derived from BPA-polycarbonate has
generated the following unique and important observations: 1. The secondary
relaxation in BPA-polycarbonate is due to the cooperative motion of about seven
repeat units. 2. The extent of cooperative motion can be systematically reduced
by the insertion of certain chemical linkages, e.g., terephthalate, into the
backbone structure. 3. The greater the extent of cooperative motion, the more
likely the polymer is to exhibit ductile behavior (yielding). Conversely,
limiting the cooperation encourages brittle behavior (crazing). 4. Motions of
elementary units along the polymer chain, e.g., the rotation of phenylene rings,
can be constrained by other units along the chain and between chains. Such
constraints also result in profound changes in the mechanical behavior.
Copolymers with various secondary relaxation characteristics will be synthesized
to obtain materials with different scales of cooperative motions, and with
different degrees of intrachain and interchain constraints. The scale of
cooperative motion will be tailored by changing the block lengths of the
bisphenol-A units between flexible terephthalate linkages. These units act to
delimit the cooperative motion. The strength of the intrachain constraint will
be varied by incorporating bulky tetramethylbisphe nol-A units into the
backbone. Finally, the degree of the interchain constraint via coupling will be
controlled by the introduction of the fluoride groups onto the phenyl rings.
These synthesized materials, with various secondary relaxation characteristics,
will be used in stress relaxation experiments. %%% The ultimate purpose of this
work is to create a relatively detailed understanding of how the structure and
motions of polymer molecules can affect the interplay between ductile behavior
and brittle behavior in the materials. Polymeric materials are increasingly
playing a critical, enabling role in advanced engineering systems. Yet, despite
many serendipitous discoveries, the relationship between the molecular structure
of polymers and their mechanical properties remains an enigma. An explanation of
this relationship requires an understanding of how polymer molecules aggregate
into the solid state, and how this solid state adjusts to the externally imposed
stress and its time dependence. ***