* 9422075
* RUI: Unification of Active Galaxies and Quasars: Radio and  Optical Studies of a Complete Sample of Lobe-dominated      Quasars
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* David Hough, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 01/31/1999
* USD 97,662.00

9422075 Hough Radio and optical studies of quasars will be carried out in order
to contribute toward the unification of the physical models which describe the
active galaxies and quasars. Quasars are thought to be young, distant, powerful
galaxies that may harbor supermassive black holes in their central regions.
However, they may be just an extreme example of the general phenomenon of active
galaxies in which unusually large power output from the nuclear regions is
observed. In order to test the various hypotheses that attempt to unite the
theories about the quasars with other active galaxies - including BL Lac
objects, radio galaxies, and Seyfert galaxies - a carefully selected, complete
sample of twenty-five of the most powerful quasars known will be studied. Radio
telescopes working in unison as interferometers will be used to Make radio
wavelength images of the quasars, from their very centers to huge radio-emitting
regions up to a million light-years away. The time sequences of images for the
central regions will permit a study of apparent faster-than-light, or
"superluminal", motion observed in these quasars. Optical observations will be
made to obtain the spectra of the light emitted from these quasars, and hence we
will learn something of the physical state of the gas surrounding the central
object. The statistics of various radio and optical properties of these quasars
will be used for rigorous tests of "unified models". The results of the
observations may possibly be used to calculate the size and age of the universe.
Additional observations, which will push the resolution limits of the radio
astronomy techniques, will be carried out.