* 9422813
* Valuing Risk Under Alternative Reduction Strategies and     Elicitation Methods
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Jason Shogren, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 03/31/1997
* USD 25,000.00

This research examines how the economic value of risk is affected by alternative
reduction strategies and two different elicitation mechanisms-experimental
auction markets and contingent valuation surveys. The results will help clarify
fundamental methodological issues in valuation which is central to environmental
policy. The approach is illustrated through the specific example of the value of
reduced risk from Escherichia coli 0157:H7 and Salmonella from beef consumption,
a particularly salient commodity given risk can be reduced privately by home
preparation or collectively with irradiation treatments or improved production
methods. The project employs a four phase design: (1) mental models interviews
to determine how subjects assess the risk of food-borne pathogens and how best
to communicate food safety risks, and to guide the design of the valuation
studies; (2) a contingent valuation survey that includes both in-person and mail
interviews; (3) experimental auction markets that use real food, real money and
repeat market experience; and (4) an internal and external validation procedure
where the internal check will use cooked meat samples, and the external check
will use survey results from a commercial store that sells irradiated products.
The project will explore: (a) how to best communicate risks of food-borne
illness; (b) whether people have general preferences for food safety rather than
pathogen-specific preferences; how preferences for risk reduction vary with the
severity of the risk; how "who" is at risk-children vs. adults-influences
preferences; (c) relative preferences for alternative combinations of collective
action (safe handling labels, irradiation, Hazard Analysis at Critical Control
Points (HACCP)) and private protection (home preparation-rare, medium, and well-
done hamburgers); (d) and if there is a systematic difference in revealed values
from the hypothetical contingent valuation survey and the non-hypothetical
contingent valuation survey and the non-hypothetical experimental auction
markets. This research is supported under the Joint NSF/Private Sector Research
Initiative and the cooperating organization is the American Meat Institute.