* 9422873
* Collaborative Research on Measurement with Theory:  A       Bayesian Approach to Dynamic Macroedconomics
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1995,05/31/1999
* Charles Whiteman, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 05/31/1999
* USD 238,748.00

SBR-9422873 Charles Whiteman and Beth Ingram In conducting empirical research,
guidance from theory is extremely valuable. Yet in macroeconomics, as
theoretical models have become increasingly complex and stylized, such guidance
has become difficult to incorporate in a formal statistical sense. This project
develops and then implements a coherent statistical framework for combining
theoretical and empirical information. The framework is Bayesian and enables the
formal yet probabilistic incorporation of theoretical restrictions (e.g., cross-
equation restrictions) in working with reduced-form models. A distinctive
feature of the approach proposed here is that theoretical models are viewed as
sources of prior information which can then be formally combined with data
information via Bayes' Rule. This is particularly useful in working with
reduced-form models such as vector autoregressions (VARs), where researchers
frequently have strong views about the parameterization of the theoretical model
but only weak views about the parameterization of the VAR. The new framework
also enables economists to incorporate prior information about parameters values
in the estimation of structural models. This stands in marked contrast with the
current practice of incorporating such information only informally and
implicitly. The result of this practice is inference without a firm statistical
basis. The methodology is then used in a variety of empirical projects: an
analysis of the source of shocks which have driven the U.S. post-war business
cycle; an analysis of competing sources of economic growth; construction and
estimation of a fully specified nominal business cycle model (which includes
monetary and fiscal policy variables) for the purpose of conducting policy
analysis; an analysis of the empirical viability of simple heterogeneous agent
models with incomplete markets; and an analysis of the usefulness of theoretical
asset pricing models in the modeling of financial time series.