* 9422761
* Financial Conditions and the Cyclical Behavior of Business  Firms:  An Empirical Investigation
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Mark Gertler, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1998
* USD 299,371.00

9422761 A longstanding issue in business cycle analysis is understanding how
small shocks may produce large fluctuations in output. Recent theoretical
research has shown how financial propagation mechanisms could amplify swings in
spending and production caused by technology shocks or shifts in monetary. The
theory begins with the idea, that for a significant class of borrowers
(households, small and medium sized firms, etc.), information and enforcement
problems may drive the cost of uncollateralized funds above the price of
internal funds. Under these circumstances, borrowers' available supplies of
collateral (broadly defined) and internal funds influence the terms of credit
they face. In this way, borrowers' financial positions ultimately influence
their spending and production decisions. The theory predicts that differences in
cyclical behavior should emerge across classes of borrowers, depending on their
respective access to credit, everything else equal. Credit market frictions are
also more likely to impinge on behavior around recessionary periods, when
borrowers have relatively weak balance sheets. To identify financial propagation
effects, therefore, it is important to look at data across different phases of
the business cycle, as well as across different classes of borrowers. This
project will empirically assess financial propagation mechanisms using a newly
available Census Bureau panel data for firms that contain both a rich cross-
sectional dimension and a long time series dimension at the business cycle
frequency to empirically assess financial propagation mechanisms. Unlike
previously used firm level data sets, this data covers non-publicly as well as
publicly traded firms for both manufacturing and other sectors, and has a long
time series available at the quarterly frequency. More specifically, this
project contributes to our understanding of financial propagation mechanisms in
four ways: The first is a comprehensive descriptive ana lysis of the data for
the manufacturing sector. The second involves structural estimation of inventory
and investment demand equations to identify the influence of liquidity
constraints in this sector. The third links the firm level data to Census Bureau
plant level data to study the effects of financial factors on labor demand in
manufacturing. The final project extends these efforts to the retail and
wholesale trade sectors.