* 9422893
* Collaborative Research: Calcareous Nannofossil              Biostratigraphy and Paleoenvironmental History of the Cape  Roberts Project Cores
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1995,12/31/2000
* Sherwood Wise, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 12/31/2000
* USD 87,378.00

This award supports basic characterization of calcareous nannofossils as part of
the development of the biostratigraphic framework for drill core recovered by
the Cape Roberts Project (CRP). This is a major program within the international
Antarctic earth science community, designed to sample the stratigraphic record
that spans the time interval 30 to 100 million years ago, by drilling four sites
on the flank of the Victoria Land basin. This award is to support the drilling
program by providing rapid age and paleoenvironmental information through the
study of calcareous nannofossils. This research will systematically sample the
recovered sedimentary cores and analyze their calcareous nannofossil content at
the Crary Science and Engineering Center (CSEC) at McMurdo Station, Antarctica.
The preparation of an Initial Reports volume at the end of each of the two
drilling seasons will include the results of this work as part of the initial
characterization of the cores. The calcareous nannofossil biostratigraphic
record spans the entire interval to be cored by the CRP. Recent work on
calcareous nannofossils from ocean drilling sites around Antarctica has yielded
a refined zonation for the Paleogene and Upper Cretaceous of the Southern Ocean
that will provide a high-resolution biostratigraphic framework for hemipelagic
and pelagic sediments recovered by Cape Roberts drilling. This research, when
combined with data from other fossil groups, magnetostratigraphic data, and
other age-dating methods, will provide integrated age control that is essential
for other geological investigations. In addition, calcareous nannofossils are
excellent paleoenvironmental indicators for surface water temperature and
productivity. Statistical analysis of quantitative population census data will
be used to infer paleoenvironmental variations during the Paleogene and
Cretaceous. These data, in combination with data from other fossil groups and
sedimentological studies, will be useful f or assessing climatic change through
the critical period of 30-100 million years before present.