* 9422992
* U.S.-Czech Workshop on Nondestructive Characterization      of Materials (Brno, June 23-24, 1995)
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1996
* Robert Green, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 03/31/1996
* USD 15,000.00

9422992 Green This U.S.-Czech workshop on nondestructive characterization of
materials will take place in Brno, in the Czech Republic, during June 23-24,
1995. The organizers are Dr. Robert E. Green, Jr., of the Center for
Nondestructive Evaluation at the Johns Hopkins University and Dr. Ludek Ptacek
of the Institute for Material Engineering at the Technical University of Brno.
At the workshop experts in technologies of nondestructive methods will meet with
engineers and materials scientists to explore potential applications of
nondestructive characterization and discuss solutions to problems encountered in
industrial practice. Properties of special interest to the participants are
elastic moduli, microstructure, residual stress, dislocation density, porosity,
fiber/matrix volume ration, and cure state. Presented papers will address the
application of nondestructive techniques for optimization of the processing and
properties of polymers, ceramics, and composites; the development of
synthetically structured materials; the measurement and characterization of
semiconductors and amorphous metals; and the growth of perfect electronic and
optical crystals and thin films. These technical presentations and resulting
discussions are intended to foster stronger links among the U.S. and Czech
research communities with the primary goal of identifying topics for future
cooperative research in the strategic areas mentioned. ***