* 9422886
* Economic Organization, Efficiency and Market Failure in     Households and Local Economies in Sub-Saharan Africa
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Christopher Udry, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1998
* USD 101,563.00

9422886 Empirical studies of consumer demand, labor supply and household
production are commonly based on the premise that families behave as though they
are single individuals. However, a growing number of studies have concluded that
families should be modeled as the outcome of the interaction between household
members with diverse preferences and resources. This project derives and tests
the implications of the assumption made by virtually all models of the household
that intra-family allocation is efficient. The project contains three
components, concerned respectively with the economic organization of families,
the market environment within which African households live, and the possible
existence of community mechanisms which internalize local environmental and
learning externalities in sub-Saharan Africa. Within many African households,
agricultural production is carried out simultaneously on many plots controlled
by different members of the household. This is an ideal environment for
examining the internal organization of families, because efficiency implies that
variable factors should be allocated efficiently across these plots. Preliminary
results base don Burkina Faso data indicate that plots controlled by women are
farmed much less intensively than similar plots within the household planted
with the same crop in the same year, but controlled by men. These results, if
confirmed, contradict the efficiency of resource allocation of the household.
This project extends this methodology to a variety of other African contexts and
examines the causes of the violation of efficiency. Theoretical research is
required to establish the classes of models of the household consistent with the
pattern of empirical violations of efficiency. This project also studies the
existence of community mechanisms which provide incentives for individuals to
engage in agricultural experimentation and internalize local environmental
externalities. The current project is for short-term preliminary fieldwork in
Ghana that will permit the design of the survey that will be used for extensive
survey-based field research in Ghana.