* 9422688
* Trusted Interoperation of Health-Care Information Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1995,02/29/2000
* Xiaolei Qian, SRI International
* Continuing grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 02/29/2000
* USD 1,303,144.00

9422688 Qian This award is made in support of the NSF initiative ENG-CISE-
IITA94, National Challenges. It is a joint initiative between the Engineering
Directorate and the Computer Information and Engineering Directorate. SRI
International, in collaboration with Stanford University Department of computer
Science and Medicine, and Inova Health System, will develop and demonstrate
techniques for the trusted interoperation of autonomous heterogeneous health
care databases containing sensitive data that mismatch in semantics,
representations, and security/privacy policies. This effort will be built on the
query mediation framework developed under ARPA and Rome Laboratory sponsorship.
The framework supports the automated and efficient mediation of queries between
autonomous heterogeneous databases. Semantic connections between component
databases are encoded in a knowledge base, which are then used by a mediator to
automatically resolve mismatches and transform queries between component
databases using the local language and schema, making a local database access
data in multiple databases using the local language and schema, making
interoperable both the data and the applications accessing the data in legacy
databases. Technique will be developed and demonstrated for solving three
critical problems that hinder the trusted query mediation of autonomous
heterogeneous health care database containing sensitive data that mismatch in
semantics, representations, and security/privacy policies. In particular, the
following questions will be answered: 1. A security/Privacy Policy Framework.
What is the relationship and difference between security and privacy? How can
the security/privacy policy of a health care database be characterized and
formalized? How can we compare the security/privacy policies of autonomous
heterogeneous health care databases? 2. Trusted Query Mediation. When autonomous
heterogeneous health care databases are interoperating through query mediation,
how c an we guarantee the autonomy and security/privacy of component databases.
In other words, how can queries be mediated such that neither the rights nor the
security/privacy of components databases are compromised? 3. Schema Mediation.
In constructing a physician's workstation as a uniform interface to multiple
autonomous heterogeneous health care databases, how can a consistent view
(schema) be constructed that (1) captures exactly the data that are relevant to
users of the workstation, and (2) resolves all the mismatches in the relevant
data? These techniques will be implemented in a demonstration system that
leverages off an existing one developed for the query mediation framework, which
demonstrates query mediation between an clinic database and a hospital database
( adopted for the T-helper database for Stanford University School of Medicine).
Health care databases form Inova Health System and Stanford University School of
Medicine will be used in the demonstration. This effort will contribute to the
goal of developing and providing technology by which health care providers can
access and share patients medical records while protecting the accuracy and
privacy of those records.