* 9422295
* Renewal of Core Support for the Computer Science and        Telecommunications Board
* CSE,EIA
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Marjory Blumenthal, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 11/30/1997
* USD 225,000.00

9422295 Blumenthal The NRC established the Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board in recognition of the importance of (1) computer
science as an academic discipline and intellectual domain and (2) the
increasingly critical role played by computing technology and telecommunications
in virtually all facets of life. The Board's charter is a broad one; to ensure
that the United States makes every effort to develop and use the major national
resources represented in computer science, computing technology, and
telecommunications. The computer's contributions to innovation and economic
growth, to national security, to the quality of life, and to scientific progress
are pervasive and affect the programs of a number of federal agencies, as well
as domestic industries. Before the Board was established, no organization had
been suitably positioned to address or influence the overall condition of the
computing and communications field. CSTB is intended to be a central asset for
identifying the implications of new technologies; assessing current and proposed
policies that affect computer science, computing technology, and
telecommunications posture. It also fosters communication among members of the
professional community on national and international issues in the computing and
communications fields. ***