* 9422722
* Information Integration for Simulation-Based Design and     Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Edward Haug, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1998
* USD 706,770.00

9422722 Choi This award is made in support of the NSF initiative ENG-CISE-
IITA94, National Challenges. It is a joint initiative between the Engineering
Directorate and the Computer Information and Engineering Directorate. This is a
joint award to the University of Iowa (ECS-9422722) and Rensselear Polytechnic
Institute (ECS-9422713) in the National Challenge area of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology. It provides funding for an investigation into the requirements
placed on product models of assemblies to support simulation based concurrent
design of mechanical systems. It provides funding for an investigation into
methods for coordinating design changes that result from simulations over a
network, and funding for evaluating the ability of the product models of the ISO
STEP standard (Standard for the Exchange of Product model data) to support
simulation-based concurrent design tools and a networked integration
infrastructure. An integrated simulation-based concurrent engineering
environment will be constructed that will permit all members of a product
development team to simulate the performance and effectiveness of product and
process designs at a level of fidelity comparable to that which can be achieved
using physical prototypes. The simulation-based design environment produced will
support the development of large scale mechanical system applications,
particularly tracked and wheeled vehicle systems. The technology produced will
reduce the time and cost of testing and introduce high quality products into the
market in a shorter time than that required by conventional development methods.
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute will be responsible for creating the product
models, exchange of product models between engineering systems using STEP , and
development of tools to support work flow control and engineering change
processing. The University of Iowa will verify these product models by
integrating their CAD and design simulation tools with the product databases,
performing simulations from multiple design perspectives, generating engineering
design changes, and working with Rensselaer to develop tool to support work flow
and engineering change processing. Caterpillar Inc. of Peoris, and PDES, Inc., a
joint industry/government consortium including Boeing, Ford, General Electric,
General Motors, Hughes, IBM, and Lockheed will be involved with the review of
the progress.