* 9422734
* High Performance Computing for Simulation, Planning and     Execution of Robot-Assisted Surgery
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Takeo Kanade, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 09/30/1998
* USD 1,799,768.00

It is a joint initiative between the Engineering Directorate and the Computer
Information and Engineering Directorate. This research involves a collaboration
among roboticists, computer scientists, biomechanicists, and surgeons at
Carnegie Mellon University and Shadyside Hospital to advance the state-of-the-
art in medical robotics. Robotics and computer-based technologies present
medicine with excellent opportunities to improve surgical practice. Surgical
robots are particularly well suited for such medical fields as orthopaedics in
which there is a clinical need for accurate execution of biomechanics-based
preoperative plans. To fully realize the promise of medical robotics, advances
are still needed to develop: (1) surgical simulators that incorporate the
complex biomechanics of biological systems, (2) clinically practical surgical
cutting and registration techniques, and (3) effective methods for preoperative
and intraoperative human-computer interaction. The interdisciplinary research
team will create advanced numerical simulation capabilities for orthopaedics,
robotic techniques for surface-based registration and high-speed 3-D sensing,
and human-computer interfaces that present biomechanical and intraoperative
information in a clinically meaningful manner. These advances will complement
surgeons' abilities with realistic surgical simulators and less traumatic
robotic tools for implementing surgical plans. The project targets total joint
replacement surgery, with the expectation of broader impact on the emerging
field of medical robotics and beyond. With high performance computing serving as
the glue, the integration of these component technologies will lead to the next
generation of computer-assisted surgical robots.