* 9422494
* Element-Element and Related Bonding in the Earlier          Main Group Elements
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Philip Power, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 01/31/1998
* USD 330,000.00

Dr. Philip P. Power, Chemistry Department, University of California - Davis, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division to investigate element-element and related bonding in
the earlier main group elements. The main thrust of the project involves the
synthesis of new classes of compounds which may have multiple bonds between
heavier group 13 elements and the preparation of kinetically stable, metal-metal
bonded main group 2 and 12 element derivatives in which the metal has a formal
oxidation state of +1. The new compounds are designed so they will contain
bonding types not previously observed for these elements. By use of a variety of
spectroscopic and structural methods the characteristics of these bonds will be
probed in order to determine the nature of element-element interactions between
the earlier main group atoms. The most important interactions which occurs in
chemical compounds are the bonding which links the constituent atoms to one
another. For carbon and other small non-metal atoms single, double, and triple
bonds are well known, as are many correlations between the chemical bonding in a
compound and its chemical properties. Up until only a few years ago, heavier
atoms were thought to only form single bonds. More recently that dogma was
overthrown and this study is aimed at exploring the possibility that atoms which
are not known to form multiple bonds actually may be capable of doing so. These
studies have great significance to our basic understanding of chemical bonding
and open the way to the preparation of new chemical systems which may display
entirely novel properties.