* 9422022
* Characterization of the Digitalis Receptor and Digitalis    Mimics
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1996
* William Ball, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1996
* USD 35,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F ! Lr C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l mÕGr mÕGr 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; E +E @t E u ~ u E +E = u t F E U F V t E U v n E U - F V v RP
X # t0 E + Hu& 9E u 9U u W u u O$ ^_ v ~ F V ~ ~ t e tq t& ~ '@;E ~# } u E @;E |
} } 9422022 Ball The long term goal of this research is to gain an understanding
of the structure and functioning of the cation transporter, Na,K ATPase, with a
particular interest in elucidating the molecular mechanisms of digitalis
(cardiac glycosides) binding and inhibition of this enzyme. The P.I. proposes to
use a relatively new and perhaps unconventional approach to identify and
characterize short peptide sequences which may mimic the glycosides, which are
nonpeptidic steroid based plant products. The peptides will be selected from
bacteriophage contained "random peptide libraries". The diversity of these
selected peptides will help us understand how the glycosides bind and how their
actions may be modified. In addition, since the enzyme's digitalis binding site
has not been determined, the P.I. will also attempt to use anti idiotypic
antibodies (raised to anti digoxin antibodies) to identify the binding site. The
random peptide libraries will also be used to determine whether it is possible
to generate a model digitalis binding site(s) This work has the potential of
enabling us to identify serum proteins which serve as natural regulatory
proteins. %%% The Na,K-ATPase is a membrane bound enzyme that uses energy in the
form of ATP to transport sodium and potassium ions across the cell membrane. It
is this maintenance of the levels of these two important cations that is the
driving force for the active transport of small molecules such as amino acids,
glucose, phosphate and calcium, as well as providing the basis for the action
potential in nerve and muscle cells. The Na, K-ATPase is also the receptor for
digitalis, a plant glycoside, which inhibits the enzyme in a highly specific
manner. This project uses a new immunological approach to learn more about the
mechanism of digitalis binding, and should in addition help in identifying the
long sought after natural, or endogenous, molecule that acts to regulate the
enzyme. ....()()))()() ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia
steinberg marcia steinberg @ ? n @ @ (r S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 1
@ NZ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 e 3 e " " " " " " " L L L L L d n L C x | | | | | | |
_ P T 4 " | | | | | | " " | x | | | | " | " | 6 > " " " " | | 3 | 9422022 Ball
The long term goal of this research is to gain an understanding of the structure
and functioning of the cation transporter, Na,K ATPase, with a particular
interest in elucidating the molecular mechanisms of digitalis (cardiac
glycosides) binding and inhibition of this enzyme. The P.I. proposes to use a
relatively new and perhaps unconventional approach to identify and characterize
short peptide sequences which may mimic the glycosides, which are nonpeptidic
steroid based plant products. The peptides will be selected from bacteriophage
contained "random p