* 9422563
* Signalling versus Screening:  The Power of Forward Induction in Sequential Bargaining
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1995,07/31/1996
* Raymond Deneckere, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Catherine C. Eckel
* 07/31/1996
* USD 45,135.00

SBR-9422563 Raymond Deneckere One of the most enduring puzzles in economics is
why real world bargaining is characterized by so many apparent inefficiencies
such as strikes, work slowdowns, and failures to reach agreements on
contractural terms when it is known that both parties can benefit from an
agreement. In such situations at least one of the parties must be uncertain
about either its gains from trade and/or its opponent's gains from trade. We
know this must be so because of Rubinstein's pioneering demonstration that when
the gains to both parties from trading is common knowledge, then the unique
bargaining equilibrium has the two parties agreeing immediately. Unfortunately,
game theory has been unable to extend Rubinstein's uniqueness result to the case
where the parties have incomplete information without making unrealistic
assumptions about the ability of the bargainers to communicate with each other
or imposing ad hoc restrictions on the equilibrium. This project will examine
the conditions under which one very plausible restriction on the bargaining
equilibrium-- that it satisfy Kohlberg and Merten's forward induction
requirement-- is sufficiently strong so as to eliminate all bargaining
equilibria but one. Such a result would uncover a fundamental link between
rational bargaining delay and private information and move game theory forward
in explaining the bargaining outcomes we actually observe. Preliminary work by
the principal investigators concerning the case there the buyers are better
informed than the sellers indicate that a key variable is the rate at which the
players discount the future. When the discount rate is low, the bargaining
equilibrium is semi-pooling and trade occurs in exactly three rounds. When the
discount rate is high, all buyer types pool by making frivolous offers until the
seller's beliefs cross a threshold, at which point the buyers make a serious
offer that is then always accepted by the seller.