* 9422901
* Estimation for Hierarchical Models with Dichotomous         Outcomes in Small-Sample, Social Research Settings
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Michael Seltzer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 10/31/1998
* USD 171,163.00

Hierarchical models (HM) provide a valuable means of analyzing the kinds of
nested data structures that are frequently encountered in social science
research (e.g., program participants nested within different evaluation sites).
Applications include studies of equity in educational opportunities and
attainment, studies of factors central to program success in multi-site
evaluation studies, and longitudinal analyses of change in cognitive skills.
Whereas most applications of the HM to date have involved the analysis of
continuous outcomes, numerous research questions entail the analysis of
dichotomous outcomes. While sample sizes in social research settings are
frequently modest due to budget constraints, standard approaches to estimation
and inference for HMs with dichotomous outcomes become extremely problematic
when samples are small to moderate in size. In particular, we run the risk of
obtaining misleadingly small confidence intervals for parameters of interest,
and our results are potentially highly sensitive to outliers (e.g., a program
site at which an intervention was unusually ineffective). A newly developed,
general estimation technique termed the Gibbs sampler has been shown to provide
a means of obtaining sound parameter estimates and intervals in a variety of
complex modeling settings. The purpose of this project is to utilize this
technique in developing and implementing estimation strategies that will enable
researchers to obtain robust estimates of parameters and appropriate intervals
in applications of HMs with dichotomous outcomes in small-sample, social
research settings. Guidelines for proper implementation and use of these
strategies will be developed through analyses of a series of simulated data sets
and through analyses of the data from two studies: A multi-site evaluation of a
dropout prevention initiative, and an NSF-funded study of the effects of
different mathematics. The software programs that are developed for
implementation of these Gibbs-sampling-based estimation strategies will be
shared with all interested researchers.