* 9422334
* TQO Improving Quality Transformations in a Dual Workforce,  Research and Development Environment
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1999
* Frederick Schoenig, Cleveland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan R. Sanderson
* 12/31/1999
* USD 484,026.00

This research will examine the implementation of quality transformation in a
public sector research and development work environment (i.e., NASA) consisting
of both in-house and contract employees. Members of the work force have diverse
cultural backgrounds, a multitude of different leaders, and are subject to
widely varying motivators. The unit of focus and analysis will be project teams
that include both civil servants and contract employees, resulting in a mix of
disciplines as well. These factors result in an environment in which it is very
difficult to develop teamwork. The objective of the research is to develop a
multi-dimensional model for quality transformation in a diversified dual work
force. The model will identifydrivers and constraints associated with quality
transformation, and will include evaluation tools, methods for implementing
quality changes, and recommended measures of effectiveness. Organizational,
demographic, and qualitative data will be collected and used to design survey
instruments for administration to team members. Project outcome measures will be
included in the analysis. The project includes an advisory panel consisting of
the NASA Lewis Research Center Quality Council, as well as bothpermanent and
contract NASA employees.