* 9422671
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Environmental              Innovation in the U.S. Petroleum Industry, 1921-1981
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1995
* David Hounshell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 12/31/1995
* USD 5,000.00

Under the direction of Professor David Hounshell, Mr. Hugh Gorman is examining
the U.S. petroleum industry as a case study of the interaction between
environmental regulations and technological development. The working hypothesis
is that when an economic externality is in dispute--in this case, the negative
costs associated with discharges into the environment--significant innovation
occurs only after the interested actors reach consensus on how to measure,
monitor, and assign liability associated with the externality. Only then can a
technological, legal, and social infrastructure emerge that encourages change in
the direction of consensus. Mr. Gorman is examining each sector of the petroleum
industry--production, transportation, refining, and consumption--to identify, at
various intervals in the period 1921 to 1981, what engineers and managers
perceived to be the state-of-the-art in preventing harmful discharges to the
environment. What incentives did they have in further reducing these discharges?
To what degree did direct economic losses serve as such an incentive? What
incentives did insurance companies and professional organizations provide? What
were the main barriers, technological or otherwise, preventing firms from
reducing their discharges? What role did government regulations play, and was
new technology or scientific knowledge needed to implement or enforce those
regulations'? In summary, what patterns can be identified that advance our
knowledge of how environmental regulations and technological development
interact in a market society?