* 9422906
* Dissertation Research:  The Assessment of Female Condition
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Richard Wrangham, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 04/30/1996
* USD 5,190.00

A new hypothesis has been proposed for the function of conspicuous sexual
traits in female primates. The conventional view has been that certain female
traits that occur in sexual contexts, such as sexual skin swellings, are
designed to attract the attention of or incite competition between males in
multi-male species. However, this view does not explain why females in these
species would need to advertise their reproductive state so conspicuously or why
conspicuous traits would incite more competition among males than would
otherwise occur. In contrast, Pagel argues that conspicuous sexual males because
they advertise the female's quality or condition. The signals evolve in response
to male mate choice and competition among females to attract males (the mirror
image of what has been normally accepted). While the female competition
hypothesis is the most developed hypothesis to date for the function of
conspicuous sexual advertisement in female primates, no tests have been made of
its predictions. This dissertation project will examine variation in female
sexual traits and their influence on female attractiveness to males in wild
olive baboons at Gombe national Park in Tanzania. No study to date has been
designed to test the hypothesis that male sexual interest is influenced by
variation in any of these female traits in the wild, although it has been
apparent that males mate selectively. This study will make a substantial first
step towards understanding the evolutionary and social significance of female
sexual signals and sexual attractiveness, a topic clearly of vital importance
for understanding human evolution. It will also result in the training of young
experts in the area of social behavior.