* 9422996
* Dissertation Research:  Local Level Politics and Culture:   Peasant Union Brokerage in Quillacollo, Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Paul Friedrich, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1996
* USD 12,345.00

This project involves the dissertation research of a student of cultural
anthropology from the University of Chicago. The project involves the
ethnographic study of local peasant Indian labor leaders in highland Bolivia.
Taking the highland town of Quillacollo as a representative center of peasant
political activity, the project will study the main regional peasant union,
using participant-observation of union meetings and other public activities;
recording the history of local disputes and their resolution; extensive
interviews with leaders and their familes, including recording the personal
political networks and political biographies of leaders, as well as a survey of
patterns of livelihood. The research will assess whether peasant unions continue
to provide a sense of shared community and function as instruments for
collective action in the socially atomized context of the community. This
research is important because it will add to the corps of specialists
knowledgeable about the Andean region of South America, and advance our
understanding of the evolution of unionism and of the community role of peasant
unions. Increased understanding of the role of peasant-worker groups with
respect to their community and the function of their leaders is important to
help us understand the behavior of such groups in contemporary society. This
case study will provide a valuable addition to our knowledge which can help us
understand similar situations in other developing countries.