* 9423054
* Creating a Science and Technology Partnership
* O/D,LPA
* 03/15/1995,09/30/1996
* Joseph Kayne, National Governors' Association
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen M Latta
* 09/30/1996
* USD 58,143.00

; R o o t E n t r y F ; :h C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l V9h V9h ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; Y @ > ? { X X < @ ` $ X < ( ` January 12, 1995 Abstract for
NGA proposal #LPA-9423054 -- Creating a Science and Technology Partnership The
National Governor s Association proposes to conduct case studies of the NSF
State/University/Industry Cooperative Research Centers (S/UICRCs), the Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR), and the Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) programs. The case studies will document state/federal interaction in
each program, identify problems or barriers encountered, and suggest changes in
program design to address problem areas. Regarding the S/UICRC program, all
existing centers will be included in the study. Interviews will be conducted
with each S/UICRC director, the NSF program directors responsible for S/UICRCs
and the appropriate state official. The state official will be the member of NGA
s Science and Technology Council of the States or their designee. Officials from
approximately 20 states will be interviewed with regard to the SBIR program, in
addition to NSF staff with responsibilities for administering the SBIR and STTR
programs. A panel of state and federal policymakers , as well as outside
experts, will then be invited to participate in a one day workshop to critique
the case studies and to recommend program modification as needed. NGA will
submit a final report in the form of a White Paper summarizing the findings from
the case studies and proposing specific actions that might be taken by NSF
management and the nation s Governors to strengthen the partnership between NSF
and state governments. ; Oh +' 0 S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ' $ H l D
h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT January 12, 1995 kathleen latta darla j. clark @
?DR @ % $ @ O& h @ 8 C Microsoft Word 6.0 16 ; e 3 e j j j j j j j : 1 ` k T @ :
j : j j j j ~ j j j j January 12, 1995 Abstract for NGA proposal #LPA-9423054 --
Creating a Science and Technology Partnership The National Governor s
Association proposes to conduct case studies of the NSF
State/University/Industry Cooperative Research Centers (S/UICRCs), the Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR), and the Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) programs. The case studies will document state/federal interaction in
each program, identify problems or barriers encountered, and suggest changes in
program design to address problem areas. Regarding the S/UICRC program, all
existing centers will be included in the study. Interviews will be conducted
with each S/UICRC director, the NSF program directors responsible for S/UICRCs
and the appropriate state official. The state official will be the member of NGA
s Science and Technology Council of the States or their designee. Officials from
approximately 20 states will be interviewed with regard to the SBIR program, in
addition to NSF staff with responsibilities for administering the SBIR and STTR
programs. A panel of