* 9423663
* Marine Climates of the U.S. Alaskan Coastal Plain During the Late Neogene and Quaternary Interglacials
* O/D,OPP
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* David Krantz, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/1997
* USD 42,366.00

Abstract This award supports a project to compare the modern marine climate
with that of the last interglacial episode in the Bering Strait region. The two
primary goals of the project are to: (1) produce detailed records of seasonal
temperature ranges as recorded in the stable isotopic composition of mollusk
shells for the modern and the last interglacial, and (2) infer from the stable
isotope data the distribution of the major water masses during each time slice.
In the first phase of the project, stable isotope methods will be applied to an
evaluation of the modern hydrography of the Bering Sea - Chukchi Sea region.
Stable oxygen and carbon isotope analyses of ostracodes and mollusks from the
shelf will allow quantification of regional differences in water-mass
distribution and latitudinal temperature gradients. Isotope profiles of the
mollusks will provide a record of the seasonal range of temperature and might be
useful in distinguishing seasonally ice- free from ice-covered conditions. This
calibration experiment in the modern system will verify the relationship between
the isotopic composition of shell carbonate and seawater and identify the
geochemical signature of the principal water masses. In the second phase, the
results from the modern system will be used to evaluate conditions during the
highstand of the last interglacial. Stable isotope analyses will be performed on
fossil mollusks and ostracodes collected from the emergent coastal plain
deposits of the Pelukian transgression. Collection sites span a relatively broad
latitudinal range from St. Lawrence Island to Skull Cliff near Point Barrow;
this distribution of sites samples different water masses and points along the
north- south temperature gradient. Ostracode specimens collected at discrete
intervals from vertical outcrop sections will provide a record of isotopic
composition changes within the transgressive units. Temperature ranges and
water-mass variations can be interpreted from isotope profiles of mollusks as a
complement to the ostracode data to quantify the seasonal components of marine
paleoclimate. The underlying scientific goal of the project is to investigate
the physical processes which control the advection of heat into the Arctic Ocean
through the Bering Strait, and to determine whether these processes have varied
significantly between interglacial episodes.