* 9423164
* Neuroanatomical Basis of Endocrine-Mediated Behavioral      Development in the Honey Bee
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1995,09/30/1998
* Gene Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 09/30/1998
* USD 337,500.00

Proposal # 9423164 Susan E. Fahrbach, PI Gene E. Robinson, co-PI Behavioral
development occurs in many species, including humans. As individuals age and
pass through different stages of their life, their genetically determined
behavioral responses to specific environmental stimuli change in predictable
ways. Often these changes involve increasingly complex behavioral responses that
involve learning. The goal of Drs. Fahrbach and Robinson is to understand how
changes in brain structure relate to the development of behavior, particularly
behavior that is characterized by a high degree of plasticity. Dr. Fahrbach and
Dr. Robinson will test two hypotheses that explain the role of neuroanatomical
plasticity and behavioral plasticity. The first hypothesis predicts that changes
in brain structure occur in anticipation of changes in behavior, perhaps as a
result of a specific neuroendocrine signal. According to this hypothesis, the
neuroanatomical changes are necessary to support the transition to a more
complex behavior. The second hypothesis predicts that changes in brain structure
occur as a consequence of changes in behavior. According to this hypothesis, the
neuroanatomical changes are necessary to support the continued performance of a
more complex behavior. Drs. Fahrbach and Robinson will explore these hypotheses
by studying brain structures insects after endocrine and experiential factors
are experimentally manipulated. Studies of brain region volumes, synapse
formation and molecular events leading to neural plasticity will be undertaken.
The principal significance of this research will be to contribute to our
understanding of the neuroanatomical basis for hormone-mediated behavioral
plasticity in adult animals and humans.