* 9423730
* Pleistocene Glacial Ice Cover and Interglacial              Paleoclimatic History in the NE Russian Arctic -            Comparisons with Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Julie Brigham-Grette, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2000
* USD 389,953.00

Abstract This award supports a project to study the late Pleistoceneglacial
geology of the regions bordering the Bering Strait. Field work and laboratory
analyses of fossil materials collected on Chukotka Peninsula over the last three
years indicates that the late Cenozoic stratigraphic framework for NE Russia is
in need of significant revision. This work casts doubt on the number of glacial
events recorded in the coastal stratigraphy and undermines the correlation by
Russian workers of disjunct interglacial marine sequences that has been based on
biostratigraphy and elevation above sea level. The development of a unified
stratigraphic scheme for those parts of Beringia on both sides of the Bering
Strait requires that the Pleistocene stratigraphy of NE Russia be more firmly
based upon modern concepts of glacial sedimentology, isostasy, and eustasy and
secured with better geochronology. Knowledge of glacial ice extent in the
Russian Arctic is important for establishing accurate boundary conditions for
paleoclimatic modeling. Likewise, knowledge of interglacial marine conditions in
the region is important for understanding changes in the distribution of
watermasses and heat transport as well as understanding the role of the Bering
Strait in global ocean circulation models. Based upon past field work and a
complete inventory of moraines and other glaciogenic deposits using European
Space Agency synthetic-aperture-radar images across NE Russia, this project will
revise the Late Cenozoic stratigraphy of the region and provide an opportunity
for both US and Russian researchers to compare and exchange field methods and
laboratory techniques via joint study of crucial stratigraphic sections and
moraine sequences on both sides of the Bering Strait. Special attention will be
given to the paleoclimatic and paleoceanographic significance of similarities
and contrasts in the Pleistocene records. The correlation and geochronology of
the deposits will be based upon a variety of modern techniques, including amino
acid geochronology of mollusks, soft sediment paleomagnetism, cosmogenic isotope
surface exposure dating and quantitative geomorphology of moraines, along with
traditional biostratigraphy. The results of this project will be important to
developing a complete picture of paleoenvironmental conditions in this region.
Beyond the scientific work described here there are ancillary benefits to this
US-Russian cooperative venture. Collaboration and joint field work between U.S.
and Russian Quaternary researchers active in areas of Beringia is beneficial due
to the shared earth and cultural history of our common border. The proposed
development in the Bering Strait region of a jointly managed Beringian Heritage
Park by the National Park Service and Russian counterparts highlights this
shared legacy. Shared problem-solving in the field is necessary due to national
differences in sedimentologic and stratigraphic terminology and concepts. An
important benefit will be the opportunity to expose our Russian colleagues to
geochronological techniques not presently available in their country.