* 9423446
* Dissertation Research: Morphometric Reaction Norms Across   Precipitation and Temperature Variability Gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Nancy Moran, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/1997
* USD 8,000.00

9423446 MORAN It is well established that a character of an organism can chanee
in response to different environmental conditions, even though the underlying
genetic composition of the organism is the same. This ability to respond to
different environmental condition is termed phenotypic plasticity. Recent
theoretical work suggests that phenotypic plasticity is favored by natural
selection in variable environments as an evolutionary mechanism for coping with
environmental variability. As such, phenotypic plasticity may affect
evolutionary change and biodiversity in the broad sense. The purpose of this
study is to test empirically the prediction made by the theoretical models, by
comparing the levels of morphological phenotypic plasticity along precipitation
and temperature variability gradients. This can increase our understanding of
the importance of phenotypic plasticity in evolutionary change. In addition,
this study may help conservation biologists understand the effects of
environmental change on populations, as these are determined in part by their
level of phenotypic plasticity. The study species, the pallid-wing grasshopper
(Trimerotropis pallidipennis), is considered an agricultural pest in outbreak
years. Knowledge of the importance of the environment on the genetics of this
species may help us understand the evolution of insect outbreaks.