* 9423485
* Quaternary Paleoceanography of the Arctic Gateway Region    Based on Isotopic and Faunal Analysis of Foraminifera
* O/D,OPP
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Benjamin Flower, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 03/31/1997
* USD 97,473.00

9423485 Flower This award supports a project to study sediments from the Arctic
Gateway region. Surface water exchange through the Arctic Gateway at Fram Strait
accounts for about 90% of the Arctic heat budget and so this region may have
played a major role in glacial-interglacial Arctic climates during the
Quaternary. The major objectives of this research include documenting the
Quaternary history of Arctic climates and investigating the role of surface to
intermediate water exchange through the Arctic Gateway in late Quaternary
glacial-interglacial Arctic climates. Two sedimentary sequences on the Yermak
Plateau, recently drilled by Leg 151 of the Ocean Drilling Program, provide the
first opportunity for high-resolution studies of the Arctic Gateway region. This
project will generate high-resolution isotopic and faunal records based on
planktonic and benthic foraminifera from sites 910 and 911 forming a depth
transect on the Yermak Plateau (at 556 and 902 m water depth, respectively).
Planktonic records, with about 4,000 year resolution, will be spliced together
from both sites to form a composite record of surface water environments
throughout the Brunhes Epoch (late Quaternary to present). Benthic records, with
about 10,000 year resolution, will also be compiled. When combined, these
records will allow detailed comparison of surface waters to intermediate water
environments for areas with 550 and 900 m water depths. These data will allow
detailed reconstruction of surface to intermediate water hydrography during the
Brunhes Epoch. Extended records at site 911A will provide the first long-term,
high-resolution records of Arctic surface and intermediate water environments
throughout the Quaternary. These hydrographic interpretations of the integrated
isotopic and faunal records will test hypotheses about the role of this oceanic
gateway in regional and global climatic change. The results will bear on the
importance of meridional heat transport by Arctic Gateway surface currents
during intervals of global warmth and during important climatic transitions. The
intervals of greatest interest include the mid-Quaternary climatic transition
from about 1.2-0.6 Ma, and glacial-interglacial cycles of the Brunhes Epoch. The
records obtained will greatly improve our understanding of the influence of the
Arctic Gateway region on the global climate system during the Quaternary. In
particular, this work will examine the role of Arctic Gateway paleoceanography
in the Quaternary glacial evolution of the Northern Hemisphere. Lastly, it
should provide insights into the future response of Arctic climates to projected
global warming.