* 9423926
* Neuroendocrine Regulation of Prolactin Secretion
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Lori Badura, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 09/30/1997
* USD 126,130.00

9423926 Badura Prolactin, a protein hormone secreted by the anterior pituitary
gland, is involved in a large number of physiological and behavioral processes
in mammals, including estrus cyclicity, immune system activation, stress, milk
production, and maternal behavior. While this hormone is clearly involved in
many different physiological systems, the precise mechanism of action and the
ways in which prolactin secretion is controlled remains to be resolved. It is
difficult to study not only because of its multiple modes of action but because
prolactin surges and chronic secretions appear to be differently regulated. Dr.
Badura is using a clever model system to examine the neuroendocrine regulation
of prolactin release. She is taking advantage of the fact that prolactin shows a
marked annual fluctuation that corresponds with changes in photoperiod, most
likely daylength. Dr. Badura will incorporate photoperiodic cues to examine the
factors the underlie the regulation of prolactin secretion. She will be
concentrating on two neuropeptides, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and
oxytocin. These peptides hormones are likely modulatory factors since they are
located in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, a brain region that
she has previously shown to play an important role in the stimulatory modulation
of basal prolactin release. Using state-of-the-art neuroanatomical procedures,
Dr. Badura will identify the sites of action and the relative contributions of
modulatory factors in the expression of photoperiodic changes in the
neuroendocrine control of this physiologically relevant hormone. Dissecting the
mechanisms by which prolactin regulates apparently unrelated physiological
systems will increase our understanding of the adaptive significance of evolving
hormonal systems that possess multiple targets and functions. ***