* 9423416
* Dissertation Research: Ant-Plants as Experimental Models in Ecology: An Example from Cordia Nodosa (Boraginaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Naomi Pierce, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 02/28/1997
* USD 7,000.00

9423416 Pierce Censuses of three separate populations in Amazonian Peru show
striking association between the reproductive biology of the ant-plant, Cordia
nodosa (Boraginaceae), and the species of ant inhabiting it. Cordia nodosa
rarely produces flowers and fruits when inhabited by the most common symbiotic
ant species, Allomerus demerarae, but regularly flowers and fruits when
inhabited by three, rarer symbiotic ant species (Azteca spp., Myrmelachista
sp.). Interestingly, there is no detectable difference in the rate of vegetative
growth. These results indicate that Allomerus may be a parasite of C. nodosa.
Moreover, colonization experiments show that parasitoid wasp predation on Azteca
foundresses may in part mediate the coexistence of multiple ant species on the
single resource represented by C. nodosa. These complex interactions make the C.
nodosa-ant assemblage an ideal system in which to investigate factors shaping
the evolution of mutualisms. This research will assess the relative costs and
benefits provided by different ant associates to the plant, and will investigate
the dynamics of colonization by C. nodosa. This research will address two
important areas in community ecology: the role that parasitisms have in the
evolution and ecology of mutualisms and the role that natural enemies have in
maintaining species diversity. In doing so, this research will enhance
understanding of mutualistic interactions and their role in ecological
communities.