* 9423026
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Managing Conservation:  An Ethnography of Law in the New England Fishing Industry in   1995
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Sally Moore, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 12/31/1997
* USD 5,000.00

9423026 Moore This project is a study of law in the New England fishing industry
in 1995, a time of ecological stress in the ocean, social and economic stress on
the shore, and rapid lawmaking at national, state, local, and international
levels. The methods of the study are ethnographic and historical and the site of
the ethnographic work is Gloucester, Massachusetts. The project aims to document
and analyze beliefs and practices of social grouns in this highly state-
regulated social field; to link legal events in the social field to later and
longer-term social ecological processes, and to develop a methodology for
longitudinal studies of lawmaking in highly regulated social fields in complex
societies. %%%% Cod, haddock, flounder and other "groundfish" have been fished
off the coast of New England for at least 350 years. Indeed it was the reports
of abundant cod in coastal waters that drew English colonists in the 1620s to
the area that became Gloucester,, Massachusetts. Economically and culturally
important to the region, groundfish species have experienced cycles of decline
and recovery for at least 100 years, but the present decline is apparently
unprecedented. A predominant belief that this decline is due to overfishing has
led to significant regulation of the New England fishing industry in an effort
to restore fish stocks. Though not new, the regulation efforts are extensive and
intimately tied to the economic, ecological, and cultural contexts of the
region. This project aims to study lawmaking processes in this field through a
combination of ethnographic and historical techniques. The combination of the
ethnographic and historical research should create a large data base that will
support a longitudinal study of lawmaking in a highly regulated social field in
a complex society, and contribute to comparative studies of lawmaking in such
fields. ****