* 9423976
* Dissertation Research:  Settlement Organization of a Major  Pre-Columbian Polity:  Archaeological Survey at             Cotzumalguapa, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1995,02/29/1996
* Arthur Demarest, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/1996
* USD 11,860.00

Demarest Under the direction of Dr. Arthur Demarest, Mr. Oswaldo Chinchillia
will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Building on previous work he
will conduct a settlement survey in the piedmont area of the Pacific coast of
Guatemala. This region is well known for the classic period (500-1000 AD) sites
ascribed to the Cotzumalguapa culture and for the elaborate sculptures and
writing system associated with it. Although attention has been drawn to this
area since the nineteenth century, current knowledge is restricted to
chronology, architecture and sculpture. Little effort has been devoted to
understanding social and political organization. Mr. Chinchillia will conduct a
systematic regional survey in the immediate environs of the three largest known
sites. He will locate and record data from smaller centers, map their position
and qize, and based on the resultant distributions reconstruct both settlement
and social systems. He will also conduct limited excavations in order to compare
surface and subsurface materials. Through this process, he will determine how
accurately suface distributions mirror buried materials and what potential bias
surface data might contain. Middle America is famous for the complex societies
which developed in an often inhospitable tropical environment. Archaeologists
wish to understand the processes which led to the emergence and development of
these complex entities and which ultimately resulted in their downfall. Very
little systematic work has been done in the piedmont of Guatemala even though
the complex and elaborate nature of archaeological remains indicates that such
attention is merited. Mr. Chinchillia's research will shed new light on the rise
of complex society. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and
assist in the training of a promising young scientist.