* 9423509
* Dissertation Research:  The Nature of the Variation within  the MHC class Ib loci, HLA-E and -F, and the Type of        Selection Causing It
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1997
* Carole Ober, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 06/30/1997
* USD 9,754.00

Natural selection is one of the evolutionary forces proposed to maintain
genetic variation within a population. However, few good examples of selection
maintaining variation in a natural population have been found. One convincing
example of this type of selection occurs at the major histocompatibility complex
(or tissue typing complex). Yet several recently discovered MHC loci, HLA-E and
-F, were reported to have significantly less variation than other MHC genes. If
so, it is likely that these loci are under the influence of a different type of
selection, one that does not maintain variation in a population. Instead, these
genes may have undergone a selective sweep or may be evolving neutrally. For
this doctoral dissertation research project, the investigator will study the
amount of variation in HLA-E and HLA-F using a technique called single-strand
conformation polymorphism analysis. Next, she will determine the nucleotide
changes responsible for this variation by sequencing variant SSCP bands. Based
on patterns of nucleotide diversity and using statistical tests for selection
such as the newly developed McDonald-Kreitman test and the HKA test of Richard
Hudson. Inferences shall be drawn regarding the selective forces that are
influencing these genes.