* 9423951
* New Methods for Polyhedral Borane Synthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Larry Sneddon, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 03/31/1998
* USD 441,000.00

Dr. Larry G. Sneddon, Chemistry Department, University of Pennsylvania, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division to develop new general methodologies that enable the
systematic, high yield preparation of polyhedral boron clusters. In this project
a variety of new approaches for the syntheses and modification of polyhedral
boron compounds will be designed. These include: new types of carbon and
nitrogen cage-insertion reactions involving the nucleophilic attack of
polyhedral boron anions on nitriles and polar-acetylenes; metal-catalyzed
reactions of polyhedral boranes with acetylenes, olefins, and/or carbon
monoxide; and new types of sulfur-atom insertion reactions leading to thia- and
dithiaboranes. A second primary goal will be a systematic exploration of the
chemistry and applications of the clusters which will be made available by the
first part of the project. The polyhedral boranes are cage shaped molecules
which possess unique chemical bonding and unusual properties. Besides being of
theoretical interest, they are thought to be starting materials from which novel
ceramics and polymers may be obtained. However, there are presently no good ways
in which large quantities of the polyhedral boranes can be prepared in an
economical fashion. The aim of this project is the development of new, efficient
synthetic methods for the generation of these compounds. This will be
accompanied by comprehensive investigations of the chemistry of the newly
available molecules. These investigations will set the stage for the practical
applications of polyhedral boranes as precursors to ceramic and polymeric
materials.