* 9423094
* Study of  Structures and Chemistry of Multimetallic         Hydroisomerization Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Jonathan Phillips, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 01/31/1999
* USD 294,000.00

Abstract Jonathan Phillips This study tests the hypothesis that catalysts
consisting of two compositionally distinct particle surfaces will be superior to
simpler catalysts with a single active surface for certain reactions and
specifically for hydroisomerization. The design paradigm calls for a small
amount of a noble metal (palladium, platinum, rhodium, or iridium) that can
dissociate hydrogen, which then spills over to an alloy surface with high
selectivity for the desired product; these alloys consist of a base metal (iron
or cobalt) and a rare earth (cerium, praseodynium, or lanthanum). Other studies
suggest that carbon supports may favor formation of surfaces with the desired
structures; supports studied in this work include both high surface-area and
low-surface area carbon, graphite, alumina, and silica. Preliminary studies
using iron-cerium-palladium on carbon show both high activity and high
selectivity for hydroisomerization of 1-butene. In this work partial
hydrogenation of butadiene is used as an additional test reaction. Surface and
bulk structures of the particles are probed using X-ray diffraction, Mossbauer
spectroscopy, microcalorimetry, and transmission electron microscopy. The
principal being established in this work should apply to a wide range of
industrial processes. The specific systems under study will permit immediate
application to the production of "reformulated" gasoline required by the Clean
Air Act and should eliminate the cost differential associated with compliance.
***