* 9423204
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Migrations and Agricultural Change -- The Case of Smallholder Agriculture in Southern  Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1996
* B. Turner, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* David A. Kirtland
* 05/31/1996
* USD 8,392.00

SBR-9423204 Billie Lee Turner II Brad D. Jokisch Clark University Dissertation
Improvement Research: Migrations and Agricultural Change: The Case of
Smallholder Agriculture in Southern Ecuador This research investigates the
impact of migratory strategies, predominantly male, on land productivity in the
highlands of southern Ecuador. Ambiguity exists over the linkages between
migrations and agricultural change. This research seeks to clarify these
linkages by explicitly connecting migration to land-use outcomes: is household
agricultural productivity affected by the type of household migratory activity?
The Canar, Ecuador region will serve as the study area. Households that have
engaged in long-term international migration as well as those active in more
localized migration and circulation will be surveyed. By conducting a community-
wide land productivity survey, combined with secondary sources and oral
histories of households representing the dominant migratory strategies, the
impacts of the migrations can be assessed. Incorporating labor mobility as a
factor influencing agricultural use will illuminate the linkages between labor
mobility and agricultural change, thus contribute to both the theories of
migration and agricultural change. The research is directly relevant to
development efforts because it will provide valuable data concerning
agricultural change under varying conditions of access to labor and money.