* 9423065
* Mechanisms of Patch Maintenance in Old-Growth Hemlock-Hardwood Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Michael Walters, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1999
* USD 297,264.00

le for toolbar execution Show multiple pages Toggle zoom-in zoom-out mode
Toggles full screen2Attempts to make the document fit on one less page Moves to
the next table cell Moves to the previous tablecell*Moves to the first cell in
the current row)Moves 9423065 Reich Mono-dominant patches of eastern hemlock and
sugar maple may persist for millennia in a stable forest mosaic pattern. This
study will explore the mechanisms underlying the maintenance of this patchy
mosaic, focusing primarily on feedbacks and the functional underpinnings for
recruitment success. Working in mesic forests in Michigan and Wisconsin, the
study will determine whether stable patch structure may be maintained by
positive feedbacks between canopy properties, resource availability, differences
in species ecophysiology, and population dynamics. Specifically this study will
determine if these factors result in success of sugar maple recruitment beneath
sugar maple, but not hemlock canopies, and of hemlock recruitment beneath
hemlock, but not sugar maple. The study will also test the resource reduction/
tolerance hypothesis of community dynamics under a multiple resource, light and
nitrogen scenario. In a series of field and greenhouse studies, the following
hypotheses will be tested: (1) light and N availability is lower on average
beneath hemlock than sugar maple canopies. (2) Small-seeded hemlock will
establish beneath hemlock overstories on suitable microsites and persist due to
great tolerance of combined low light and N levels. In contrast, seedlings of
large seeded sugar maple can establish beneath hemlock overstories, but fail to
maintain positive growth rates due to low N and light availability. (3) Hemlock
seedling recruitment will fail beneath sugar maple canopies because of dense
leaf litter and lack of suitable nurse logs. In contrast, greater N availability
beneath sugar maple canopies enables sugar maple seedlings to maintain positive
growth rates under deep shade. (4) Yellow birch will fail to establish in deep
shade in either patch type and will regenerate in high resource conditions only
on suitable microsites. (5) Seedling survival is a function of relative growth
rate, which in turn is a function of light and N availability and of variation
in seedling metabolism and allocation. The minimum light needed for survival is
influenced by N availability, most in yellow birch, less in sugar maple, and
least in hemlock. %%% The combination of field observations, field
manipulations, and greenhouse experiments will yield a superb combination of
detail to more fully understand the natural dynamics of northern forests. This
project is unique in its excellent attempt to link ecosystem processes,
physiological ecology and community dynamics. The results also will have direct
bearing on the physiological attributes of commercially valuable tree species,
such as sugar maple.