* 9423947
* REU: Ecological Research in the Southwestern US and its     Relevance to the Environmental Policy
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Naida Zucker, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 12/31/1998
* USD 159,000.00

In recognition of the many challenges that environmental problems pose, and the
dire need for trained scientists and management personnel in this field, the
grantee will initiate an REU Site program with an ecology /environment theme via
a collaborative effort between New Mexico State University (NMSU) and Howard
University (HU). Their goal is to provide a multi-cultural group of students
with a rigorous research experience in ecology/environmental biology during an
eight-week summer period, followed by a 10 day visit to Washington, DC where
they will be exposed to work being done by environmental agencies. At NMSU,
groups of 3 or 4 students will collaborate in data collection on an original
research project; each student will be responsible for analyzing and presenting
a unique subset of the data at a mini-symposium. During meetings with their
group mentor(s) students will discuss relevant literature, problems encountered,
and new hypotheses and experimental designs for others to test in future years.
While at NMSU, a series of visitors knowledgeable in environmental problems
specific to the southwest will speak informally with the entire group.
Discussions will encompass many topics of particular interest to minority groups
including environmental justice and how cultural perceptions affect
interpretation of environmental problems and implementation of appropriate
policies. Next the entire group will visit HU where formal lectures on
environmental policy, justice and related issues will be presented. The group
will also tour governmental and non-governmental agencies where they will meet
representatives concerned with environmental problems. This experience will not
only make the students more aware of how ecological research is used to make
policy decisions but will provide them with knowledge od job opportunities in
environmental biology.