* 9423316
* Disertation Research: Nitrogen-Plant-Insect Interactions:   Integrating Via a Net Effects Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Clive Jones, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 09/30/1996
* USD 6,048.00

9423316 Coleman Nitrogen fertilization is well known to both increase plant
productivity and insect herbivore damage. Certain levels and rates of
fertilization may negatively affect plant productivity by increasing the amount
of damage by insects. This research will examine the net impact of two insect
herbivores on two plant species grown under various fertilization regimes. It is
designed specifically to understand the consequences of fertilization and insect
herbivory in combination on plant productivity. Two economically and
ecologically important tree species (oak and cottonwood) with contrasting life
history traits and two economically detrimental insect herbivore species are the
subjects. Fertilization experiments will be carried out in both a planted field
plot and, for control and comparison purposes, in a greenhouse. Samples of each
tree species will be exposed to differing fertilization schedules in the
presence and absence of insect herbivores, and effects on plant growth, tissue
chemistry, and herbivore performance will be measured. The results of this study
should improve understanding of the impact on plant productivity of
fertilization levels and rates of addition, in the presence and absence of
insect herbivores. They will reveal when tradeoffs occur between positive
effects of fertilization on plant growth and negative effects of fertilization
through stimulation of insect feeding on plants. The long term result may
include the formulation of fertilization practices that optimize net
productivity of plants, yet reduce fertilizer and pesticide requirements.