* 9423322
* Structural Studies of Inorganic Phosphates,                 US-Morocco Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Elizabeth Holt, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1997
* USD 20,410.00

Description: This project is to support collaborative research by Dr. Elizabeth
Holt, Chemistry Department, Oklahoma State University, and Dr.A. Boukhari,
Laboratoire de Chemie du Solide Appliquee, Faculte des Sciences de Rabat,
Universite Mohammed V, in Rabat, Morocco. The research will focus on alteration
of the structures of AIBIIP2O7 complexes with the aim of producing new materials
with commercial properties. The physical properties of many known complexes of
this family arise from the behavior of the B atom. Thus various methods of
altering the environment of the B atom will be explored. Included are: the
preparation of ferromagnetic diphosphate complexes of form MIMIIP2O7,
substitution of two AI atoms for a single AII atom in AIIBIIP2O7 and exploration
of mixed valence materials, (BIIBIII)P2O7. These types of changes are expected
to lead to systems with increased metal to metal interaction, and thus
interesting physical properties. Scope: This project is to fund visits by two
Moroccan M.S. and Ph.D. students from the Universite Mohammed V to the
crystallographic laboratories at Oklahoma State U. ,each year, to carry out
materials structural research. It also supports visits by the two senior
scientists to each other laboratories. The project allows the collaboration of
the Moroccan group, with experience in sample preparation and analytical
studies, with the US scientist who has considerable experience in experimental
chemistry, especially in crystallography. The bulk of the synthetic work will be
done in Morocco, a country with the largest phosphate mines in the world, while
the structural characterization will be done at Dr. Holt's laboratory under her
supervision. Dr. Holt has had a very successful collaboration recently with Dr.
Boukhari which resulted in several publications. This project will build on this
relationship, and will expand the collaboration by including additional students
from Morocco. The project fits well with the objectives of the Division of
International Programs.