* 9423903
* REU-site: Summer Undergraduate Research in Cell Biology,    Developmental/Reproductive Biology and Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1999
* Robert O'Connell, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 03/31/1999
* USD 151,500.00

9423903 The Worcester Foundation Summer Training Program is a ten week immersion
in biological research for undergraduate students. It consists of intensive
"hands-on" laboratory research experience individualized for each student and
performed under the guidance of working scientists expert in many of the modern
areas of biological science. The Program is designed to provide students with
their first exposure to the actual practical of scientific research in the hopes
that the excitement, challenge and creativity of the enterprise will convince
them to consider basic research in the sciences as a viable career choice. In
the spring, each student is matched with a basic research project, initially
proposed by a preceptor with an active research program in the students stated
area mf interest. Upon acceptance, each student is provided with a reading list
of current publications in the selected area to provide the background required
for the proposed summer research project . During the Program we: 1) instruct
each student in safe laboratory, and appropriate ethical practice; 2) acquaint
them with current issues in biology: 3) teach them scientific techniques and
skills, many of which can be utilized in their future endeavors; 4) guide them
in shaping the specific research questions to be asked; 5) require that they
work independently toward the agreed upon research goals; 6) encourage cross
disciplinary approaches by providing opportunities for interaction with other
students, our research staff, and our visiting scientists; and 7) maintain an
educational setting which is maximally challenging and thus, fosters each
student's exploration of future career choices in science. In addition to the
required written report detailing the progress made in their individual research
projects, each student presents a short oral report to the Faculty and public
summarizing the results of their efforts at a closing mini-symposium and award
ceremony.