* 9423531
* Dissertation Research: Non-Equilibrium Competition and      Coexistence: Experimental Tests of Mechanistic Models
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* G. David Tilman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 02/28/1998
* USD 5,500.00

Theoretical investigations suggest that nonconstant resource supplies play an
important role in maintaining species diversity. However, for most organisms,
explicit mechanisms enabling species coexistence due to resource variation are
unknown. In the proposed study, the role of phosphorus (P) and light variations
in maintaining species diversity in algal communities will be investigated, and
the potential mechanisms of coexistence will be tested. Among these are the role
of efficient resource storage and rapid induction of photosynthesis. After
screening experiments with multispecies algal communities, six algal species
that differ in their abilities to grow under several regimes of constant and
fluctuating light and P supply will be chosen. Their kinetics of P- and light-
dependent growth then will be determined. Next, a mathematical model will use
these kinetics to predict the competitive dynamics over a wide range of light
and P fluctuations. These predictions will be tested in numerous competition
experiments. This combination of physiological and community experiments wit h
mechanistic theory will allow the explicit testing of theory and of the role of
non-equilibrium conditions in these communities. Thus, this will indicate the
degree to which the knowledge of species physiology can be used to predict the
dynamics and structure of competitive communities.