* 9423392
* Late Quaternary Climatic and Vegetation History of the      Alaskan North Slope:  Part II, Analysis of Paleo Records
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1995,09/30/2000
* Linda Brubaker, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 09/30/2000
* USD 552,680.00

Abstract ATM-9423392 Brubaker,Linda B. University of Washington Title: Late
Quaternary Climatic and Vegetation History of the Alaskan North Slope: Part II,
Analysis of Paleo Records Beringia (far northwest Canada, Alaska, and northeast
Siberia) is an important region of paleoclimate study for the NSF program
Paleoclimate of Arctic Lakes and Estuaries (PALE) because it remained
unglaciated during the late Quaternary and experienced extensive changes in
paleogeography due to changing sea levels. This research is designed to describe
the late Quaternary climate history of the North Slope (ca. 150,000 years BP to
present) through the analysis of proxy climate indicators in a suite of lake
sediment cores on the Alaskan North Slope. The research will: 1) describe
temporal and spatial variations in the pollen, spores, plant macrofossils and
selected geochemical properties, 2) interpret variations in paleoclimate from
proxy indicators (using analytical approaches and large modern calibration data
sets for the interpretation of pollen data), and 3) infer potential causes of
paleoclimatic variations using a conceptual framework of large scale controls of
eastern Beringian climate and climate model simulations as part of ongoing PALE
paleoclimate projects. Results of the proposed research will contribute directly
to PALE's goal of documenting circumarctic paleoclimate variability.