* 9423707
* The Synthesis, Characterization, and Surface Chemistry of   Ultra-thin Oxide Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1995,05/31/2000
* David Goodman, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/2000
* USD 229,000.00

Abstract 9423707 The goal of this project is the synthesis, characterization,
and surface chemistry of well defined, ultra-thin (less than 10 nm) oxide films.
Ultra-thin oxide films will be prepared on refractory single crystal substrates
and characterized using an array of surface science techniques, including low
energy electron diffraction, Auger electron spectroscopy, X-ray and ultraviolet
photoelectron spectroscopy and, ion scattering spectroscopy, reflection
absorption Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, high resolution electron
energy loss spectroscopy, scanning tunneling microscopy/atomic force microscopy,
and temperature programmed desorption. Ordered, oxide surfaces in thin film form
will be prepared on single-crystal, refractor metal substrates. This approach
will be extended to include a variety of oxide and mixed-oxide types. A
methodology utilizing these highly ordered, stoichiometric oxide thin films
offers a promising new strategy for studying the surface chemistry of these
materials in ways precluded utilizing the bulk materials and traditional
techniques. %%% This study impacts the basic science of oxides and various
practical technologies such as environmental waste remediation, device
fabrication, and catalysis. Because of the highly insulating nature of many
oxide materials, their surface geometrical and electronic properties, in
general, have received much less attention than, for example, metal surfaces. To
date, extensive work on the chemisorption and catalytic properties of oxide
materials have been conducted, however, the microscopic reaction mechanisms
occurring on oxide surfaces are still not well understood. The principle reason
for this is that these studies have been performed primarily on powder samples.
Therefore, the information represents an average of the various crystal faces
exposed in addition to a variety of defects which are inevitably present in the
powdered samples. On the other hand, high-purity single cr ystals of many oxide
materials have been difficult to obtain and studies of these insulating
materials have often encountered the difficulties associated with surface
charging, sample heating and cleaning. Therefore, there is a clear need for the
synthesis of high quality, thin oxide films. Structural and chemisorptive
properties of oxide materials can be obtained by preparing well-defined, thin
oxide films whose properties are identical to their single-crystal bulk
counterparts, thereby facilitating surface chemical studies of these materials
under controlled conditions.