* 9423410
* Atmospheric Transport and Deposition of Chemical            Constituents at Summit, Greenland: Interpretation of the    GISP-2 Ice Core
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Cliff Davidson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 05/31/1998
* USD 297,362.00

This project is the continuation of an investigation of the transport of
chemical trace elements and species from source regions through the atmosphere
to the Greenland ice sheet. Its goal is to provide information for the
interpretation of the trace element distribution in the long ice core that has
been obtained through the Greenland Ice Sheet Program (GISP- 2) drilling effort.
The ice core will provide a detailed record spanning 200,000 years. The project
has three specific objectives: (1) the identification of source regions and
atmospheric pathways for the chemical constituents reaching the drill site,
including the possible changes in air mass characteristics during transit, (2)
the quantification of relationships between chemical species in the atmosphere
and those in the ice sheet, and (3) the interpretation of the deep ice core data
using this information. Prior field work has resulted in the collecting of
samples of air, aerosol, precipitation, and deposited snow, which will be
analyzed for various anions and cations, trace elements, carbon compounds, and
trace gases. This project will emphasize the deposition mechanisms. The first
objective will be achieved by measuring concentrations of chemical species in
air and snow, and then combining this information with meteorological data of
other investigators. Concentrations of major anions and cations will be
determined by ion chromatography in our laboratories, while concentrations of
trace elements and other species will be obtained by collaboration with other
groups. The second objective involves measurement of wet, dry, and fog
deposition, as well as changes that occur in the snow pack after deposition of
chemical species. The third objective will be achieved by developing models to
explain the processes influencing air and snow chemistry at the site in
collaboration with GISP-2 researchers who are actively working with the core
data. The results will be a better interpretation of the ice c ore data, and the
reduction of uncertainties involved in using the core data to determine past
atmospheric conditions. ***