* 9423516
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny and the Evolution of Host  Use and Host Specialization in the Endophagous Moth Genus   Papaipema (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1995,03/31/1997
* David Wagner, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 03/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

WAGNER 9423516 This project will examine the relationships among species for one
of North America's largest native groups of moths, the genus Papaipema
(Lepidoptera: Noctuidae). Papaipema is unique among large genera of North
American moths in containing both widespread agricultural pest species and
highly specialized species (the majority) that feed on only one or a few plants,
occur in a very restricted geographical area, or both. Although the morphology,
taxonomy, and life history of Papaipema species are well-understood relative to
other large moth genera, no one has yet attempted to reconstruct the phylogeny
or address relationships among the species in this genus. This project will
utilize molecular DNA sequence data to construct a cladogram or phylogenetic
pattern of relationships. Once the relationships among the various species have
been resolved as much as possible, the cladogram will be used to test hypotheses
concerning the generalist/pest/outbreak life style and its converse, extreme
specialization on particular host plants. Specifically, the following questions
will be asked: Did specialization precede the more generalized "pest" habit or
vice versa? To what degree can the nature of plant use in this group be
explained by similarities in chemical compounds occurring in the plants versus
the relationships among the plants themselves or the habitats in which they
occur? %%% This project will contribute to our basic knowledge of biodiversity
in this group of North American moths. It will also contribute important
information about how insects form host plant associations and how pest species
originate. This knowledge holds promise for developing strategies for
controlling agricultural, forest and nursery crop pests. ***