* 9423843
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Chaos with Multiple Positive       Lyapunov Exponents
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* James Yorke, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1998
* USD 283,590.00

DMS-9423843 Yorke This proposal studies higher dimensional chaos. Lyapunov
exponents measure the average rates of linear expansion or contraction of a
dynamical system in different directions; a system with N positive Lyapunov
exponents is expanding in N linearly independent directions, thus an attractor
of the system should be at least N-dimensional. However, attractors and Lyapunov
exponents can be very sensitive to parameter changes, leading to "windows" in
parameter space for which the system exhibits lower-dimensional behavior. Also,
the fluctuations over time of the number of positive finite-time Lyapunov
exponents in some systems leads to important questions about the shadowing
properties of numerical trajectories. We will study these and other fundamental
aspects of dynamics systems with multiple positive Lyapunov exponents. Higher
dimensional chaos can occur in models of many engineering devices and in
meteorological models and climate models. This research will tell us if
mathematical models can suddenly get trapped in artificial windows of regular
behavior. These windows would be artificial in that any realistic level of noise
would disrupt the regular behavior. Our research will also shed light on the
reliability of numerical trajectories for higher dimensional models. This study
is critical to realistic modeling.