* 9423592
* Formative Period Household Socio-Economics at La Joya,      Veracruz, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Philip Arnold III, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 179,192.00

Arnold With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Philip Arnold and his
colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological research at the site
of La Joya which is located in the Tuxtla Mountains of Mexico. The Olmec culture
is one of the earliest and also best known in Middle America. The large sculpted
stone heads which weigh many tons each and were made by Olmec peoples bespeak a
surprisingly high level of social organization at an early date. While the
overall importance of the Olmecs has long been recognized, very little is
archaeologically known about them and the two sites which have been excavated
are both located along the Gulf coast of Mexico. The adjacent Tuxtla Mountains
have both fertile well drained soils. They also served as the source for the
basalts used for the monumental sculpture, elite tombs and utilitarian ground
stone artifacts at Gulf Olmec centers. With the exception of Dr. Arnold's
reconnaissance, very little archaeological work has been focussed on the Olmec
in this region. At La Joya Dr. Arnold has discovered a large site which dates to
the early Olmec period and therefore has the potential to shed light on the rise
of this culture. Several goals guide the excavation and subsequent analyses. Dr.
Arnold wishes to focus on households and to determine how individual households
were organized and how they changed over time.He will also characterize
subsistence strategies and land use practices which the La Joya residents
employed and finally will investigate how utilitarian craft objects were
produced. Together these data will provide information on how La Joya people
related both to each other and to their environment. To accomplish this goal Dr.
Arnold will combine both survey and excavation. This will allow him to plot the
distribution of sites over the landscape and to determine the context of several
of these. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data
of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed light on the rise of complex
society in the New World and help scientists to understand how groups at
relatively simple technological levels interact with their environment.