* 9423196
* Genetics in the Atomic Age
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* John Beatty, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/1999
* USD 64,975.00

While science and the cold war usually brings physics to mind, the atomic age
and cold war issues also influenced and reflected developments in biology. This
research investigates the influences of genetics on popular culture, military
strategy, civil defense, diplomacy and ideology, and of cold war concerns on
concepts and methods in genetics. A central issue in the research involves the
extent to which geneticists in postwar America played an active role to
establish and maintain their social relevance. This relevance depended on
geneticists being able to evaluate the significance of radiation-induced
mutation for human individuals and populations, and to maintain the distinction
between genetics and eugenics. There were tall hurdles to overcome in order to
reach the goal. For instance, geneticists disagreed greatly about the
significance of mutations. Using archival sources, interviews, and surveys of
research support and popular reports, this investigation will undertake a
careful and detailed analysis of the theoretical, conceptual, methodological and
empirical issues in contention, and how they were overcome. The investigation
will focus on three interelated areas of disagreement: the `genetic load`
disputes, the `classical/balance` controversy, and arguments over the
interpretation of genetic research on humans vs. non-human `model` organisms. It
will consider the role of disciplinary and professional differences in these
controversies. It will consider the relationships between Federal research
sponsors and their scientific clients. It will examine how the scope and
direction of scientific effort reflected scientific and social concerns and how
sponsors and clients handled socio-scientific controversies. Results will be
published in articles and a book.