* 9423762
* Collaborative Research on Domestic and International        Conflict Linkages
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Will Moore, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 05/31/1998
* USD 44,102.00

9423762 Moore Theoretical perspectives in the social sciences have traditionally
treated domestic and international conflict as independent. However, the
investigators contend that linkages exist and are important for understanding
the dynamics of conflict at either the domestic or international levels. Recent
history provides numerous examples of domestic and international conflict
linkages including the Kurdish uprising in Iraq following the Gulf War, the
Argentine invasion of the Falklands/Malvinas Islands, and the Contra War in
Nicaragua. Yet, do such linkages exist as general patterns of conflict behavior
or are they only manifest during significant events such as inter-state crises,
wars, riots and rebellions? The current investigation will answer that question
with respect to middle powers that are undergoing liberalization and/or facing
ethno- nationalist challenges. It will also help address the weaknesses that
exist within the literature by developing and testing a dynamic theory of
domestic-international conflict linkages. The project has been underway for one
year with support from Emory University and the Institute for Global cooperation
and Conflict. During that time the investigators have specified a theoretical
model, developed a coding scheme for collecting relevant data and begun the data
collection on eight cases. their model builds on work in the international
relations literature that examines conflictual and cooperative behavior among
nation-states. In addition, the research team makes use of the recent call for
two-level modelling and contend that the linkage can best be clarified by
arguing that domestic groups hostile to the state, the state itself, and
relevant other states in the international system all monitor, and respond to,
one another's behavior in conflict situations. In other words, the investigators
develop a modes where the behavior of any of these actors is argued to be
conditioned by the behavior of each of the other actors. ***