* 9423868
* Dissertation Research:  Dispersal, Evolution, and Phylogeny of Membranipora (Bryozoa:  Cheilostomata)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1998
* C. Drew Harvell, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 02/28/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9423868 Harvell Dispersal of organisms and gene flow among populations are
poorly understood in open systems like the ocean where the life history of many
marine groups includes long distance dispersing stages. This is in contrast to
terrestrial and fresh water organisms with their often obvious physical
discontinuities in habitat to explain genetic structure of populations and, with
a more long-term view, allopatric speciation or the origin of new species from
geographically isolated populations. This project will focus on the marine
bryozoan genus Membranipora (Bryozoa: Cheilostomata) and the species M.
membranacea to investigate whether ocean currents are a major factor in
structuring gene flow. Molecular genetic methods (primarily mitochondrial DNA
sequencing with a small component of protein electrophoresis) will be used to
investigate patterns and rates of gene flow among populations. In addition, a
phylogeny or diagram of relationships among species in the genus Membranipora
will be constructed using mtDNA sequence data and interpreted in a geographic
context to address hypotheses about the causes of speciation in the genus
Membranipora. %%% This study will contribute to our knowledge of marine
biodiversity by studying a genus in the group of organisms known as Bryozoa.
These are most commonly seen in their plant-like branching colonies but the
small larval dispersing phase is very important to gene flow among populations.
The project will investigate current gene flow patterns within one species and
begin to address geologically historical gene flow by determining relationships
among species in the genus and examining their geographic distributions.