* 9423850
* Isolation of an Xist Gene cDNA From The Marsupial           Monodelphis Domestica
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/1994,04/30/1996
* John McCarrey, Texas Biomedical Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 04/30/1996
* USD 50,000.00

McCarrey 94-23850 Abstract In the embryo proper of eutherians X-chromosome
inactivation is random with respect to whether the maternally- or paternally-
derived chromosome becomes inactivated, whereas in marsupials it is exclusively
the paternal X chromosome. However, in eutherians X chromosome inactivation is
non-random in the extra-embryonic membranes and occurs earlier than in the
embryo proper. A second difference is that whereas X chromosome inactivation is
stable and can remain so for over 100 years, reactivation of the previously
inactivated X chromosome occurs routinely with age in a tissue- specific manner
in marsupials. These differences predict that much could be learned of the
mechanism of X inactivation as well as the mechanism of maintenance of
inactivation if the gene(s) involved could be compared in structure as well as
function. A candidate gene has been isolated and sequenced from humans and mice,
the Xist gene. Neither seems to encode a protein and both have high degrees of
homology in the non-codine regions. However, the homology consist of tandem
direct repeats which are not particularly useful for isolating homologues from
other species. An attempt will be made to isolate the Xist homologue from the
marsupial, Monodelphis domestica using PCR and the small regions of homology.
Although this is not a routine cloning exercise and the risks are high, the
isolation of the Xist homologue from a marsupial would make possible approaches
leading to an understanding of one of the fundamental mechanisms of eukaryotic
genetics. %%% The mouse Xist gene will be used in an attempt to isolate the
marsupial homologue. The successful cloning and characterization of this gene
will allow a comparative approach to understanding the differences and
similarities between X chromosome inactivation in placental animals (eutharians)
and non-placental animals (metherians). ***