* 9423997
* Collaborative Research:  Chemical and Sensory Basis of      Hostplant Specificity
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1995,09/30/1998
* Frances Chew, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/1998
* USD 123,481.00

9423997 Chew This research will provide basic information on the evolution of
plant-insect relationships, using a model system of cabbage butterflies and
Brassica plants. The different sensitivities of geographic subspecies of a
butterfly to chemicals in potential hostplants will be examined to explain
patterns of plant use. Also, differences between and within populations of
butterflies will be studied to document the genetic variability in a given
insect species. The chemical compounds responsible for acceptance or rejection
of specific plants will be identified. Bioassays for effects on egg-laying,
larval feeding and growth of the insects will be used to isolate the active
compounds, and the extent to which taste or toxicity are involved will be
determined. The results are expected to provide an integrated picture of the
interactions between plant chemistry and insect responses at different insect
and plant life stages and with changing resource availability. This research is
expected to result in the identification of natural chemical compounds that
defend plants against insects. Information on the most vulnerable stage of the
insects will be obtained, so that an accurate picture of plant escape from
herbivory may result. Since the project involves both native and introduced
insects and plants, predictions about the development of new plant-insect
associations my be possible. The research may also determine the likelihood that
a native insect can adapt to the different chemistry of an aggressively
spreading naturalized plant.