* 9423356
* Dissertation Research: In Vivo and In Vitro Effects of Plant Allelochemicals on Glutathione Transferase Expression and  Function
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Bruce McPheron, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 09/30/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9423356 McPheron Glutathione transferases are a ubiquitous gene family found in
plants and animals. Glutathione transferases are involved in the conjugation of
glutathione to reactive organic molecules, especially lipophilic or fat-loving
molecules like many pesticides and plant allelochemicals. This research will
analyze glutathione transferaqes in insecticide-resistant and insecticide-
susceptible strains of an apple bud moth, and determine how this class of
enzymes is expressed and functions. The effects of plant extracts of differing
chemistries on glutathione transferase expression and activity will be monitored
using radioactive glutathione transferase messenger RNA and also by using
purified genetically-engineered glutathione transferases placed in E. coli ( a
model bacterium used in molecular- genetic studies). Defining the interaction
between glutathione transferase expression and activity and foreign organic
molecules will lead to a greater understanding of the mechanisms by which
organisms deal with potentially damaging chemical compounds. Because glutathione
transferases are found in bacteria, plants and animals, the knowledge gained
will be broadly applicable, ranging from increased understanding insecticide
resistance to increased understanding of resistance to anti-cancer drugs in
humans.