* 9423033
* Continuation of High-speed Backbone Services to Phillips Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Guy Almes, Advanced Network & Services, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 02/29/1996
* USD 374,922.00

9423033 Almes In 1993, Merit, Inc. and their study partners, Advanced Network
and Services, Inc., implemented a plan to provide augmented connectivity and
infrastructure to the southwestern U.S.. This was done by establishing full
switching capabilities which support high bandwidth carrier transmission
facilities similar to other locations that support NSFNET backbone services.
Additionally, they established two direct connections to the new switches for
the Phillips Laboratory and the Sandia National Laboratories, both of
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Since then this region has seen a growth in research
and education activities through further use of this connectivity. This is
especially true for the support of the University of New Mexico's management of
the Maui High Performance Computing Center (MHPCC). This project will continue
to expand the high bandwidth, wide-are networking for the southwest region
including the two national laboratories and will also include the provision of a
high-speed gateway connections for the state-wide network, New Mexico Technet,
that serves the entire state of New Mexico's university-industrial-government
research complex. The ANS operated NSFNET Backbone Network has been operating
since 1988 at speeds of 1.5 million bits per second. A new higher speed service
of 45 million bits per second began operation in 1990 which now connects
nineteen locations. This Albuquerque connection will also benefit from the
economies of scale which are achieved because of the multiple organizations
which share a common infrastructure and common network management facilities.