* 9423305
* The Formation and Maintenance of the Zonal Winds of         Jupiter and Saturn
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Philip Marcus, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 03/31/1999
* USD 145,000.00

94-23305 Marcus Prof. Marcus will model numerically the east-west winds in the
upper troposphere (i.e., the visible cloud layer) of Jupiter and Saturn, using
3-D fluid-dynamics. The principal objective is to improve our understanding of
why the winds are structured in zones or bands with alternating velocity
directions from the equator to the poles. Additionally, the Principal
Investigator (PI) will address other unresolved issues of those giant planets'
atmospheres -- the number of bands, the magnitude of the wind velocities, the
greater velocities of the Saturnian winds compared to the Jovian winds, and the
relationship between the winds and the vortices embedded in them. The motivation
for the work is that, unlike thermal convection in stars which can be reproduced
and studied under laboratory conditions (albeit in simplified form), the
mechanism of "east- west" winds of planetary atmospheres has not been modeled in
the laboratory and all proposed methods for creating such winds remain mere
conjectures. Yet we cannot claim to understand the outer planets until we
understand their east-west winds. The PI will base his calculations on two
different sets of assumptions: (1) The winds' vertical depth extends over tens
of to several hundred density scale heights; and (2) the winds are confined to a
thin vertical layer. The point is to decide between the two kinds of theories.
The calculations will be done in both spherical and parabolic geometries. The
latter geometry has the advantage that a parabolic dish containing a stable
fluid overlying a convecting fluid can be built in a laboratory to test the
validity of the numerical results, an experiment the PI is suggesting to be
carried out by others.