* 9423102
* Asymptotic Approximations in Parametric and Semiparametric  Models
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Oliver Linton, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine C. Eckel
* 01/31/1998
* USD 121,121.00

SBR-9423102 Oliver Linton One of the areas in which econometrics has made great
advances during the last fifteen years is semi-parametric estimation. These new
classes of estimators are able to efficiently estimate the parameters of a wide
array of non-linear models, such as tobit and probit models, with only very
minimal information about such things as the error generation process or the
functional form of any regression functions. One problem with these estimators
is that first-order approximations to the asymptotic distributions of these
estimators provide poor approximations to their sampling behavior for the sample
sizes that are typical in applied economic research. This research develops more
accurate formulas for the asymptotic distribution of a wide class of parametric
and semi-parametric estimators and test statistics. There are three projects.
The first project continues the principals investigator's work on second-order
approximations of the asymptotic distribution of semi-parametric models.
Computing these estimators typically requires the selection of a smoothing
parameter, called the bandwidth. The new expansions developed under this grant
provide bandwidth selection methods that are second order optimal. The second
project develops asymptotic expansions for estimator and test statistics of
parametric ARCH time series models. These new expansions are then used to
provide bias and size correction procedures and to evaluate the magnitude of
small sample effects in these complicated procedures. They also provide more
accurate small sample approximations of the sampling distribution. The third
project investigates a new class of semiparametric models for duration data and
derives their first-order asymptotic theory.