* 9423593
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Ontogeny of                Recognition Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1997
* Meredith West, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1997
* USD 9,059.00

Abstract (IBN 9423593) West, Meredith Experimental evidence has shown that many
animal species show natal populational preferences with respect to reproductive
patterns. In the present research, an avian model of cultural evolution is used
to explore how social learning may be implicated in such reproductive patterns.
Different populations of subjects are exposed for extensive periods to
distinctive social populations prior to their breeding seasons. The reproductive
preferences are then tested. Measurements are made of the proximate dynamics of
the development of individuals' preferences. In addition, the behaviors by which
individuals communicate reproductive preferences, in particular, the use of
vocalizations and responses to vocalizations, are measured. Preliminary results
confirm that social learning exerts direct effects on the transmission of
reproductive preferences. The proposed studies explore in more depth the nature
of the learning mechanisms and test whether learned preferences can be passed on
to subsequent generations of individuals. If such cultural, transgenerational
transmission occurs, current theories and concepts of the role of genetic
programs in guiding and determining reproductive outcomes will have to re-
evaluated. New theories will have to incorporate the exogenetic or cultural
mechanisms deriving from models of social learning. In that human societies show
analogous dependence on cultural transmission, the results of these studies will
provide a new and more ecologically appropriate model of the evolution of
complex behavior.