* 9423184
* Interface Apparency and Manipulatability:  Cognitive        Gateways through the Spatial Visualization Barrier in       Computer-Based Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/1995,10/31/1996
* Kent Norman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 10/31/1996
* USD 53,554.00

The positive impact of computer-based technology varies in part as a function of
interface design and the individual abilities of users. The primary cognitive
factor driving differences in performance using computer-based technology is
spatial visualization ability. Four techniques for mitigating the negative
impact of low spatial visualization are discussed. The use of spatial metaphors
and graphical user interfaces have been promising, but interface apparency,
revealing hidden relationships and showing contingencies, and interface
manipulatability, allowing users to directly manipulate objects and see
intermediate steps, are most likely to benefit individuals with low spatial
visualization ability. The current project explores the interface apparency and
interface manipulatability. Two studies will be undertaken in which the hidden
contingencies of a hierarchical control structure are revealed through a dynamic
graphical screen display. Two additional studies will be undertaken which allow
users to manipulate objects through intermediate steps rather than having to
infer or visualize those s teps. The results of these experiments and the design
concepts that are subsequently suggested by them will help to provide interface
designers with graphical user interface techniques that will provide gateways
through the spatial visualization ability barrier.