* 9423584
* Thin Liquid Films - Structure and Stability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Darsh Wasan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1998
* USD 200,191.00

ABSTRACT CTS9423584 Wasan, D.T. Illinois Institute of Technology The objective
of this research is to examine, both experimentally and theoretically, the
phenomenon of multilayered microstructuring or stratification in sub-micron thin
liquid films with fluid surfaces stabilized by surfactant micelles of Brownian
particles; further to explore its use as a probe for investigating order
inducing long-range structural forces in colloidal dispersions. A unique feature
of this continuing study lies in the use of its newly instrumented surface force
balance for curved films with fluid interfaces for investigating the influence
of multilayered microstructuring on film thickness stability. Surface force
balance will be used in conjunction with differential interference microscopy to
study symmetric foam and emulsion films as well as asymmetric films such as
those between approaching small oil droplets and an air-water surface or water
droplets and an air-oil surface. X-ray diffraction using synchrotron radiation
from the advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory will be used to
directly observe the intrinsic, in-layer structure within thin liquid films with
fluid surfaces. Experiments using differential and common microinterferometric
methods will be performed to obtain the local mean curvature of the film
meniscus and the film/meniscus contact angles and, thereby, the film excess
energy and the disjoining pressure attributable to the presence of micellar
structure inside the film. It is proposed to investigate the micellar/particle
structure in the region between the thin liquid film and the meniscus, i.e.,
inside the wedged film by using Confocal Scanning Laser Fluorescence Microscopy
as well as low-angle, transmitted light diffraction technique. The experiments
will be compared with our Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics simulations.
Important technological factors affecting the film structure and stability, such
as effective micelle/particle volume fraction, film size and i ts thickness,
particle size, shape and polydiserpisity, will be evaluated. Systems to be
investigated will include both spherical and non-spherical micelles, mixed
micelles (such as mixtures of anionic and nonionic micellar solution), proteins,
and differentially charged colloidal particles such as latexes and silica, and
hydrocolloids such as gums and starches. This study on thin liquid film
phenomena is aimed at understanding the role of surface-induced
structural/depletion forces in stabilizing or destabilizing foams, emulsions,
and collodical dispersions.