* 9423534
* U-Pb Analysis of Detrital Zircons in Late Proterozoic Rocks of Arctic Alaska: Implications for Tectonic Evolution of the Canada Basin and Adjacent Polar Margins
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Brian Patrick, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 06/30/1998
* USD 131,452.00

Abstract This award supports a project to study the tectonic evolution of the
Arctic by providing paleogeographic constraints on mechanical models proposed
for the opening of the Canada Basin. Current geophysical and geological data
upon which these models are based typically lack the required detail and
resolution (e.g., geophysical data), do not provide unique solutions (e.g.,
stratigraphic and basin axis correlations), or remain interpretive due to
overprinting during younger orogenesis (e.g., structural relationships). The two
models that best fit the meager data base invoke (1) rifting of Arctic Alaska-
Chukotka from the Lomonosov Ridge followed by sinistral translation along the
Canadian Arctic Island margin or (2) rifting and rotation of Arctic Alaska from
the Canadian Arctic Islands. These models differ in the assumed pre-Cretaceous
paleogeographic position of northern Alaska. Thus isotopic studies designed to
constrain the paleogeographic origin of Arctic Alaska could potentially provide
significant insights into the evolution of the Canada Basin. Nd isotopic
analyses have been successfully utilized to provide general constraints on
paleogeographic models. Combining Nd data with U-Pb isotopic analysis of single
detrital zircons, which allow discrimination of specific age populations,
provides a powerful tool for correlation of displaced stratal sequences and
their source regions. This research will involve a U/Pb detrital zircon study of
Proterozoic metaclastic rocks at 4 localities across Arctic Alaska in an effort
to provide additional constraints on its paleogeographic origin. Proterozoic
rocks will be targeted in order to determine the primary cratonal signature and
establish a baseline for similar detrital studies in Paleozoic and younger
strata of the Arctic Alaska region. Comparison of the resultant isotopic data
with known detrital signatures from the Canadian Arctic and Cordilleran margins
will bear directly on critical evaluation of current models for the tectonic
evolution of the Canada Basin. In addition, results of this study will address
the presence or absence of pre- Mississippian terranes, the significance of 2.0
Ga Nd model age reported for Proterozoic rocks in northern Alaska in terms of
homogeneous source versus multicomponent mixing, depositional ages of the
Proterozoic clastic rocks sampled, and potential correlation of Arctic Alaska
with crustal fragments (Yukon-Tanana and Ruby terranes) presently outboard of
the Cordilleran miogeocline.