* 9423530
* Assessment of Variations in the Snow Accumalation Rate in   Northern Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Konrad Steffen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 09/30/1998
* USD 319,828.00

This award is for support for a 3 year program to assess the variation in the
snow accumulation rate in northern Greenland. Previous work has shown that
isotope records from shallow ice cores can be used to identify interannual and
perhaps seasonal cycles of snow temperature and accumulation. In order to assess
seasonal and interannual variability, the isotope temperature record requires
calibration from in situ meteorologic measurements. On- going remote sensing
research appears to show that interannual trends in brightness temperature can
be used as proxy data for annual accumulation but this work requires calibration
from ice core data in northern Greenland. Combining stable isotope measurements,
remote sensing, and surface energy balance data will allow an assessment of how
interannual and seasonal processes affect the magnitude and variability of snow
accumulation. Meteorologic data collection stations will be established and five
shallow ice cores will be drilled in a 400 km2 area around each of two stations,
one in northeastern and one in northwestern Greenland. Argos satellite links
will provide data transmission capability from each remote site. Grain size and
temperature profiles, sublimation, and energy balance will be calculated using a
one-dimensional energy and mass flux model.