* 9423202
* New Products and Processes by Cationic Polymerization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1995,02/28/2001
* Joseph Kennedy, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2001
* USD 650,000.00

9423202 Kennedy The overall objective of this project is to understand and
consequently to control the mechanism of cationic olefin polymerizations, and
thus to develop useful novel advanced materials and processes of readily
available monomers and equipment, respectively; the elucidation of
structure/property relationships of the materials is an integral part of the
project. This overall objective embraces four major specific objectives: 1) To
explore the fundamentals and to expand the scope of living carbocationic
polymerizations. Studies will mainly focus on the elucidation of the active
living species, expansion to branched olefins (3-methyl-1-butene,
4-methyl-1-pentene, etc.) and conjugated dienes (butadiene, isoprene, etc.), and
dollowing up the recent discovery that mixed Friedel-Crafts coinitiators yield
living polymerization at temperatures higher than ambient. 2) To synthesize
novel multi-arm star polymers. Seed research has shown that multi-arm radial
star polyisobutylenes can be made by living cationic polymerization. This lead
will be pursued to include the preparation of polymers with various molecular
weights and a study of viscosity characteristics. 3) To prepare novel
statistical copolymers of aliphatic/aromatic olefins, alkenes/conjugated dienes
with controlled molecular weights and microcompositions. The stated objective
could be reached by a new technique the so-called Continuous Controlled
Copolymer Composition method. This lead will be pursued for the preparation of
new designed copolymers. 4) To prepare new amphiphilic networks. Specifically,
efforts will be made to prepare membranes with controlled permeability
characteristics and new networks that respond to environmental stimuli (nature
of solvent, pH). %%% This research is significant for the generation of basic
knowledge needed for the preparation of new advanced materials with desirable
combinations of properties, and for new multipurpose polymerization processes. A
mong possible applications are motor-oil additives, thermoplastic elastomers,
and biomaterials. ***