* 9423989
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site:  Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Victor G. Rodgers, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 05/31/1998
* USD 163,763.00

9423989 Murhammer The Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at The
University of Iowa support for a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site, with ten students per year from selected universities and colleges
throughout the United States, with an emphasis on recruitment from six
Historically Black Colleges and Universities and four small liberal arts
colleges to conduct research for an 8 week summer period. These students will be
matched with one of seven faculty advisors in order that they can conduct
research in an area most closely related to their interests. The individual
projects will be in research areas of expertise of the supervising REU faculty
to ensure direct scientific interaction between the REU students and the
graduate students of each research group. A close student-faculty interaction
will be developed during daily discussions about the progpess of the particular
project and other research related issues. In addition, weekly seminars on
research-related issues and many social events will be held. The summer's
program will conclude with an "in-house" research conference during which the
REU students will present their research results. It is expected that
significant guidance by the REU advisor will be necessary during the early
stages of the research. As the research progresses, the REU advisor will
gradually decrease the level of guidance in order to move the student toward as
much independence as his/her ability warrants. All of these programs and
activities are planned to achieve the goal of making undergraduate students more
aware of graduate research opportunities in chemical and biochemical
engineering. ***