* 9423987
* SBIR Phase II: Development of a Bioremediation System for   the Degradation of Ozone-Depleting Substances
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Mary DeFlaun, Envirogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1997
* USD 300,000.00

Deflaun 9423987 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
involves the development of a biocatalyst-based reactor system for the
destruction of hydrohalocarbon compounds known to contribute to ozone depletion
and global warming. During Phase I work, Mycobacterium vaccae JOB5 was selected
as uniquely suited for use in biotrickling filters designed to treat air
emission. Phase II research will attempt to: (1) establish potential co-
substrates for hydrohalocarbon oxidation; (2) develop an on-line gas
chromatographic method for continuous monitoring of pollutant halogenated
hydrocarbons; (3) show the feasibility of using M. caccae JOB5 in bench-scale
biotrickling filters and verify mineralization of target compounds; (4)
establish the optimal feeding rate to these biofiltering devices; (5) obtain
data on the long-term use of the biotrickling filter; (6) use this information
in cost analyses of estimates for construction of a full-scale biotrickling
filter, and in projecting capital and operating costs in comparison with those
of conventional physical/chemical treatment technologies; and (7) incorporate
this information into a final report and commercialization plan for the
technology. It is suggested that the development of a bioreactor system for the
removal and destruction of hydrohalocarbon vapor emissions potentially could
offer significant cost reductions and overall savings compared to today's
conventional air treatment options. %%% This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase II project involves the development of a biocatalyst-based reactor system
for the destruction of pollutant compounds that contribute to ozone depletion
and global warming. During Phase I work, Mycobacterium vaccae JOB5 was selected
as best suited for use in biotrickling filters designed to remove these
pollutants from the air. Phase II research will attempt to: (1) find out what
kind of compounds can be removed from air with this microbe-based filter system;
(2) deve lop an on-line gas chromatographic method to continuously measure the
concentration of these pollutants in air; (3) show the feasibility of using M.
caccae JOB5 in bench-scale biotrickling filters and verify that the filtering
device destroys the target compounds; (4) establish the rate at which the filter
system can destroy pollutants; (5) obtain data on the long-term use of the
biotrickling filter; and (6) use this information in cost analyses for building
a full-scale biotrickling filter, and comparing capital investments and
operating costs for this novel biotechnology with conventional physical/chemical
treatment technologies. Finally, these data will be incorporated into a final
report and commercialization plan for this novel technology. It is suggested
that the development of a bioreactor system could provide significant cost
reductions and overall savings compared to today's conventional air treatment
options. ***