* 9423055
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Rendering Visible the      Unseen.  The Creation of Photographic Language in Science   and Culture
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Robert Smith, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 02/29/1996
* USD 10,000.00

Modern computer technology has made it possible to alter photographs in order to
show almost anything one wants. Indeed, this new technology has even been used
in motion pictures to insert actors (Woody Allen in Zelig, Tom Hanks in Forrest
Gump) in historical films. It is important to note, however, that the
verisimilitude of photographs has been problematic from the beginning.
Photographs are not always accurate in their portrait of reality. The problems
with the veracity of photographs has been a major problem in science since the
19th century. This issue is what is being examined in this dissertation
research. Despite the significance of photography in science, no detailed study
has been made of the production and circulation of scientific and medical
photographs from its beginning in late nineteenth century British science. In
her dissertation research under the direction of Professor Robert Smith, Ms.
Jennifer Tucker is addressing such questions as: How did different disciplinary
communities decide if photographic evidence was truthful? In what instances in
science was the realism of photography contested, and on what basis? During a
preliminary search in Britain in academic year 1994-1995, Ms. Tucker discovered
hundreds of original scientific and medical photographs and glass lantern slides
in over forty institutions. Most of these images have never been catalogued or
reproduced. This grant enables her to reproduce selected scientific photographs
from these unique historical archives. She is also traveling to Lowell
Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona to consult photographs and manuscript
correspondence that shed light on debates over astronomer Percival Lowell's
controversial photographs of Martian canals. This research promises to greatly
enhance our understanding of the nature of evidence and proof in science today.