* 9423182
* Molecular Genetics of Organized Gliding Motility
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Armin Kaiser, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 03/31/1998
* USD 301,847.00

9423182 Kaiser The bacterium myxococcus exhibits multicellular gliding movements
that are highly coordinated. Coordination spans the range of few to many
thousands of cells. While growing, a dozen cells may associate and move as a
cohort. In fruiting body development, many thousands of cells move coordinately.
The aim of this project is to work out the cellular and molecular basis for
movement coordination. Despite the apparent complexity of their movements,
myxobacterial cells have the structural, chemical and genetic simplicity of
Gram-negative bacteria. Previous work on Myxococcus had distinguished two
motility patterns called "adventurous" and "social". This project is seeking to
identify many of the genes that control social motility and to learn their
biochemical functions. For this purpose, mutants defective in social motility
are being isolated. Earlier work had identified pili, long thin hairs that
projected from one pole of each cell, as necessary for social motility. This
project is investigating the way that pili support social motility, by seeking
mutants that assemble normal pili, yet fail to show social motility. Steps in
transducing a pilus "signal" might be found in this way. The motors responsible
for gliding movement have not yet been uncovered in any of the gliding bacteria.
The search for mutants is being structured in a way that should allow mutations
which inactivate the gliding engines to be detected, a step toward understanding
the mechanism of gliding. %%% Multicellular movements are particularly important
in the embryonic development of vertebrates, but little is known about how they
are organized or regulated. Myxobacteria offer a realistic way to begin to
investigate this general problem. ***