* 9423641
* X-Ray Studies of the Statistical Physics of Surface         Morphology
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Simon Mochrie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/1998
* USD 290,000.00

9423641 Mochrie Surface morphology is key to a number of technologically
important processes, including for example, corrosion, catalysis, and epitaxial
growth. In addition, there remain basic scientific questions, most especially
concerning the nature of instantaneous correlations between different points in
the interface, and the correlation between the interfacial position at different
times. These fundamental issues will be addressed in the proposed research.
Specifically, studies of the equilibrium properties of crystal surfaces will be
made to investigate equilibrium surface morphology. In addition, the kinetics of
changes in surface morphology following rapid temperature changes, and during
growth, will be investigated. This research will lead to an improved
understanding of what determines surface morphology. Such an understanding may
eventually allow for the introduction of simple processing strategies for
tailoring surface morphology to suit technological needs. The experimental
technique employed in these studies is high-resolution synchrotron x-ray
scattering, in conjunction with a proven, state-of-the-art ultra-high vacuum
apparatus. %%% The form and structure of solid surfaces are the keys to a number
of technologically important processes, including for example, corrsion,
catalysis, and the growth of one crystalline solid on another. In addition,
there are basic scientific questions, especially concerning the nature of
instantaneous correlations between different points in an interface (as when a
crystal surface grows) and the correlation between the interfacial position at
different times. To address these issues, studies of the equilibrium properties
of crystal surfaces will be made to investigate the equilibrium form and
structure of the surface. The rate at which changes in surface form and
structure occur following rapid temperature changes, and during gro wth, will
also be investigated. This research will lead to an improved understanding of
what determines the form and structure of a solid surface, and may eventually
allow for the introducton of simple processing strategies for tailoring surface
form and structure to suit technological needs. The experimental technique
employed in these studies is high- resolution x-ray scattering combined with
state-of-the-art ultra-high vacuum apparatus. ***