* 9423694
* SGER:  An Experimental Investigation of Distributed         Computing Approaches for Resolving Production Scheduling    Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Robert Davis, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* georgia-ann klutke
* 01/31/1996
* USD 29,915.00

9423694 Davis This research explores the feasibility and the effectiveness of
using parallel algorithms for solving production scheduling and other related
problems is a distributed control manufacturing environment. Under a parallel,
distributed control architecture, a problem is partitioned and solved
simultaneously by several processors, with each processor contributing only a
portion of the total time to the total solution time. A mixed integer
programming formulation of the job shop scheduling program is used as the
general model structure for the research. The model is then transformed through
parameter adjustments into other scheduling scenarios (e.g., flow shop problem).
The emphasis is on permutation schedules. A set of permutation schedules is
formulated using an n-ary structure. The branching variable in the n-ary tree is
the position of each job in the sequence. This structure is common to many
branch and bound solutions for sequencing and scheduling problems. Using a depth
first search rule through the n-ary tree, all job sequences are implicitly
evaluated to solve the problem. Several sample problems will be solved. Using
the results from the sample problems, the behavior of parallel algorithms in a
distributed control architecture will be characterized in terms of algorithmic
solution time, communication overhead due to data exchanges between processors,
and other algorithmic overheads due to start up, search, and wind down. As
earlier research has established, scheduling problems of practical sizes are
very computationally intensive and when left to a single processor, can take an
extremely large amount of time to solve, especially if exact solution approaches
are employed. Parallel programming offers some promise in reducing the
computational load on a processor to solve a problem. Therefore, any insights
gained in solving this class of problem will offer some economic benefits to
several sectors of the economy given that scheduling problems are encountered in
several areas of life. In addition, there are several other classes of problems
that behave alike and are similar to scheduling and sequencing problems. These
classes of problems stand to gain if progress is made in solving scheduling
problems.