* 9423705
* Mathematical Science:  General Methods for the Numerical    Solution of Nonlinear DAEs
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1999
* Stephen Campbell, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1999
* USD 151,500.00

A differential algebraic equation (DAE) is composed of both differential and
algebraic relationships. Many physical problems are most naturally initially
described by a DAE. DAEs arise in a variety of physical problems including
flight control, robotics, chemical process control, and contact or constrained
problems in mechanics. In addition, DAEs occur in the solution of partial
differential equations by the method of lines and in many circuit models.
Computer generated mathematical models for physical processes are often DAEs.
Existing numerical codes, while very useful, require special problem structure
and do not handle many problems of interest. In addition, many of these methods
require the potential user not only to recognize the mathematical structure of
the problem, but also to explicitly exploit this structure. This restricts both
the number of users and the complexity of the problems that can be solved. This
project will develop numerical methods for general nonlinear DAEs. Theoretical
analysis, computational implementation, and applications will all be considered.
The long range goal of the proposed research is for scientists and engineers to
be able to work directly with the original implicit model thus reducing design
and simulation time as well as facilitating the consideration of more complex
problems. The building of physical prototypes is time consuming, expensive, and
restricts the number of ideas that can be tried out. Computer simulation is
becoming increasingly essential for both design and evaluation. In many areas of
technology, the equations that the computer must solve are most easily set up as
a mixture of differential and algebraic equations or a DAE. DAEs are not the
kinds of equations that classical numerical methods and mathematical theory were
designed for. Converting a DAE into another type of mathematical problem is
often difficult and time consuming. Sometimes this conversion requires
considering a simpler mathematical equation which does not do as good a job of
predicting what the real physical system will do. This has led to a world wide
effort to develop numerical methods for solving DAEs. There have been notable
successes and some of this effort has resulted in software, such as DASSL, that
is used in many industries and laboratories. However, many important classes of
DAEs are still difficult, or impossible, to solve directly with existing
software. This project will develop numerical methods that can be used to solve
important additional types of DAEs. While DAEs arise in many areas, this project
will focus on constrained mechanical systems including the simulation and
control of robotic manipulators, simulation and control of vehicular systems,
and the simulation, control, and optimization of chemical manufacturing
processes.