* 9423382
* MRI:  Changes in Uterine Gene Expression During Embryo      Implantation in the Mouse
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1995,07/31/1996
* Yvette Huet, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1996
* USD 12,000.00

Yvette Huet-Hudson IBN#9423382 The objective of the proposed research is to
examine changes in gene expression in the pregant mouse uterus following
exposure to the hormone estrogen. Estrogen is required for embryo implantation.
Successful establishment of pregancy, resulting in the birth of healthy rodent
offspring, depends upon normal implantation in the uterus. Implantation is a
complex process regulated by the hormones progesterone and estrogen. The
initiation of implantation is triggered in the progesterone-primed uterus by
estrogen. One current theory is that progesterone/estrogen mediated regulation
of embryo implantation is modulated indirectly through gene expression. It has
also been shown that embryos require exposure to the maternal uterus within one
hour of estrogen exposure for implantation to occur. In order to better
understand how this process is initiated, this investigator will compare the
genes that are expressed prior to, and one hour after, estrogen in a
progesterone-primed uterus. This will be accomplished by producing uterine cDNA
subtraction libraries. This will allow the investigaor to determine which genes
are turned on or turned off by estrogen in the uterus during the critical one
hour time period required for successful implantation. In gaining information
concerning which genes are differentially expressed, it is hoped that a
foundation will be laid for future studies of uterine physiology during early
pregnancy. This new investigator, a minority scientist, has a strong background
in reproductive biology, including a recent publication in the journal
Proceedings of the National Academy. She will use this initiative funding to
begin her independent investigation, in preparation for the submission of a full
proposal.