* 9423113
* Collaborative Research on Applying Strategic Bargaining     Models in Union Contract Negotiations
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Joseph Tracy, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 03/31/1999
* USD 163,855.00

SBR-9423113 Joseph Tracy It is widely believed that U.S. collective bargaining
in the 1980s has changed substantially from earlier decades. This perception is
supported by a decline in strike activity, which labor leaders argue is due to
the increased propensity of firms to permanently replace striking workers. This
research project examines this claim about the bargaining strategy of firms by
developing and then empirically testing a formal theoretical model of the firm's
decision to use replacement workers in the course of a labor dispute. The model
is also used to assess the impact of various labor policies (e.g., a ban on the
replacement of strikers) and to study the impact of the structure of
compensation on bargaining outcomes. This research is very timely. This past
year, organized labor lobbyed Congress for an amendment to the labor law that
would ban the use of permanent replacement workers. Careful consideration of
this legislation was hampered by the lack of any comprehensive studies of the
likely consequences of such a ban. This research is designed to fill in this
important gap in our knowledge. The work on replacement workers will make use of
new U.S. data on replacement workers collected for this project and Canadian
data on large, private-sector contract negotiations from 1967 to 1993. The work
on the impact of the structure of compensation will focus on equity sharing
plans (ESOPs) and profit sharing plans using an extensive data set on ESOPs and
new firm level data on profit sharing plans in Japan.