* 9423814
* Curatorial Improvements to the Entomological Collection,    Bernice P. Bishop Museum
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Scott Miller, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Continuing grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 02/28/1999
* USD 545,709.00

9423814 Miller The Bishop Museum arthropod collections are a unique assemblage
of specimens mainly from the Pacific and its source areas. The collections
experienced enormous growth in the last 40 years as over 13 million specimens
were added almost entirely by project-based collecting. The collections now rank
among the three largest entomological collections in the U.S.. This project will
complete the improvements to collections begun in 1986 with the installation of
60% of a compactor system and consolidation of the scattered collections onto a
single floor. A second phase included the elevation of curatorial levels to
loanable units for the Coleoptera, Diptera and Lepidoptera. This project will
complete the elevation of curatorial levels for the remainder of the collection,
focusing on the Hymenoptera, Heteroptera, Homoptera, Orthopteroidea and the
smaller orders and groups (Mallophaga and Thrchoptera), and including the
subclasses Acari. Visiting scientists will curate the collections to loanable
units (Smithsonian curatiorial level 3). Before the visit of the specialist, the
technical staff of Bishop will consolidate the group and presort the specimens.
During the specialist's visit a technician will help the specialist as well as
complete any tasks remaining after the specialist leaves. This strategy saves
the visitor's time and provides for a more efficient visit. Another fund-
extending strategy that has worked will and one also proposed for use here, is
taking advantage of travel schedules to piggyback a Honolulu visit. In some
cases, exceptional curators were able to work on the collections by timing their
visits with their travel schedules, supporting a Honolulu leg to their trip, for
example. The completion of the proposed project has long term cost benefits as
staff and visitors will not have to sift through multiple drawers of specimens
looking for members of the group of their interest. Collections management tasks
will be streamlined. Over time, as the studied m aterials are returned, the
collection as a whole will become a much stronger reference collection
permitting speedier and better identifications. Properly organized collections
set the stage for the use of computers in their management and for the
dissemination and manipulation of data associated with the specimens. All
leading to much better documentation and understanding of the biodiversity of
the region.