* 9423231
* Power-at-a-Distance and Power Reversals: Testing New Predictions for Exchange Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* David Willer, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1999
* USD 262,430.00

This is a study of power in social exchange networks that will test two
extensions of Network Exchange Theory (NET) through laboratory experimentation.
In the first extension, NET offers predictions for power-at-a-distance, where
unlike previous studies power exercise is not limited to immediately adjacent
positions, but reaches outward two or three network steps. In the second
extension, NET predicts that coalitions which eliminate power under some network
conditions will bring power reversals under other conditions. In the research, a
system of linked microcomputers called ExNet connects human subjects in
experimental networks allowing communications and facilitating resource
transactions. The existing versions of ExNet would not permit the intended
experiments, so software will be written to add these and other capabilities to
ExNet, and the system will be made available to the community of laboratory
exchange researchers to facilitate experiments of many kinds. %%% This work is
an important step in linking laboratory experimentation on social exchange with
phenomena in the real world, most notably because it increases the size and
complexity of social network processes that can be studied. These experiments
are fundamental research on social-capital aspects of human capital theory,
exploring the ways that structural location in a social network can be a vital
resource conferring power and thus resources, quite independently of the
individual characteristics of the person occupying that location. An extension
of one of the most promising lines of work in social-psychological research on
group processes, this project will contribute fundamental insights on how the
structural properties of social exchange networks influence the fates of human
beings.