* 9423518
* Dissertation Research: Microbial Activity on Wood in        Streams: Exploring Abiotic and Biotic Factors Affecting     the Structure and Function of Wood Biofilms
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1997
* Jackson Webster, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joaquin Martinez Martinez
* 02/28/1997
* USD 10,948.00

WEBSTER &amp; TANK Woody debris is an integral part of most stream ecosystems.
In many streams and rivers, the highest densities and rates of production for
aquatic invertebrates are associated with wood. For many aquatic invertebrates,
their food base is the microbial biofilm on the surfaces of woody debris. The
factors which affect the structure and function, both biological and non-
biological, of these biofilms has received little consideration. This project
uses measurements of microbial growth and activity to experimentally test the
roles of factors such as light levels, burial, leaf litter abundance, and wood
type on biofilms in stream ecosystems. This research is important because it
tests some of the possible causes and mechanisms for the high rates of
production associated with woody debris. Human management activities and natural
disturbances affect such variables as the amount of light reaching a stream, the
types and amount of vegetation, and the rates of sediment input. How these
impacts might resonate through the stream ecosystem will be focused on woody
debris since this habitat is a region of high biological activity. This research
looks closely at this link and possible factors influencing microbial growth
rates and rates of activity at this crucial interface.