* 9423280
* Instantaneous Measurements of Molecular Mixing in High      Reynolds Number Shear Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Robert Lucht, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John F. Foss
* 07/31/1999
* USD 243,474.00

CTS-9423280 J. C. Dutton & Robert Lucht University of Illinois This research
seeks to develop and apply a new technique for quantitative measurements of the
structure of high Reynolds number gaseous shear flows, including the capability
of measuring the extent of mixing at the molecular level. The extent of mixing
at the molecular level in shear flows will be measured instantaneously by using
two different lasers and two different lasers and two different cameras to
excite and then detect laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) from nitric oxide (NO)
and acetone simultaneously. NO will be added as a seed species to air in the
other stream. In pure nitrogen, the NO LIF quenching rate is orders of magnitude
smaller than the quenching rate in air. Consequently, if the two streams mix at
the molecular level to even a small extent, the NO LIF signal will virtually
disappear. The acetone LIF signal is proportional to the acetone number density
in the fluid volume, whether or not the fluids have mixed at the molecular
level. The simultaneous NO-acetone LIF imaging technique will allow quantitative
measurement of the fraction of the seeded fluid that has been macroscopically
stirred with the unseeded fluid, as well as the extent to which the streams have
mixed at the molecular level. Quantitative measurement of molecular mixing are
of tremendous importance, particularly in chemically reacting systems where
mixing of the fuel and oxidant streams at the molecular level is required for
chemical reaction. As an important practical example, fundamental understanding
of mixing at the microscale as well as the macroscale is necessary for accurate
calculation of pollutant formation in flames.