* 9423272
* Analytical Model of Superscalar Processor Performance
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* John Shen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 06/30/1998
* USD 239,999.00

Trace-driven simulators (TDS) are widely used by processor architects to
accurately assess the expected performance of a processor design. While
necessary and useful, TDS have some shortcomings. Traces of realistic programs
are usually very large and expensive to store, and simulation of traces can very
time consuming. Furthermore, simulation does not yield a characterization of the
factors that determine performance, and hence can not recommend specific changes
to enhance performance. The two-fold objectives of this research are (1) to
investigate alternatives to TDS for accurately quantifying processor
performance; and (2) to seek to characterize factors that determine superscalar
processor performance. The effort will involve developing an analytical model of
machine behavior, based on which processor performance can be computed without
requiring tedious trace-driven simulation. It is hoped that the same analytical
model, in addition to providing a useful tool, will also provide a
characterization of superscalar processor performance. This characterization can
potentially reveal fundamental laws governing processor performance that can be
mathematically formulated. In this research project, processor performance is
modeled as a composition of program parallelism and machine parallelism. Program
parallelism is represented by two distribution functions that are derived from
the execution trace of benchmark and captures the control and data dependencies
in the program. This derivation is analogous to performing a type of transform
on the execution trace from the time domain to the transformed domain.
Consequently the two distribution functions can be viewed as concise spectral
representation of the program parallelism. Machine parallelism represents the
resources available in the processor for the concurrent processing of
instructions. A machine is modelled as a network, or circuit, of primitive
components, e.g. buffers and scalar pipelines. Macro models of the components
and the model for their serial and parallel interconnections will be developed.
With such a circuit of model microarchitectures, complex superscalar processors
can be effectively and rigorously modeled. While the research appears somewhat
theoretical in nature, a great deal of experimentation is required and expected.
The plan is to work with realistic programs with extremely long traces as well
as a wide range of state-of-the-art implementations of real instruction set
architectures. The Alpha 21164 and the Power PC 620 designs and the SPEC92 Shen
benchmark suites are used as the primary experimentation vehicles.