* 9423831
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program:  Regional School/  Workshop on High Energy Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Marleigh Sheaff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/1996
* USD 27,400.00

9423831 Sheaff This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science program award supports the
travel and local expenses of twelve U.S. scientists (five instructors and seven
students) and three Latin American students , who will be participating in the
International School on High Energy Physics (LISHEP95) to be held at the Centro
Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas (CBPF), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 6-22 February,
1995. The workshop is organized by Dr. Marleigh Sheaff, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, and Professor Alberto Franco de Sa Santoro, from the CBPF, Brazil.
LISHEP95 is an international activity that builds on current strengths in Brazil
and is expected to have significant impact on the development of high energy
physics in Latin America. It will be organized in three sessions: Session A,
"Particle Physics for High School Teachers" will be held 6-10 February. Session
B, "Advanced School on HEP", for which the audience will be advanced graduate
students and young Post-Doctoral Associates, will be held 8-19 February.
Finally, Session C, the "cbt Workshop on Heavy Flavor Physics", aimed at active
researchers in the field of heavy quark physics, will be held 20-22 February.
LISHEP will contribute to the stated U.S. goal of internationalizing large
science projects and is likely to lead to increased collaborations between U.S.
scientists and scientists from the region. By enhancing existing science
programs and highlighting the technological stimulation that results from them,
this meeting will help to make the developing countries in our hemisphere
stronger scientific and engineering partners in the future. ***