* 9423781
* U.S.-France Workshop:  The New Marginality in the Dual Me-  tropolis-Trajectories and Strategies of Poor Urban Youth in France and the U.S., Berkeley, California, Spring 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Manuel Castells, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1997
* USD 16,479.00

This award will support travel of 10 U.S. participants to a U.S.-France
Workshop on studies of poor urban youth in France and the United States in
Berkeley, California, Spring, 1996. The organizers are Manuel Castells,
University of California, Berkeley and Michel Schiray of the Social and
Political Sciences Group of the French National Center for Scientific Research.
The participants include established researchers and graduate students. The
workshop addresses current research on the causes, mechanisms and consequences
of urban marginality in large cities of advanced societies. In particular, the
participants will present papers on the social experiences, trajectories and
strategies of poor youth in French and American metropolitan areas. The workshop
provides an opportunity for U.S. and French social scientists to assess the
current state of knowledge and to develop a detailed collaborative research
agenda. The participants will discuss the relationship of poor urban youth to
the educational system, to the urban labor market and to activities within the
neighborhood. They will also investigate urban youth responses to
marginalization, delinquency, street violence, and police and criminal justice
systems. This workshop is related to the National Science Foundation's Human
Capital Initiative. Specifically it addresses issues that are encompassed in two
subfields: (1) Neighborhoods and (2) Poverty. The workshop's agenda will
identify important topics for fundamental research.