* 9423795
* Novel Electron Transport Studies of Metallic Multilayers at Low Temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Jack Bass, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 360,000.00

9423795 Pratt This research project extends research based on their has
pioneering approach to the study of giant magnetoresistance (GMR) in
artificially structured multilayers of ferromagnetic and non- magnetic
multilayers. The technique involves low temperature measurements with current
flow perpendicular to the multilayer planes, and is termed CPP-MR. These
measurements exhibit larger magnetoresistance than analogous in-plane
measurements (CIP-MR), and also provide more direct access to the fundamental
spin- dependent scattering parameters and to the interface-specific resistance.
The research will compare CPP-MR and CIP-MR measurements on the same
ferromagnetic/non-magnetic interface. New methods have been developed to analyze
such data to extract fundamental information about magnetic interfaces. This
information is also of great current interest in the context of applications of
magnetic multilayers in the field of information storage technology. %%% Non-
Technical Abstract: Appropriately fabricated magnetic multilayers, composed of
alternating layers of magnetic and non- magnetic metals, each only a few atoms
thick, have the property that their electrical resistance decreases drastically
upon application of a magnetic field. They can thus be used to detect very small
magnetic fields. Combined with their small size and fast response, this
capability has made them of interest to the recording industry for extracting
information from future generations of higher density magnetic disks and tapes.
They also show promise for use in determining position or speeds-of- rotation of
auto engine components. This project focuses on better understanding the
fundamental physical phenomena involved, so as to achieve the ability to tailor
magnetic multilayers to meet specific technological needs. The present research
group has pioneered unique techniques for developing such understanding. These
techniques will be further improved and applied to new materials in the current
project. ***