* 9423436
* Dissertation Research: Imaginal Disc Development,           Morphological Integration and Phylogenetic Pattern in       Diopsid Dipterans
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Gunter Wagner, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/1997
* USD 12,000.00

9423436 WAGNER The primary goal of this research program is to examine the
relationship between the genetic structure of species and the pattern of
morphological evolution within the fly genus Diasemopsis. These flies are
distinct because of the extreme elongation of the head into long eye-stalks.
This bizarre morphological transformation may have led to changes in other
morphological traits as a result of shared genetic effects between traits.
Because any given gene may influence a number of different morphological traits,
selection to change one part of an organism may have a cascade of effects on
other body parts. Presently, it is unknown how much this genetic connection
between body parts directs the course of evolution since it is possible this
connection can be broken over time. The first step toward answering this
question requires comparing the types of genetic connections between different
species. If different species show similar genetic structure (i.e. different
body parts are linked genetically in the same manner in both species), this
could profoundly influence the course of evolution. This research will examine
this possibility in two different species of stalk-eyed flies. In addition, the
pattern of shared genetic effects between traits will be compared with the
pattern of morphological evolution within these flies to determine if those
genetic connections which have remained fixed between species have constrained
the divergence of these species.