* 9423924
* Dissertation Research:  Deforestation and the Changing      Pharmacopeia of Malagasy Medical Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1996
* William Derman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/1996
* USD 13,791.00

This project involves the dissertation research of a student of cultural
anthropology from Michigan State University. The project will analyze the impact
of major environmental change -- deforestation -- on traditional medicine use in
a tropical forest community. Deforestation affects the use of both indigenous
and pharmaceutical medicines because it shifts health statuses, local economic
options and resource bases. By a combination of surveys, in-depth interviews and
archival research the student will analyze the social context of medicinal use.
The project will take place in Madagascar, where processes of deforestation
resulting from shifting rice agriculture are well documented and where ongoing
conservation strategies are altering patterns of land and resource use. The
study will document the major illnesses perceived by an economically
impoverished rainforest community, to identify the medicines most commonly
employed by different social sectors, the factors affecting access to the
medicines, the social strategies used to compensate for diminishing access to
natural resources, and the social forces shaping deforestation. This research is
important because deforestation is changing the social, economic, political and
medical lives of traditional peoples all over the earth. This careful case study
will illuminate general processes of how the health status of traditional people
is affected by global environmental change.