* 9423958
* SBIR Phase II:  Adaptive Rate Modem for Mobile Cellular     Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA)
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Jay Jacobsmeyer, Pericle Communications Company
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/1999
* USD 399,806.00

9423958 Jacobsmeyer This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
investigates the performance and feasibility of an adaptive data rate modem for
wireless packet radio networks. In the United States a consortium of cellular
service providers is building a nationwide mobile data network called Cellular
Digital Packet Data (CDPD). By using existing 30 kHz radio frequency channels,
CDPD provides a mobile data overlay on the existing cellular voice system. To
combat the effects of multipath fading, CDPD uses a (63,47) Reed-Solomon code
over GF(64). This code cannot correct all the errors that occur during the long,
deep fades that occur on the mobile radio channel. A new technique, proposed
herein, adapts the information data rate to the time-varying signal to noise
ratio. Past research has shown that in theory, this technique can improve
throughput of CDPD by a factor of five. The research objectives of this project
are to construct a hardware prototype modem and demonstrate a factor of four
improvement in throughput in Rayleigh fading. The prototype will be based on the
AT&T DSP32C floating point signal processor and will be tested using an HP11759C
Fading Channel Simulator. The principal commercial applications of this research
are wireless multiple access communication networks, including cellular radio,
mobile satellite and wireless local area networks. The primary benefit of the
proposed research is more economical use of cellular radio base stations and
mobile terminals, resulting in more affordable mobile data service for the US
consumer.