* 9423691
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  The Theory     of Assessment and Decision making by Animals
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1994,12/31/1995
* Mace Hack, Individual Award
* Fixed Amount Award
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/1995
* USD 45,503.00

9423691 Hack This award is under the International Junior Investigator and
Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Mace A. Hack to work with Dr. Geoffrey A. Parker at the University
of Liverpool on the theory of assessment and decision making by animals. Their
collaboration will focus on the development of a new type of contest model based
on repeated encounters between opponents, the primary goal being a better
understanding of the strategies animals use to settle contests in a fitness
optimizing manner. The second goal is for Dr. Hack to acquire the skills
necessary to build complex game theoretic models which he may then apply to
appropriate problems in future research. Decision making under conditions of
uncertainty is not only fundamental to assessment during contests but is also
critical in other behavioral contexts, including foraging optimally in a
variable environment, selecting a mate of high quality and distinguishing
reliable cooperators. ***