* 9423294
* A Pilot Investigation of a New Class of Advanced Materials: Corrosion Behavior of Titanium-Based Intermetallics Containing Aluminum
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1996
* Margaret Ziomek-Moroz, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 10/31/1996
* USD 48,611.00

9423294 Ziomek-Moroz This research is a one-year study to increase current
understanding of the corrosion behavior of a new class of advanced materials,
titanium-based intermetallics containing aluminum. The corrosion behavior of
gamma titanium aluminide, alpha-two titanium aluminide, alpha-two/gamma titanium
aluminide, and pure constituent metals is examined in aqueous solutions of
potassium nitrate, potassium sulfate, potassium hydroxide, nitric acid and
sulfuric acid. Scanning and timed electrochemical experiments are performed in
deaerated, non-deaerated, and oxygen-saturated solutions to determine the
effects of solution aeration on corrosion behavior. Microscopic investigations
are employed to characterize the surface of the corroded intermetallics. The
structural information will be correlated with the observed electrochemical
behavior. This is the first time such a study has been made on titanium
aluminides with controlled microstructures. %%% This grant contributes to the
understanding of the corrosion behavior of titanium-aluminide intermetallics
with non-homogenous microstructures. Gamma titanium-aluminide alloys offer great
promise for applications in the aerospace industry. A practical output of these
investigations will be information applicable to the development of
electrochemical machining techniques for titanium aluminide. ***