* 9423543
* Dissertation Research: Ecological Significance of Omnivory:  The Role of Phytophagy in the Persistence of Omnivorous    Predator-Prey Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Robert Denno, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1997
* USD 5,000.00

9423543 Denno The persistence of predator populations is primarily determined by
the resources available to the predator in a given environment. When resources
decline, predators starve or emigrate and predator populations do not persist.
Omnivorous predators, however, can escape starvation or preclude emigration by
feeding on plants and persist in environments with low prey densities. When prey
are scarce, with each additional prey item eaten, the omnivorous predator
consumes an increasingly larger proportion of the prey population, further
suppressing the prey population and ultimately resulting in the local extinction
of the prey. Omnivorous predator-prey interactions have received considerable
theoretical attention and there are numerous examples of omnivorous insects
distributed among diverse taxa, however, no study has attempted to determine the
importance of phytophagy in the persistence of both omnivore and prey
populations. This dissertation research will examine the role of phytophagy in
the population persistence of the omnivorous predator, the big-eyed bug, and its
aphid prey, a significant pest on soybeans. A series of laboratory and field
experiments will determine if the bug can survive periods of low food
availability by eating different quality of plant material and different stages
in the life cycle. This research will address important issues in predator-prey
dynamics including the vital role of omnivory in maintaining predator
populations during periods when prey items are scarce. In addition, this
research will have direct applications related to biological control of aphid
pests on soybeans, and the potential damage to soy beans caused by the control
agent, rather than the aphid.