* 9423603
* Dissertation Research: Evaluating Indirect Estimates of Gene Flow: A Comparative Life History Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1998
* Nelson Hairston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/1998
* USD 15,000.00

9423603 HAIRSTON The magnitude of dispersal between natural populations of
organisms is known to affect a wide array of biological events, including
speciation, extinction, and local adaptation. The genetic consequence of
dispersal, termed gene flow, is commonly inferred from the geographic
distribution of gene frequencies. However, the accuracy of such estimates is
difficult to ascertain. Measuring gene flow in closely related species which
vary in dispersal ability allows such indirect estimates to be evaluated. This
proposal outlines a sampling regime for 19 species disperse of Arrenurus water
mites across a range of spatial scales. The majority of these species disperse
only once in their lifetime on the adult stages of aquatic insects, while a few
do not disperse at all. Dispersal ability of the mite species can be ranked
categorically based on known attributes of the host and the host-parasite
relationship. Analyses of genetic population structure will be made for each
mite species from allozyme data, as will the population structure of some insect
hosts. Data regarding the insects will provide insight into the genetic
consequences of the parasitic association to the parasites. For the water mites,
correlations between dispersal and gene flow will be assessed statistically, and
phylogenetic relationships will be considered. Because these mites are closely
related, occur in similar habitats, and their dispersal potential is well
understood, differences between them other than dispersal ability are minimized.
This study will be the first attempt to assess population genetic structure in a
large group of co-occurring, closely related species.