* 9423473
* Dissertation Research: Adaptive Radiation of Greater        Antillean Anolis
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Jonathan Losos, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/1997
* USD 8,000.00

9423473 LOSOS While there have many studies of adaptive radiations, comparing
the characteristics of one species to another, to date there has never been an
investigation of the role of male vs. female specialization in the generation of
biological diversity. Males and females are often very different in ecologically
important ways, such as extreme differences in body size, behavior, diets, or
habitat. To understand diversity and the environmental variables important to
its maintenance, it is important to consider specializations between sexes as
well as between species. Accurately understanding the amount and patterns of
diversity in the natural world is becoming increasingly critical for
conservation efforts. With limited resources, management decisions must not only
be well informed but also gain the most efficiency with the funds and lands
available. This project will determine to what extent such specializations
contribute to diversity within the adaptive radiation of Anolis. Differences in
diet, behavior, body design, and habitat use will be compared in fifteen species
of Anolis. Data will be collected by behavioral observations, habitat censuses,
and examination od stomach contents. The radiations of Anolis have occurred
independently on two islands, which provides enhanced power to statistical
analyses. In addition, the relationships among the species are well-understood.