* 9423023
* The Negotiation of Legal Identity Among Salvadoran          Immigrants in Los Angeles, California
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Susan Coutin, Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 08/31/1997
* USD 84,000.00

9423023 Coutin This research seeks to shed light on the ways in which illegal
immigrants seek to shape the transnational forces that compel their movements.
To do so, it investigates the ways in which Salvadoran immigrants in Los Angeles
define and negotiate their legal identities in the United States. It builds on
recent studies of immigration that have emphasized the global structural forces
that drive immigration, in preference to models that emphasize individual
choice. However, it challenges the assumption that immigrants are powerless
subjects of such forces by concentrating on the Salvadoran immigrant efforts to
use law to define and alter their status in society and reinterpret concepts of
citizenship. Its investigation focuses on the legal strategies devised by
Salvadoran immigrants to the United States since the late 1970s. If concentrates
in particular on the change in focus from the status of refugee to that of
immigrant. The research will consist of 18 months of fieldwork within the Los
Angeles Salvadoran community, one of the largest and best-organized in the
United States. It will involve work with two Salvadoran immigrant organizations,
community organizations, individual Salvadoran immigrants, and observation of
immigration proceedings. Analysis of the research data will improve our
scientific understanding of the conceptions of the nation-state of individuals
who have experienced transnational forces first hand. %%%% This research
investigates the ways in which Salvadoran immigrants in Los Angeles define and
negotiate their legal identities in the United States. It challenges the
assumption that immigrants are powerless subjects of transnational forces that
drive their migration by concentrating on the Salvadoran immigrant efforts to
use law to define and alter their status in society and reinterpret concepts of
citizenship. Its investigation focuses on the legal strategies devised by
Salvadoran immigrants to the United States since the late 1970s. If concentrat
es in particular on the change in focus from the status of refugee to that of
immigrant. Fieldwork within the Los Angeles community will enlarge our knowledge
of the role and behavior of immigrants in American democracy and shed light on
the concepts of citizenship and nationhood devised by individuals who have
experienced transnational forces first hand. ****