* 9424595
* CRB:  Should Molecular Genetic Diversity be Used as a       Predictor of Evolutionary Potential?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Ken Spitze, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1998
* USD 105,000.00

9424595 Spitze The maintenance of genetic diversity is of central importance to
establishing management strategies for conservation measures involving
endangered species. This is because high levels of genetic variation are assumed
to enhance the probability of a populations survival over time. Loss of genetic
diversity resulting from a reduction in population size may lead to inbreeding
depression increasing the risk of extinction. Also, the rate of genetic change
is a function of the amount of genetic variation in quantitative traits. Thus,
populations with high genetic variation are more adaptable than those with low
variation. This conservation and restoration biology research will test the
utility and predictive power of conventional molecular genetic techniques that
are commonly used to assess genetic diversity to quantify the level of genetic
variation in natural populations. The results of this research will shed light
on this important conservation issue by examining the relationship between
quantitative genetic variation and allozyme heterozygosity, and quantitative
genetic variation and diversity measures obtained by molecular techniques.
Overall, these results will investigate the empirical basis for the use of
molecular markers to assess adaptive potential of populations with high and low
genetic variability.