* 9424330
* SGER:  A New Approach to the Study of Meiotic Chiasma       Interference
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1997
* James Haber, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9424330 Haber This proposal presents a new approach to understanding the
mechanisms of meiotic crossover interference and the connection between gene
conversions and crossing-over. Interference, the inhibition of crossing-over in
chromosomal regions adjacent to another crossover, has been known since early in
this century, but the mechanism by which one crossover during meiosis can exert
an inhibiting effect on an adjacent crossover - over distances of hundreds of
kilobase pairs - is not yet understood. One of the difficulties in studying
interference is that the location of double-strand breaks that initiate meiotic
recombination in any given meiosis is not known, so that it is difficult to
determine how one recombination event influences another. The investigator has
expressed the site-specific HO endonuclease gene under the control of a meiotic-
specific SPO13 promoter in order to create defined double-strand breaks in well-
defined intervals, so that the relationship between gene conversion, crossing-
over and interference can be studied. Preliminary studies have confirmed that
the expression of SPO13::HO leads to meiotic gene conversions after premeiotic
DNA replication. Moreover the investigator has shown that complete meiotic
recombination can be carried out in rad50 spol3 diploids in which all normal
meiotic double-strand breaks are absent; hence, examining crossing-over in the
absence of any other initiating lesions is possible. This should make it
possible to confirm - by indirect immunofluorescence using antibodies directed
against recombination proteins - that elements of the synaptonemal complex,
implicated in the establishment of interference, will assemble at the site of a
double-strand break. Several aspects of this project are "high risk." First, it
must first be established more precisely if SP013::HO-induced double-strand
breaks are produced at the same time as normal meiotic breaks. Second, it must
be established if apparent crossing-over associated with gene conversion in a
rad50 spol3 background is in fact the consequence of reciprocal exchange.
Finally, the detection of a single region of synaptonemal complex by cytological
means may prove to be more difficult than to see many such regions in a normal
meiosis. %%% Interference, the inhibition of crossing-over in chromosomal
regions adjacent to another cross-over, has been known since early in this
century, but the mechanism by which one crossover during meiosis can exert an
inhibiting effect on an adjacent crossover - over distances of hundreds of
kilobase pairs - is not yet understood. The investigation has designed an
elegant series of experiments to further our understanding of this fundamental
process. ***