* 9424512
* Aerodynamic and Thermal Design Optimization Tool for Turbine Airfoil Cascades: GOALI
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* David Huddleston, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/1999
* USD 154,549.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9424512 HUDDLESTON MISSISSIPPI STATE UNIVERSITY Mississippi State
University and Allison Engine Company propose to develop a collaborative
research project between personnel at the NSF Engineering Research Center for
Computational Field Simulation at MSU and the Computational Fluid Mechanics
Branch at Allison. The research topic will be the development of aerodynamic
design optimization/improvement capability. This will be accomplished by
coupling the versatile aerodynamic analysis capability afforded by modern
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) codes with nonlinear optimization techniques.
It is anticipated that developed technology could be applied to a wide range of
aerodynamic design problems and ultimately integrated into a multidisciplinary
analysis and optimization framework. Turbine airfoil shape design optimization
will be investigated and and novel techniques will be implemented to aid the
design of turbine airfoil shapes subject to a prescribed flow path size,
velocity diagram and specific design objective. Design objectives to be
investigated include cooling air minimization, minimal gross weight and
maximization of efficiency. This design topic will be used to stimulate research
and focus technolo gy development aimed at producing a general aerodynamic
design improvement/optimization strategy. Developed capability will help turbine
engine manufacturers achieve the Integrated High Performance Turbine Engine
Technologies (IHPTET) goals of increased turbine engine thrust-to-weight ratio
for future flight systems. Research funded by this project is expected to
produce significant contributions to current state-of- the-art capability in
aerodynamic design optimization. Anticipated advances include (1) more efficient
solution of the aerodynamic sensitivity equations, (2) improved geometric
parameterization and (3) integration of design optimization capability with
state-of-the-art grid generation and CFD simulation codes. Successful
application of this technology to a complex aerodynamic device, such as turbine
cascade design, will provide a tangible demonstration of the utility of advanced
simulation methods to augment conventional aerodynamic design methods.
Technology developed within this project will help provide the necessary
foundation for future extension to multi-disciplinary design optimization.