* 9424177
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in       Experimental, Theoretical, and Computational Fluid Dynamics
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Eric Spina, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 03/31/1999
* USD 171,000.00

9424177 Spina An REU Site in the Department of Mechanical, Aerospace and
Manufacturing Engineering at Syracuse University is proposed. The proposal will
focus on fluid dynamics, including experimental, theoretical, and computational
projects. The program will be conducted during a 12-week period in the summer.
Ten participants will be chosen, with at least seven from schools other than
Syracuse University. A strong commitment is made to recruit groups that have
traditionally been underrepresented in engineering and students from
universities where research is not emphasized. Before starting individual
projects, each student will attend an intensive one-week training program that
will address basic research techniques. In addition to one-on-one interaction
with a faculty mentor, a complementary program of activities is planned to
enhance the professional development of each participant. Among scheduled
activities are a workshop on professional writing, a lecture on public speaking,
and presentations on the role of fluid dynamics research in industry by invited
speakers. In addition, a 3-day workshop on ethical-decision making will be
included in the program . This workshop will be conducted by an expert in the
area of ethics and technology. Finally, participants will also prepare a written
research proposal, a final written report and make oral presentations of
proposed work and final results. ***