* 9424268
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site Proposal
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1998
* William Rasdorf, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 04/30/1998
* USD 185,977.00

9424268 Rasdorf This REU Site will support three years a research program in
civil engineering. One important objective of the proposed program is to
understand the underlying mechanisms necessary to increase the number of women
pursuing advanced degrees in engineering and qualifying for academic and
research careers. In brief, this program is divided into three parts. The main
focus of the program will provide 10 full fellowships each summer for three
years for engineering students. The program will pay each students a stipend
plus housing costs. Furthermore, we will guarantee at least 80% participation by
women in this program. In addition, we will pursue a second focus devoted to
creating guidelines for faculty and principal investigators which will explain
how to effectively conduct an undergraduate research program and interact with
undergraduate students. A brochure for students that answers some of their
commonly held questions about graduate school and research careers will also be
developed and widely distributed. Additionally, two surveys - one for
participating faculty and the other for participating students - will be
developed as a means for evaluating our program. In summary, not only will we
supervise students, but we will also develop brochures, guidelines, and surveys
that we believe will be broadly useful to interested faculty and students. ***