* 9424282
* Auroral Kilometric Radiation and Transverse Acceleration of Ions in Ionosphere Magnetosphere Plasmas
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1999
* Abraham Bers, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 05/31/1999
* USD 180,000.00

The aim of this proposal is to explain some of the observed properties of the
auroral kilometric radiation (AKR), and to understand some of the processes
leading to the transverse acceleration of ionospheric ions (TAI) that eventually
populate the Earth's magnetosphere and result in a strong ionosphere-
magnetosphere coupling. The analytical and computational techniques that will be
used to attain the goals of this proposal include the space-time evolution of
instabilities in plasmas, and wave induced chaos in ion dynamics including the
novel concept of web stochasticity. AKR has been a source of fascination and
extensive study, observationally and theoretically, for nearly twenty years. The
data accumulated during this period has provided information about the AKR
source regions, the modes and polarizations of the waves, and the particle
distributions that exist in and around the source regions. It is generally
agreed upon that, since the radiated power in AKR is orders of magnitude above
thermal emissions, the source of AKR is plasma instabilities. Theories based
upon the electroncyclotron maser instabilities (ECMI), generated by loss- cone
electron distributions, have been successful in explaining some of the observed
properties of AKR. Thus, ECMI are generally believed to be the source of AKR.
However, the traditional analyses of ECMI have failed to provide a clear
explanation of some of the important features of AKR that are consistent with
observations. The proposed work intends to understand and explain the specific
phenomena that have not yet been understood theoretically. A signature of the
strong ionosphere-magnetosphere coupling is a series of observations, reported
over the past fifteen years, which show that a significant population of the
ions in the magnetospheric plasma are of ionospheric origin. In the ionosphere,
the ions are observed to be accelerated in a direction transverse to the
geomagnetic field. The interaction between ions and plasma waves, that seem to
be present in regions where TAI occurs, is believed to play an important role in
the TAI. The proposed research is to use concepts of nonlinear dynamics and web
stochasticity to understand the acceleration of ions by lower- hybrid wave
packets; the observed tail heating of O+ and bulk heating of H+; the ion
distribution functions observed during TAI.