* 9424382
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 30,000.00

Hirsch The investigator studies several areas of dynamical systems and its
applications: (1) Certain stochastic processes such as generalized Polya Urns
are now known to have sample paths whose limit sets are almost surely Chain
Recurrent sets for an associated differential equation. This allows the use of
dynamical systems theory in a variety of fields. Applications are made to
Stochastic Approximations, Game Theory, Mathematical Economics of sustainable
resources, Numerical Algorithms, and Neural Learning Algorithms. (2) New methods
for proving existence of Horseshoe Chaos are applied to generalized Henon maps.
The Smale-Birkhoff existence theorem is extended to replace the assumption of
transverse intersections between stable and unstable manifolds by a much more
general topological condition of nonzero intersection number. (3) New models of
neural computation are constructed, based on varying competition between
oscillatory or chaotic attractors, with competition controlled by an adaptive
clocking system. Mathematical dynamical systems theory studies the long-term
behavior of complex systems. This project develops rigorous mathematics that can
aid in the analysis of systems in several applications. (1) In Economic Theory,
markets are often modeled as a game played repeatedly between competitors who
continually adapt their strategies (e.g., prices, production) in the light of
experience. It is of great importance to determine whether this leads to a
stable, predictable situation. This project studies how questions of this kind
can be solved by translating them into mathematical problems in the seemingly
different but well understood field of dynamical systems theory. This
application builds directly on work by the recent Nobel Laureates in Economics,
Nash and Harsanyi. The investigator is also collaborating with economists on
applications of the same mathematical results to models of sustainable
resources. (2) In many areas of science en gineering it is important to whether
particular systems are "chaotic," i.e. inherently unpredictable in the long run.
This project provides new means for determining chaotic dynamics. (3) The newly
emerging field of Neural Computation involves dynamics in many ways. Some of the
same mathematical ideas used in the other parts of this project are directly
relevant. In collaboration with biophysicists, the investigator applies
dynamical systems theory to new neural network systems that can efficiently
"learn" to do a variety of useful tasks, such as robot control.