* 9424606
* CRB:  Research Toward Sustainable Land Use and Biodiversity in Mosaic of Agriculture and Tropical Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Bruce Haines, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 07/31/1999
* USD 204,571.00

9424606 Haines This research will be conducted in three phases. The long-term
goal for the three phases is to determine the sustainability of various natural
or semi-natural land uses on tropical sites of differing soil quality and
topography. Sustainability is defined as land use in which rates of nutrient and
soil mass loss are less than rates of nutrient input and soil formation. This is
important because of increasing conversion of species rich forests to
agricultural land throughout the tpopics. in many tropical areas, agriculture is
typically short-lived, and fields are then abandoned. Abandoned fields and
tropical moist forest tend to have negative and positive net soil mass and
nutrient balances, respectively. Thus, at the landscape scale, forests can
offset losses from adjacent fields. Therefore, landscape scale sustainability
requires restoration and regeneration of natural forest vegetation. The near-
term goal of this project is to document patterns of abandoned pasture
succession, and identify factors potentially limiting the rate of forest
regeneration. To do so, rates of succession on different soil types and
conditions will be quantified, and seed rain, seed bank, seed germination,
seedling establishment and sapling growth will be measured. These factors will
be combined to understand limitations to colonization and growth of species for
the restoration of tropical forest communities. Given the rapidly increasing
rates of deforestation and population growth in many tropical areas, the ability
to rapidly restore vegetation to abandoned cropland becomes increasingly
important. This study will provide valuable population-level data at the
landscape scale to guide experimental approaches to large-scale restoration of
abandoned agricultural land in the tropics.