* 9424471
* CRB:  Conservation Strategies for the Rapid Recovery of     Depleted Populations of Large Lizards - Continuation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Allison Alberts, Zoological Society of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/1998
* USD 86,563.00

9424471 Alberts Only 60 of the 3,000 species of the extant lizards attain an
adult body mass greater than 1 kg. Despite this, large lizards represent over
60% of lizard species considered threatened or endangered. Even among distantly
related species, large body size, requirements for tracts of undisturbed
ha`itat, and human exploitation for skins and food link large lizards with
respect to conservation management strategies. Of all large lizard species, the
West Indian rock iguanas, genus Cyclura, are the most endangered, primarily
because they inhabit fragile island ecosystems that suffer from habitat
degradation and the ill effects of introduced species. Over the past two years,
Cyclura species have been studied at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba. This
research has led to important management decisions and development of management
plans to conserve this highly endangered lizard. As a result of the recent
Haitian/Cuban refugee crisis, one of the four originally proposed studies, the
experimental reintroduction program, has been postponed. Because of the more
than 30,000 refugees currently housed at Guantanamo Bay, field experiments had
to be delayed. This research will take advantage of this delay to conduct
experiments that will provide direct mechanistic evidence regarding species
survivorship following capture breeding and release programs. The release of
endangered species from captive breeding programs is often conducted without any
scientific rigor. The research in this Conservation and Restoration Biology
proposal represents the first rigorous approach to determining the factors that
will affect the success of captive breeding prmgrams.