* 9424271
* Thermal Plasma Diamond Deposition:  Film Quality and        Morphology Under High-Growth Rate Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1995,04/30/2000
* Steven Girshick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 04/30/2000
* USD 298,380.00

Abstract Girshick CTS-9424271 The PI points out that a crucial issue in the
commercialization of CVD diamond lies in the development of morphology control
under high growth rate conditions. This proposal addresses this key issue by
considering the following objectives: (1) To relate diamond growth rates and the
morphology parameter a to process conditions in an rf thermal plasma reactor;
(2) To relate a to actual surface conditions during film growth, i.e. , species
concentrations and surface temperature; (3) To relate film quality to surface
conditions, growth rates and morphology; (4) To assess the feasibility of
growing smooth &lt;100&gt;-textured films at high growth rates. The PI plans to
attain these research objectives through a combination of diamond growth
experiments involving on-line diagnostics for temperature and species
concentrations, and off-line diagnostics to analyze the deposited films and by
carrying out numerical modeling. The experiments will make use of a reactor in
which an rf plasma is accelerated through a nozzle to produce thin boundary
layers, which are known to promote high growth rates. The experimental
parameters to be varied include the flow rates of hydrogen, methane and argon,
the substrate surface temperature, the nozzle exit diameter, and chamber
pressure. Diagnostics will include gas chromatography and mass spectroscopy of
gaseous samples obtained through micro-orifices located in the substrate, and
non-intrusive techniques of emission spectroscopy and laser induced
fluorescence. A previously existing code which treats the rf plasma, the
chemical kinetics in the substrate boundary layer, and the film growth chemistry
at the diamond surface will be modified to account for the new reactor design.