* 9424445
* Crystal Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Michael O'Keeffe, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/1998
* USD 329,933.00

9424445 O'Keeffe This research program consists of experimental and theoretical
studies in crystal chemistry. The proposed theoretical work includes the
development of an ab initio quantum molecular dynamics method for simulating the
structure and properties of "ionic" compounds maintained at constant pressure.
This will be used to study phase equilibria and defect energetics and structure
in a variety of important compounds. The prototype compositions will be silicon
oxides, but considerable effort will be devoted to inventing materials with
novel structures and properties. The bond valence method of analyzing bond
lengths in crystals will be extended to include the effects of non- bonded
interactions and to accommodate exceptional cations. The mathematics of nets
such as occur in zeolites and framework silicates will be studied. The
experimental work will be devoted to synthesis of new nitrides and oxides, with
special attention to phases stable at high pressure. Structural characterization
of new phases and previously known important phases with incompletely determined
structures will be conducted using X-ray and neutron diffraction. %%% This
research program consists of experimental and theoretical studies in crystal
chemistry. The underlying theme of this project is to obtain deeper
understanding of the factors that determine crystal structures and their
relationship to chemical and physical properties. Examples of some of the major
lines of research are: 1) simulation of crystal structure for application to
phase equilibria studies at high pressures and to examine defects in crystalline
materials; 2) measuring electron density distributions in crystals to understand
bonding; 3) crystal structure determination to confirm theoretical studies; and
4) the development of adequate descriptions of complex structures.