* 9424301
* Support for the International Secretariat of the Global     Change System for Analysis, Research, and Training (START)
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1994,05/31/1999
* A. F. Spilhaus, Jr., American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 05/31/1999
* USD 1,707,187.00

9424301 SPILHAUS In order to facilitate regional examinations of the causes and
consequences of global change around the world, many nations have worked
together to identify scientific issues and to develop plans for collaborative
efforts to study and address problems. To facilitate these efforts, the
International Geosphere- Biosphere Programme (IGBP), the World Climate Research
Programme (WCRP), and the Human Dimensions of Global Environmental Change
Programme (HDP) have established a Global Change System for Analysis, Research,
and Training (START). START is an evolving system of regional research networks,
each of which will consist of at least one regional research center and a number
of regional research sites. Among the most developed of these networks is the
Inter-American Institute for Global Change (IAI). Also under development are the
European Network for Research In Global Change (ENRICH) and the Asian-Pacific
Network for Glmbal Change Research (APN). In addition to encouraging and
supporting the involvement of leading U.S. scientists in the IAI and other
regional research networks, the federal agencies participating in the U.S.
Global Change Research Program (US/GCRP) have sought to facilitate these
valuable international collaborations by sponsoring the international START
secretariat. For the past few years, operations of this activity have been
supported by the Consortium for Interdisciplinary Earth Science Information
Network (CIESIN). Changes in CIESIN's budget have forced it to focus on other
activities, however, and as a result, the American Geophysical Union (AGU) will
provide core support for START secretariat operations. Funding for these
activities is provided by the National Science Foundation, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the U.S. Department of Energy on
behalf of all participating agencies in the US/GCRP. During its initial years of
operation, the START secretariat has played an important rol e in building the
international linkages necessary to increase the involvement in global change
studies of researchers from around the world, and especially from developing
nations. The regional research networks are at critical stages of development,
and a strong START secretariat is essential to continue this essential work.
AGU's sponsorship of the START secretariat should strengthen START's foundation
and enable it to effectively attain its goals of promoting research on the
regional origins and implications of global environmental changes and of
enhancing indigenous scientific capacities for global change research.