* 9424566
* CRB:  Modeling the Effects of Habitat Degradation:  An      Assessment of the Risk to Population Viability and the      Effectiveness of Population Monitoring
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Daniel Doak, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1998
* USD 76,487.00

9424566 Doak Habitat degradation is frequently cited as one of the most
important causes of species endangerment and extinction. Almost all plans for
the recovery of endangered species, or any of the compromise plans that try to
protect a species while still allowing some development emphasize population
monitoring as a means of gauging the health of threatened populations. However,
the ability of monitoring to measure impacts of gradual habitat degradation on
long-term population viability has rarely been addressed. This research will
develop source-sink models with varying levels of biological and spatial
complexity to explore the effects of habitat degradation on short-term
population growth and long-term viability. General models will be developed and
explored, as well as more specific models linked to two well-studied species of
conservation interest that face effects of habitat degradation: Yellowstone
grizzly bears and sea otter populations in Alaska and California. Models will be
used to investigate both the effects of habitat degradation - especially the
existence of time lags in population responses - and the abilities of different
monitoring strategies to detect these responses in a timely fashion. In
addition, by fitting models of varying complexity to these systems, the level of
model complexity and the type of field data needed to adequately detect
responses to habitat degradation will be addressed, as well as the robustness of
these predictions. This research will not only give a better scientific
understanding of the effects of habitat degradation, but will also improve the
incorporation of monitoring data into the process of management and policy
decision-making.