* 9424123
* RUI: Semantics and Design of Object-Oriented Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Kim Bruce, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 06/30/1999
* USD 144,433.00

This award is for research on the design and semantics of statically-typed
object-oriented programming languages. The project has several goals. (1) It
builds on and extends the design of the polymorphic, statically-typed object-
oriented programming language, PolyTOIL, to provide more power and
expressibility while retaining type-safety. (2) It investigates the design of an
object-oriented language whose primary relation between types is matching rather
than subtyping. This will likely req uire the development of a partial type-
inference system to allow the programmer to avoid the proliferation of bounded
type parameters. (3) It seeks to create better mathematical (denotational)
models for foundational calculi for object-oriented languages. (4) It
investigates the development of verification techniques for object-oriented
programming languages. (5) It applies current knowledge of the semantics of
object-oriented languages to the understanding of concurrent object-oriented
languages. These problems are being attacked using formal specifications of
type-checking rules and operational semantics. Subject-reduction-style theorems
are being used to prove the safety of type systems. Interpreters are being
written in order to provide a better understanding of the strengths and
weaknesses of the systems and in order to invetigate scaling up of theoretical
designs to full-strength programming languages. The project seeks to validate
verification techniques by proving the consistency of an operational and
axiomatic semantics.