* 9424532
* FASEB Summer Conference: "Transcription Initiation in       Prokaryotes," July 15-20, 1995, Saxton's River, VT
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* Richard Gourse, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1996
* USD 5,000.00

9424532 Gourse The 1995 FASEB Summer Conference on "Transcription Initiation in
Prokaryotes" will be held July 15-20, 1995 at the Vermont Academy in Saxton's
River, Vermont. The conference is held under the auspices of the Federation of
American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB). There will be ten major
sessions and poster sessions. The topics to be included for discussion are:
biochemistry of transcription, control through different sigmas, activation,
repression, promoter recognition, and control of transcription in complex
systems. The purpose of the meeting is to bring together geneticists and
biochemists to share information. The field of transcription initiation in
prokaryotes is progressing rapidly, providing information on mechanisms at the
molecular level.This is the third FASEB Summer Conference on this subject. The
first two, in 1991 and 1993, were well attended. %%% Transcription, the
synthesis of RNA molecules from DNA templates, is the first step in the
expression of genes, a process fundamental to life. During this meeting
researchers seeking to understand transcription at the molecular level through
the study of bacteria will exchange ideas and information. Such understanding
has the potential to greatly benefit mankind. ***