* 9424131
* Helium3 and Mixtures of Helium3/Helium4 in Aerogel, and     High-Q Mechanical Detectors at Low Temperatures
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Jeevak Parpia, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 285,000.00

9424131 Parpia This project explores the effect of impurities that are one
dimensional (strands of aerogel) or zero dimensional (4He atoms) on the
superfluidity of 3He. The presence of impurities modifies the phase diagram of
pure 3He in ways that are incompletely understood and are often surprising. The
research will employ both pure 3He and mixtures of 3He and 4He. Of considerable
interest is the distribution of 3He and the 4He in mixtures: Phase separation
may occur, one of the isotopes being preferentially adsorbed near the aerogel
colloid, the superfluid properties of the system may be changed, etc. There is
the possibility that the work could lead to discovery of conditions in which two
different superfluids coexist in a mixture of 3He and 4He. The work will use
torsional oscillators and sound resonators to map the transition temperature,
superfluid fraction, sound velocity and heat capacity of these quantum fluids in
aerogels. The research is of a fundamental nature and will provide important
information about the physics of superfluid behavior. %%% This is an
experimental low temperature physics project. The research deals with superfluid
liquids consisting of the isotopes of helium: helium-3, helium-4, or mixtures
thereof. Separately, helium-3 or helium-4 can be cooled to the superfluid state
(vanishing viscosity). Very recently, it was discovered that mixtures of
helium-3 and helium-4 can have properties surprisingly different from the parent
superfluids. Further, it has been found that the presence of a filamentary
aerogel (a silica-gel) "impurity" colloid, which comprises only 1% of the sample
volume, can profoundly affect the superfluid properties of the isotope mixtures.
The effect is related to the very large surface area of the aerogel. A range of
low temperature techniques are being employed to investig ate these fundamental
problems, which bear of the physics of superfluids. The results may also be
relevant to other quantum phenomena such as superconductivity. ***