* 9424422
* Japan Long Term Visit:  Numerical Investigation of          Hydrodynamics Inside Gas-Solid Fluidized Beds
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Dinesh Gera, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 12/31/1997
* USD 38,500.00

9424422 Gera This award supports a 9-month Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.
Dinesh Gera, Research Assistant Professor at West Virginia University. This
fellowship opportunity will enable Dr. Gera to begin a collaborative research
effort with Professor Yutaka Tsuji of Osaka University. The investigators
propose to apply a Discrete Particle Simulation (DPS) technique to predict the
motion of a large number of particles in various cases such as dense flows and
disperse phase flows. The purpose of this collaboration is to develop the DPS
technique for fluidized beds in order to provide quantitative agreement with
actual phenomena. The DPS technique was developed by Prof. Tsuji's group and
many researchers are now to applying this preliminary model in their simulation
techniques. As a postdoctoral fellow, Dr. Gera will have the opportunity to
become familiar with research techniques and equipment at Osaka University while
contributing to the overall research effort. After becoming acquainted with
their simulation techniques, experimental equipment, and procedures, Dr. Gera
intends to continue his research efforts at West Virginia University. The
9-month visit by Dr. Gera will help him to establish a personal and professional
link with a leading researcher in Japan. The publications resulting from this
project will be beneficial to researchers in the "multiphase community" in the
United States, Japan, China, and Europe. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the
objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge
through an international collaboration. ***