* 9424344
* Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras, Quantization, and Supersymmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Arthur Jaffe, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 90,000.00

9424344 Lesniewski It is proposed to continue and expand in new directions an
ongoing program of studying quantized spaces and superspaces by means of the
techniques of operator algebras and non-commutative differential geometry. The
goals of the program are: (1) To understand the mathematics of quantization of
systems (involving both finitely and infinitely many degrees of freedom) with
complicated geometry of phase space; (2) To study the non-commutative geometric
principles underlying the physics of the microworld, and in particular possible
implications for quantum gravity; (3) To explore new mathematical phenomena
relating analysis to other fields of mathematics. Non-commutative geometry is a
new direction of mathematics created in the eighties. Its prime objective is to
study objects, called non-commutative spaces or manifolds, which are not
ordinary geometric objects but still have a geometric flavor. Examples of
structures of this sort arise naturally e.g. in physical theories of subatomic
phenomena. Methods of non-commutative geometry became a powerful tool in
studying various problems in modern analysis and understanding the fundamentals
of the physics of the microworld. It is proposed to study examples of non-
commutative manifolds with emphasis put on applications to quantum physics.
Also, it is proposed to relate some of the ideas of quantum theory to problems
in number theory and modern analysis. ***