* 9424636
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Studies of Nitrided and    Fluorinated Thin Gate Oxides for Advanced MOS Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Tso-Ping Ma, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 136,551.00

9424636 Ma This proposed research project, to be conducted jointly by
researchers at Yale and at the Xinjiang Institute of Physics of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, is designed to answer some important scientific questions
concerning advanced thin gate dielectrics for future generations of MOS (Metal-
Oxide- Semiconductor) integrated circuit technology. The objective of this
collaborative research project is to achieve a better understanding of the role
of nitrogen and fluorine in improving the thin gate oxide reliability. In
particular, we hope to answer the questions as to (i) how the concentration and
spatial distribution of nitrogen or fluorine affect the electrical properties of
the gate oxide, (ii) how the concentration and spatial distribution of nitrogen
or fluorine affect the hot-carrier effects (including dielectric breakdown) as
well as radiation effects in MOS devices, (iii) whether/how the incorporation of
nitrogen or fluorine affect the hydrogen migration in the oxide, (iv)
whether/how the incorporation of nitrogen or fluorine causes strain relaxation
near the SiO 2/Si interface, and (v) how the processing parameters affect the
concentration and distribution of nitrogen or fluorine. The knowledge to be
gained from this research could serve as a useful guide for the semiconductor
industry in their process development, and thereby help to accelerate the
development of this advanced gate oxide technology to commercial maturity.