* 9424398
* Studies of Geometric Algorithms and Their Applicatins
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Richard Pollack, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 07/31/1999
* USD 336,777.00

The relatively new field of computational geometry has developed at an
accelerating rate in the past few years. The problems that it encompasses cover
a wide range of applications, such as motion planning and computer graphics, and
their solution often involves the use of sophisticated techniques drawn from
many branches of mathematics and theoretical computer science. Prior work
includes extensive contributions to many basic and applied problems in the area,
including motion planning, hidden surface removal and related visibility
problems, combinatorial and algebraic analysis of arrangements of curves and
algebraic surfaces, randomized algorithms for linear programming and other
optimization problems, etc. The purpose of this research is to continue the work
in these fields and to extend it into new core areas in computational geometry.
A major portion of the research is devoted to the study of arrangements of
curves and surfaces. Specifically, the following problems are being studied: 1.
Combinatorial and algorithmic problems related to substructures (lower
envelopes, single cells, zones, etc.) in arrangements of surfaces in higher
dimensions. 2. Related algorithms in real algebraic geometry for computing cells
and road maps in semi-algebraic sets. 3. Combinatorial and algorithmic problems
involving planar arrangements of segments or curves (also known as ``geometric
graphs''. A theme that is manifest in this work is the rich cross-fertilization
between basic research in computational geometry and the various application
areas, where problems in one area motivate the study of new basic problems whose
solution in turn finds applications in many other areas. Another theme is the
strong connection between the combinatorial analysis of substructures in
arrangements and the design of corresponding efficient algorithms for
constructing and utilizing these structures. Often the efficiency of such an
algorithm crucially depends on the size of the structure to be computed, and
most of the algorithm design has to be devoted to the combinatorial analysis of
the complexity of that structure. These considerations are reflected in the work
being done.