* 9424277
* Conductance Fluctuations in Amorphous Silicon
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,02/28/1998
* James Kakalios, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9424277 Kakalios The principal aim of this research project is to elucidate and
study the physical mechanisms underlying conductance fluctuations in
hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H). Previous studies of 1/f noise and
random telegraph switching noise in a-Si:H in our laboratory suggest that the
noise arises from inhomogeneous current filaments whose resistance varies in
time, possibly due to the motion of bonded hydrogen inducing bonding
rearrangements which alter the defect structure of the material. Amorphous
silicon films will be synthesized in an rf plasma-enhanced chemical vapor
deposition system at the University of Minnesota, for which the doping level and
deposition conditions are systematically varied. The temperature and bias
dependence of the random telegraph noise of these films will be investigated to
determine if the switching noise arises from current microchannels. The non-
Gaussian statistics which characterize 1/f noise will be investigated as the
properties of the a-Si:H films are varied. Finally, the long-range disorder at
the mobility edge will be characterized by comparing the difference between the
thermopower and conductivity activation energies, and will be correlated with
the noise behavior as well as with the optical and structural properties of
these films. These efforts will significantly improve our understanding of the
fluctuation phenomena in a-Si, a technologically important material. %%%
Hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) is increasingly used in photovoltaic
devices, input scanners, fax machines, photocopiers, and thin-film transistors
for flat-panel displays. All of these require the large surface area advantages
of amorphous semiconductors. As these electronic devices are made smaller,
fundamental electrical noise in the amorphous silicon ultimately limits device
performance. An understanding of the microscopic m echanisms responsible for the
noise phenomena is therefore crucial if amorphous semiconductors are to achive
their technological potential. The principal aim of this research project is to
elucidate and study these mechanisms as the properties of the thin-film
semiconductor are systematically varied. Previous studies of the electronic
noise in hydrogenated amorphous silicon in our laboratory discovered that the
noise itself exhibits time-dependent fluctuations, that is, the noise has noise!
Studies of the noise of the noise provide important information concerning the
degree of electronic disorder and long-range correlations in the material. This
research will significantly advance our knowledge of fluctuation phenomena in
amorphous silicon in particular, as well as improve our understanding of the
physics of non-linear relaxation processes in disordered solids, in general. ***