* 9424348
* Polyherdral Methods in Integer and Combinatorial            Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Egon Balas, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 07/31/1998
* USD 396,103.00

9424348 Balas This objective of this research is to extend some earlier work
undertaken by the investigators in integer and combinatorial optimization
problems. The research on which the current work is built was supported also by
the National Science Foundation. In earlier research, the investigators
developed a new approach to solving mixed integer programming problems based on
a framework described as 'lift-and-project cuts' within the context of the
branch and bound technique. The procedure has been founded to be robust and more
efficient than any of the approaches currently used in solving mixed integer
programs. The current research is aimed at investigating some other unresolved
questions associated with the improved technique. Included in the questions to
be resolved are matters related to the characterization of the computational
behavior of the algorithm, development of some other new algorithms, and the
design and implementation these algorithms to solve a broader class of problems.
The lift-and-project cut approach to mixed integer programming has applications
to several areas of design, manufacturing, distribution, facility location, and
civil infrastructure development. One such application is the optimal design of
multi-product batch plants in chemical engineering, where the optimization is
concerned with the choice of unit plants sizes for various stages of the process
and the batch sizes for the products. Another example is the design of a cost-
effective fiber optics network that protects services against the consequences
of equipment failure. In the area of civil infrastructure development, one
example is the design of a minimum weight truss consisting of a number of
specified bars with fixed modal locations, under specified conditions on
stresses, bar elongations, and nodal displacement. Another class of problems
studied in this research is the generalized traveling salesman problem where the
development technique can be used to construct optimal rolling cycles i n a hot
strip mill. This research has the potential to significantly enhance the
advancement and the understanding of integer and combinatorial optimization
problems. Furthermore, several sectors of the economy stand to benefit from the
results.