* 9424625
* CRB: Collaborative Research: Comparing Genetic and          Demographic Models of Population Viability for a Neotropical Parrot
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Colin Hughes, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 09/30/1998
* USD 96,167.00

9424625 Hughes One of the central problems in conservation biology is
determining the viability of small populations. Population viability is
dependent on complex interactions of demographic and genetic factors. Over the
short term demographic variation induced by the environment seems to be the most
important of these factors. Over the long term the genetic consequences of small
population size become increasingly important. Both genetic and demographic
methods are used to assess population viability. Genetic assessments of
population viability focus on effective population size. The effective size is
the size of an idealized population in which the random processes of inbreeding
and drift act at the same rate as they do in the study population. Many
guidelines for conservation state the number of individuals that should be saved
in terms of effective size. Yet, in almost every wild population, effective size
is much smaller than actual population size. Demographic assessments result from
population viability assessment (PVA) models of persistence. In PVA models,
populations are projected into the future using means and variances of
demographic parameters: annual reproductive success and survivorship for
different age or stage classes. This conservation and restoration biology
project will compare genetic and demographic approaches to viability assessment
based on studies of a Neotropical parrot, the Green-rumped Parrotlet in
Venezuela. In addition, this research will develop a demographic model of
population persistence for this species of parrot. The use of PVA and other
demographic models is a cornerstone in conservation biology, yet the methods
have rarely been tested and verified on small populations of neotropical birds.