* 9424069
* GOALI/IUCRP:  Solid State Amperiometric Sensor for In-Situ  Monitoring of Melt Composition in High Temperature          Metallurgical Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Uday Pal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 06/30/1998
* USD 256,563.00

9424069 Pal A solid state sensor will be designed and built to in-situ monitor
oxide (slag) melt composition encountered in smelting and refining of ferrous
and non-ferrous metals. In this device, the oxygen ion conducting stabilized
zirconia solid electrolyte will physically separate the cathodic compartment,
exposed to the melt, from the anodic compartment, exposed to a reference gas.
Possible choices for electrode materials include refractory oxides such as the
lanthanum and yttrium chromites, doped zirconia and various inert metal-zirconia
cermets. A negative potential sweep, will be applied to sensing electrode
(cathode) with respect to the counter electrode (anode). When the dissociation
potential of an oxide in the melt is reached, the oxide will reduce at the
cathode and the oxygen ions will be driven through the solid electrolyte to the
anode, where they will liberate electrons and an ionic current through the
device will be detected. If the oxides in the melt, which are to be detected,
have dissociation potentials that do not overlap and are lower than that of
zirconia, then these oxides can be sequentially dissociated and distinguished by
this device. Once an oxide is dissociated, the potential sweep will result in an
ionic current peak which will give a measure of its concentration. By using a
single device one could detect and measure the concentrations of the oxides of
iron, manganese and chromium in ferrous smelting and refining slags. The sensor
will be tested on three well defined slag systems, CaO-SiO2-Al2O3-Feo, CaO-
SiO2-Al2O3-FeO-MnO, and CaO-SiO2-A12O3-FeO-MnO-CrOx. The industrial partner will
package this slag sensor for on-site testing in steelmaking facilities. Proper
real time detection of FeO and MnO in steelmaking and ladle refining slags and
also CrOx in stainless steelmaking slags is key to improving the recovery of
iron and alloying elements and decreasing non-metallic inclusions through better
process control. For optimum process control of ferrous and non-ferrous smelting
and refining operations, concentration of some critical components in slags need
to be monitored in real time at various stages during the process. Currently,
all slag composition analyses in these processes are performed with expensive
analytical equipment on samples removed from the melt and they take a relatively
long time. If in-situ monitoring of slag composition can be performed using a
relatively inexpensive sensor it would be widely used for smelting and refining
process control, resulting in improving the quality of the product, increasing
productivity and thereby decreasing the overall manufacturing cost.