* 9424305
* Estimation and Equalization of Time-Varying Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1995,05/01/1999
* Georgios Giannakis, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/01/1999
* USD 171,642.00

Intersymbol Interference (ISI) is caused by multipath effects or bandwith
constraints and presents a major obstacle in modern high- speed digital
transmission. When the communication link is also fading with time, it is
essential for the equalizer to be able to follow the channel's time variations.
While several adaptive and blind methods have been proposed for time-invariant
or slowly fading channels, relatively little attention has been given to the
rapidly fading case. The major goal of this project is to use basis expansion
ideas as a tool for the equalization of rapidly varying channels. In this
framework, each time-varying coefficient is expanded into a set of basis
sequences, and the expansion parameters are estimated using novel adaptive and
decision directed schemes. Next, basis expansions are combined with time-varying
correlations and higher- order statistics to address time-varying, blind
equalization in a rapidly fading environment. Finally, based on physical
intuition and experimental data, the selection of the "best" basis which
captures optimally the channel's dynamics is being addressed. Complex
exponentials are being investigated for the mobile radio channel, while wavelet
expansions are being considered for channels with abrupt changes, and are being
compared with stochastic channel modeling approaches.