* 9424226
* REU SITE:  Astronomy Site at the University of Alabama,     Tuscaloosa
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Gene Byrd, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 03/31/1999
* USD 86,220.00

9424226 Crocker A Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in
Astronomy will be operated at the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa during the
summers of 1995, 1996, and 1997. The major focus of the research for the student
projects at this site is in the areas of Astronomy and Astrophysics. The
students will be working with the Astronomy group within the Department of
Physics and Astronomy. There are six academic faculty, one research professor,
five postdoctoral researchers, and 12 graduate students in the Astronomy group.
It is planned to have five REU summer students each year. The summer program
will run for 10 weeks and will offer a summer stipend for the students of $2700.
Free housing and some travel support will be provided. The student participants
will be chosen on a competitive basis from applications from around the country,
but the heaviest recruiting will be in the mid-southern United States. The
students will be involved in research activities and will also take part in
coordinated seminars on science and general scientific techniques. These
activities will help the undergraduate students develop good research skills and
will introduce them to current research topics. The student projects are
designed so that the students will complete a particular research project and
that there will be scientific results obtained by the students that are
publishable in a first rate scientific journal. Selected students will be
supported to attend and present papers at professional scientific meetings.