* 9424296
* Adsorption Sites and Nucleation in Materials Deposition on  Silicon and Hydrogen-Terminated Silicon Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1999
* Yves Chabal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9424296 Bent The goal of this research is to obtain an atomic and molecular
level understanding of film nucleation on silicon substrates through a
combination of infrared(IR) vibrational spectroscopy and scanning tunneling
microscopy(STM). By combining IR with STM, a number of important issues in
materials deposition and etching on silicon surfaces -- issues which are
fundamental to understanding current microelectronics processes and to
developing future technologies will be addressed definitively. Initially the
focus will be on exploring the limits of the approach with emphasis on the
GaAs/Si system as well as emphasis on the oxidation of silicon. The GaAs/Si
system will test the limitations of the experimental approach since this is a
system where the IR intensities are expected to be particularly weak. Silicon
oxidation will also be studied both because of its technological importance and
because it represents a system where high quality and interesting IR results at
low frequencies using CoSi2-implanted silicon samples can be obtained. The
systems that will be investigated include: oxidation of Si(100) by water and by
ethanol as a model system for the TEOS (tetraethoxysilane) MOCVD process. %%%
The characterization techniques used in this research provide site specific
"fingerprints" of bonding at surfaces, and the fingerprint from each of these
techniques places constraints on the interpretation of the other which permits
more definitive conclusions than would be possible from either of the techniques
alone. Because of the significance of these materials for electronic and
photonic applications, it is important to study the details of elementary
chemical and physical processes, and to understand fundamental features of
structure/property relationships. An important feature of the program is the
training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area of
materials research. ***