* 9424355
* Hydrodynamic Convection of a Passive Scalar in a            Two-Dimensional Couette Flow
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Xiao-Lun Wu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 150,000.00

9424355 Wu In this research we investigate statistical properties of a passive
scalar coupled to a two-dimensional (2D) fluctuating velocity field. The
experimental object is a free-standing soap film which is driven by a 2D Couette
cell. The 2D Couette cell, which has recently been developed in our laboratory,
allows precise control of hydrodynamic flow and characterization of various flow
instabilities. Our early experiments have shown that a driven soap film exhibits
strong spatiotemporal fluctuations in its thickness. A simple calculation
suggests that these fluctuations can be treated as a passive scalar and that the
viscous-"diffusion" subrange is extensive due to a sharp cutoff at small length
scales. We intend to measure the spectral density of the fluctuations as a
function of wavenumber using a real- space imaging technique. In addition, the
spatiotemporal fluctuations of the velocity field will be measured using a novel
fiber-optical velocimeter. We wish to establish correlations between the
spectral densities of the velocity field and the passive thickness field in
flows with different degrees of stochastic components. %%% Two-dimensional (2D)
hydrodynamics and instabilities have largely remained domains for theoretical
and computational analysis. However, the subject has great importance for
meteorology, oceanography, and a variety of laboratory experiments. This
research is geared toward an understanding of a passive scalar, such as dyes or
temperature, convected by an imposed fluctuating velocity distribution in two
dimensions. Our previous experiments have shown that a free-standing soap film
behaves like a 2D fluid, and the fluctuations in film thickness are influenced
by the spatiotemporal behavior of the velocity distribution. A simple
theoretical analysis indicates that if the fluctuations in the thickness are
much less than the average thickn ess, then the fluctuations can be treated as a
passive scalar quantity. We will use a video imaging technique to extract
statistical properties of the film thickness in space and time and correlate
them with the imposed 2D velocity distribution. This research will enrich our
general knowledge about hydrodynamic fluctuations in two dimensions and help to
refine theoretical models. ***