* 9424068
* Systematics and Evolutionary Biology: A Continuing Program  of Undergraduate Research at the American Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1995,09/30/1998
* Melanie Stiassny, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 09/30/1998
* USD 149,376.00

Drawing on the research and teaching expertise of the Museum's outstanding
scientific staff, the AMNH program provides students with a coherent, hands-on
introduction to research in systematics and evolutionary biology, areas in which
few undergraduates have a solid grounding. Entering into the Museum community,
our students are offered an extraordianry opportunity to step outside of their
immediate university environments, broaden their experience of biological
disciplines, and participate in the highest caliber research at a premier
academic institution. The program is a comprehensive, interactive learning that
centers around research projects carefully designed to introduce undergraduates
to the excitement, challenge, and relevance of systematics and comparative
evolutionary biology. In addition to hand-on experience of research and
publication, our students participate in a comprehensive program of round-table
discussions where they discuss their research progress and problems, "show and
tell" their latest findings, and thrash-out ideas in an informal and supportive
setting. A Special Lecture Series introduces students to eminent Museum faculty
whose lectures address current debates in systematics and contemporary
evolutionary theory. And students participate in a REU Student Seminar where
they give formal slide-illustrated presentations to a supportive, yet critical
audience of mentors and peers.