* 9424467
* Spin-Polarized Tunneling Study of Spin Effects in the       Superconducting State
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Paul Tedrow, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 243,727.00

9424467 Tedrow The discovery of spin-polarized electron tunneling has made
possible detailed probing of the superconducting state in the presence of
applied magnetic fields to an extent not previously possible. In particular, the
development of tunnel barriers that act as spin filters has greatly increased
the versatility of this technique. In this work, the spin-polarized tunneling
technique will be applied to the investigation of the density of states of thin-
film superconductors in three regimes of external influence. In the first
regime, the superconductor will be subjected to injection of quasiparticles
through a spin-filter tunnel barrier to allow observatio of possible spin-
dependent nonequilibrium effects. In the second, spin state mixing caused by
spin-orbit scattering and magnetic exchange interactions arising in rare-earth
impurities will be studied. Finally, the exchange proximity effect will be used
along with the tunneling spectroscopy to attempt to verify the existence of the
Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov state. %%% Experiments are proposed to study
the distribution of conduction electron energies (the so-called "density of
states") in thin-film superconducting materials by means of the experimental
technique of spin-polarized electron tunneling. In this technique, electrons of
one spin (magnetic moment) orientation "tunnel" preferentially through an
insulating magnetic barrier into the superconductor; the resulting current
provides a map of the electron energies in the superconductor. Further
information will be gained by studying these effects under the influence of
external magnetic fields and in the presence of magnetic impurity atoms doped
into the superconducting films. ***