* 9424246
* Astronomical Society of the Pacific (ASP) Symposium:        Clusters, Lensing, and the Future of the Universe,          College Park, Maryland, June 26-28, 1995
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Marvin Leventhal, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 12/31/1995
* USD 3,000.00

9424246 Leventhal This award will provide partial support for a science
symposium on "Clusters, Lensing, and the Future of the Universe", June 26-28,
1995, at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland. The University of
Maryland, Department of Astronomy, is hosting the annual meeting of the
Astronomical Society of the Pacific (ASP) from June 24-28, 1995. As part of this
meeting, the Department of Astronomy has sole responsibility for organizing a
Science Symposium. The title of the symposium is "Clusters, Lensing, and the
Future of the Universe". It will be held at the College Park, Maryland campus of
the University of Maryland from June 26 to 28 , 1995. It is anticipated that
approximately 150 professional astronomers will attend and participate in the
symposium. A smaller and unknown number of amateur astronomers are also likely
to attend. The primary purpose of this symposium is to bring together people
working on three of the major unsolved problems of modern astrophysics, in the
expectation that the problems (and their hoped-for solutions) have aspects in
common. Roughly, the questions can be phrased as (a) How should we describe the
largest-scale structures in the universe? (b) How did the structures form
without producing stronger imprints in the cosmic microwave background
radiation? and (c) Which values of the standard cosmological parameters and of
the inflationary universe model parameters best describe the universe during the
epoch of galaxy formation, the present time, and the long range future? The
intended format of the symposium includes about 20 reviews by invited speakers,
each accompanied by a couple of shorter contributed talks; and a number of
poster paper contributions on related topics.