* 9424228
* Undergraduate Research Experiences in Membrane Sciences
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Leonidas Bachas, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1998
* USD 139,664.00

9424228 Bachas This REU Site Award will introduce twenty-seven talented
undergraduates to research in the field of membrane science. Nine students per
year will be selected primarily form nominees provided by nine Kentucky colleges
and universities that serve the economically underprivileged Appalachian regions
of Kentucky, and will be matched with the eight faculty advisors. Special
efforts will be made to recruit minority students by using our established
contacts with faculty at U. S. institutions that have high minority enrollments.
The individual projects are designed along the lines of the research program of
the supervising advisor to ensure direct scientific interaction with the
graduate and postdoctoral students of each research group. Weekly seminars
during the summer, and evening seminars in the fall will be conducted to
stimulate discussion and provide information on career possibilities, on current
major research issues, and on the development of effective scientific
communication skills. Further, in-house "mini-conferences" will be organized
during which the students will present their project results in the form of a
scientific presentation. The students will also have the opportunity to attend a
professional conference and get exposed to the most recent advances in their
field. Finally, the students will be encouraged to participate at the annual
Regional Undergraduate Chemistry Research Poster Competition organized by the
Department of Chemistry and sponsored by the University of Kentucky Graduate
School. %%% This wide spectrum of research-related activities is expected to
contribute toward the scientific maturation of the individual students and
possibly encourage them to pursue a research career