* 9424272
* Quantitative Assessment of Transfer of Training in the CAVE Virtual Environment and its Relevance to the National       Information Infrastructure
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Thomas DeFanti, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 07/31/1998
* USD 375,000.00

If one is to posit that virtual reality will be used to train humans in critical
performance tasks, the key becomes finding what sort of training is transferable
between the virtual and physical worlds. Experiments performed thus far in the
CAVE Virtual Environment showed significant performance improvement in virtual
reality-trained subjects compared to the untrained population for the same task.
Further experiments will quantitatively assess what may be perhaps the most
important aspect of virtual reality research--the relationship between the
technology and the training task which would result in a maximum transfer of
training. Early results indicate that latency is a severe problem and that
restricting virtual reality solely to the visual domain limits its training
application. This work will extend the study of latency measurement to wide area
networks using CAVE-to-CAVE experiments over the vBNS national network as the
model. The results are expected to have broad applicability in the National
Challenge areas, particularly in manufacturing and education If one is to posit
that virtual reality will be used to train humans in critical performance tasks,
the key becomes finding what sort of training is transferable between the
virtual and physical worlds. Experiments performed thus far in the CAVE Virtual
Environment showed significant performance improvement in virtual reality-
trained subjects compared to the untrained population for the same task. Further
experiments will quantitatively assess what may be perhaps the most important
aspect of virtual reality research--the relationship between the technology and
the training task which would result in a maximum transfer of training. Early
results indicate that latency is a severe problem and that restricting virtual
reality solely to the visual domain limits its training application. This work
will extend the study of latency measurement to wide area networks using CAVE-
to-CAVE experiments over the vBNS national network as the model. The results are
expected to have broad applicability in the National Challenge areas,
particularly in manufacturing and education.