* 9424546
* CRB:  Biodiversity in Experimental Prairie Restorations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Henry Howe, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 84,125.00

Howe I propose to discover whether seed-eating birds and rodents and foliage-
eating mammals influence plant diversity and community composition as
agricultural land is converted to native tallgrass vegetation. Birds and mammals
select seeds by size, and most herbivorous mammals select seeds by size, and
most herbivorous mammals prefer to eat foliage of some plant species over
others. However it is not known whether preferences evident in the lab actually
alter composition and diversity of tallgrass prairie communities, either in
conserved remnants or in synthetic assemblages created by restoration.
Understanding such basic processes as seedbank depletion and intensive mammalian
herbivore will aid in land reclamation, prairie restoration, and conservation of
hundreds of native species which now occupy peripheral oldfield or woodland
habitats, or increasingly isolated prairie remnants now (( 1% of pre-European
extent on rich soils suitable for intensive agriculture. An exclosure experiment
in southwestern Wisconsin will determine whether consumer choices by vertebrates
regulate vegetative composition during establishment of replicated restorations
of prairie grass and forbs. I will seed 45 representative species of fallow
agricultural land that has been prepared for two years. Different levels of
vertebrate access (no access, bird access, rodent access, total access including
deer) should produce different species composition in replicated plots that
initially receive the same number an composition of seeds. Cricetid and
microtine rodents should depress large-seeded species (( 3.0 mg/seed), sparrows
should depress species with seeds of intermediate size (0.3-2.0 mg/seed), while
populations of plants with seeds to small to be of interest to vertebrates ((
0.2 mg/seed) should be most diverse and abundant when granviores are present.
With all vertebrates absent, large-seeded species should be disproportionately
abundant. Rodent and deer access after emergence should favor grasses because of
selective herbivore on forbs. It is remarkable that foraging preferences
considered axiomatic in foraging ecology of seed selection and herbivore are
generally untested in tallgrass prairie communities, and therefore cannot be
applied to conserving or restoring a rich flora. Recent experience has shown
that when restoration is done as a science, it is very revealing. This study
will augment scientific understanding needed by federal, state, and local
governments, private interests, and environmental groups that show an increasing
commitment to "restoration from scratch" of species assemblages that are
vanishingly rare on rich agricultural soils.