* 9424478
* Stability of Intermetallic Contacts to Compound             Semiconductor Alloys Lattice-Matched to Indium              Phosphide
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Y. Austin Chang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/1999
* USD 273,680.00

9424478 Chang The objectives of this research are to investigate the stability
of intermetallic contacts to two compound semiconductor alloys, InGaAs and
InAlAs, which are lattice-matched to InP, and to study the electrical behavior
of selected intermetallic contacts to these two compound semiconductor alloys.
The thermodynamic stabilities of the quaternary systems will be studied by
determining relevant phase equilibria. Both the four-point probe and
transmission line methods will be used to study the electrical behavior of the
ohmic contacts. For those material combinations giving significant Schottky
contacts, both I-V and C-V methods will be used. Films of intermetallics will be
deposited on the compound semiconductor alloys by sputter deposition, and
annealing of the contacts will be carried out using a rapid thermal annealing
furnace. The metal/semiconductor interfaces will be characterized in the as-
deposited state and after annealing using a variety of surface-sensitive
techniques, including TEM, SAM and GAXRD (glancing angle x-ray diffraction). %%%
The results of the proposed study are expected to provide improved fundamental
understanding of the relationship between electrical behavior of
intermetallics/compound semiconductor alloy combinations, and the thermodynamic
and kinetic stabilities at their interfaces. Concurrently, the research
investigation can have a significant impact on the design and development of
optoelectronic and high-speed electronic devices for practical applications. An
important feature of the program is the training of students in a fundamentally
and technologically significant area of materials research. ***