* 9424482
* Laser Spectroscopy of Ions and Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Richard Saykally, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 01/31/1998
* USD 902,500.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. Richard Saykally of the Department of Chemistry of the University of
California at Berkeley will engage in continuing studies of the structure and
dynamics of weakly bound molecular complexes. Special emphasis is paid to the
dynamical aspects. The experimental data will be obtained by ultra high
resolution laser spectroscopy and their analysis will be accompanied by rigorous
theoretical modeling in order to obtain highly detailed intermolecular potential
energy surfaces. Specifically, the data from which this information is extracted
are vibration-rotation-tunneling (VRT) spectra. Extensions to hydrated proton
complexes and amino acid complexes will be made possible by continued
developments in the technology of VRT spectroscopy. Since intramolecular
interactions are known to be non-additive, the emphasis will be on trimer and
higher order complexes. The structure and dynamics of condensed phase matter,
other than metals and semiconductors, is largely determined by the weak
interactions between strongly bound molecules. This research serves to obtain a
better molecular level understanding of the intermolecular interactions that
govern the behavior of condensed phase systems, including those of biological
importance.