* 9424587
* Integrated Prognostics, Maintenance and Life Extending      Control of Mechanical and Production Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Asok Ray, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 06/30/1999
* USD 180,000.00

9424587 This proposal supports research in integrated prognostics, maintenance,
and life-extending control of continuous time production processes. The research
includes three tasks. The first task involves the development of stochastic
fatigue damage dynamics models with data determined by experiment and obtained
from published literature. A specific fossil fuel power plant model will be used
as an example case. The second task focuses on the synthesis of decision and
control policies based on both continuously varying and discrete-event models.
This formulation will include a feed-forward policy over a finite time horizon
using nonlinear programming, a constrained parameter optimization for nonlinear
decision and control in a feedback loop, and interactive discrete event
strategies for maintenance decisions and life-extending control at the
coordination and supervisory levels using the concept of finite-state automata.
The third task is the simulation of the decision and control system on a
simulation testbed. If successful, this research will lead to enhanced plant
safety, operational reliability, and availability of continuous-time production
processes such as chemical and processing plants, pulp and paper mills, and
large rolling mills. The results should also be extendable to discrete
production processes such as the manufacture of glass containers and light
bulbs, semi-conductors, ceramic-enamel coatings on appliances, and food
products. This research comprises a step toward the notion that control and
diagnostic systems based on sensory and operational information can be used to
improve plant operational characteristics.