* 9424544
* Molecular Techniques to Define Relationships and Dispersal  Patterns of a Species in an Unpredictable Environment: the  Muskox, an Arctic Model
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1996
* Pamela Groves, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 11/30/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9424544 Groves This project will investigate genetic factors associated with the
potential of a species to adapt and survive while inhabiting an unpredictable
environment that may be altered by climatic change or human activity. The
project will address the following questions: (1) is there detectable genetic
diversity between populations affected by known bottlenecks and barriers to
dispersal? (2) is genetic diversity sufficient to establish relationships
between populations and explain historic patterns of dispersal across their
range? (3) can genetic variability be used to establish relationships of
individuals within populations and to assess the differential roles of the sexes
in pioneering new ranges or recolonizing old ones? (4) what are the predicted
patterns of gene flow between populations that have fluctuated as a result of
climatic change or human intervention and may be isolated by geographic
barriers? Using the muskox as a model, the answers to these questions should
increase understanding of the population dynamics of a species that is sometimes
constrained from dispersal by climate, human activity and geographic barriers
and has apparently adapted to survive genetic bottlenecks caused by these
constraints and population fluctuations. As disturbances to the environment are
likely to become more significant with predicted global climate change and
increasing human presence on the earth, the ability to predict species'
responses to change is becoming more important if efforts are to be made to
ensure their survival. The known history of fluctuations of indigenous
populations as well as documented increases of introduced populations make the
muskox an appropriate subject for an investigation of the influence of genetic,
climatic, geographic, and human factors on the population dynamics of a widely
distributed arctic mammal. Ecological and evolutionary principles described in
this study should be applicable to other arctic species. Analysis of
mitochondrial DNA has been unsatisfactory in detecting enough genetic diversity
to establish relationships within and between muskox populations (Groves, in
prep). Three regions of nuclear DNA will be analyzed for their potential to
address the project goals. These areas include: hypervariable microsatellites,
exonintron regions and Y chromosome linked regions. Results from the planning
grant research using archived muskox tissue samples will be used to plan a
larger study of muskox population dynamics, biogeography and evolution
throughout their range. The number and type of samples required from different
populations will be established so that the most economical and efficient
approach to collecting samples can be arranged.