* 9424615
* CRB:  Projecting Diversity of Neotropical Migratory Birds   Under Global Climate Change
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1998
* Brian Maurer, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 05/31/1998
* USD 129,875.00

9424615 Maurer An understanding of how to conserve biological diversity must
incorporate a knowledge of how geographic ranges of species change, particularly
for those species that may be declining in abundance and are likely to become
threatened with extinction. This research is designed to examine complex changes
in the structure of geographic ranges of species of neotropical migrant
warblers. A number of measures of geographic range structure have been discussed
in the literature, but these have yet to be related directly to population level
processes such as dispersal. Simulation models will be constructed that relate
these measures of geographic range structure to population processes in order to
provide a theoretical framework to understand mechanisms that determine patterns
in geographic range structure within and among species. In order to establish
empirical patterns of changes in abundance across geographic ranges of
neotropical migrant warblers, and their non-migratory relatives, maps of
abundances of species will be constructed for 5 five-year time periods.
Differences between logarithms of these maps between time periods will be used
to construct maps of the spatial patterns of population change. Maps of
abundance across geographic ranges of these species will be correlated with
output from vegetation models that are linked to global climate change models.
These correlation models will be used to obtain projections of the structure of
geographic ranges of species under various climate change scenarios. Maps of
diversity of warblers under current conditions and under a variety of global
change scenarios will be constructed by overlaying abundance maps, and counting
the number of species with abundances &gt;0 in each map unit. The analysis of
geographic range structure and dynamics proposed herein will provide insight
into the patterns and processes that determine the spatial distribution of
abundances of species, and suggest possible mechanisms that are responsible for
these patte rns. Such pattern changes under global change scenarios will provide
further insight into the potential loss of species with narrow geographic ranges
or small populations.