* 9424137
* CRB:  Plant Communities on Patchy Serpertine Outcrops:      Spatial Structure and Ecological Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1999
* Susan Harrison, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 150,316.00

9424137 Harrison Serpentine outcrops in Northern California are ecological
islands with a rich native flora. This study examines two related aspects of
plant community structure on serpentine soils, with both immediate and general
relevance for conservation biology. The first question is how plant community
diversity is spatially structured on serpentine versus non-serpentine soils, and
how this spatial structure is affected by patchiness and other attributes of
serpentine. Spatial turnover in species composition will be compared between
serpentine and non-serpentine substrates, and between patchy and continuous
serpentine, while holding the size and spacing of sampling areas constant. This
well be the first rigorous test of the role of patchiness versus distance alone
in producing the spatial component of community diversity. To assess the roles
of endemism and lack of invasion, the above analyses will be repeated excluding
endemics and alien species, respectively. Species turnover between pairs of
sites will be regressed on distance and environmental dissimilarity within each
habitat type to further quantify spatial turnover and its causes. The second
question concerns biotic causes of patterns of diversity. Experiments will
examine how the rates of key biotic interactions vary with the size and
isolation of serpentine patches. Pollination and seed predation will be measured
in two serpentine endemic plant species, along both natural and experimental
gradients of patch isolation. This study will illuminate both how best to
conserve plant communities on serpentine soils in California, and the more
general issue of how patchiness at several spatial scales affects the structure
and function of ecological communities. This research becomes even more
important as human activities gradually increase the rate and degree of
fragmentation of natural systems.