* 9424261
* Directed Improvisation:  A Paradigm for Multi-              Agent Human-Computer Collaboration
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Richard Fikes, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 06/30/1999
* USD 300,739.00

The proposed project will investigate directed improvisation, a new paradigm for
multi-agent human-computer collaboration. Basically, one or more users direct
one or more computer characters with abstract instructions and constraints. The
characters improvise courses of behavior that follow the directions, express
distinctive styles of behavior, and meet other objectives. The resulting "work,"
comprising the individual and interactive behaviors of the characters, reflects
a collaboration among all of the human and computer participants. Human users
collaborate with one another to determine the abstract structure and quality of
their characters' behaviors. Computer characters collaborate with users and with
one another to improvise the details of their individual and interactive
behaviors. Objectives of the project are: (a) develop a model of the directed
improvisation paradigm for multi-agent human- computer collaboration; (b)
develop and implement a domain- independent model of computer agents capable of
performing directed improvisation in single-agent and multi-agent
configurations; (c) develop and implement a domain-independent model of
interfaces for one or more human users to collaborate with one another while
directing the improvisational behavior of computer agents; (d) instantiate the
implemented models of agents and interfaces in an experimental testbed
application: a Computer-Animated Improvisational Theater (CAIT); (e)
demonstrate, analyze, and evaluate the directed improvisation paradigm in the
CAIT testbed. Directed improvisation is a promising new paradigm for multi-
agent human-computer collaboration, potentially useful in a diverse set of
applications. The CAIT testbed also has intrinsic significance as a pioneering
example of enjoyable experience- based learning environments, a new kind of
computer game, and a new artistic "form" for interactive stories and
entertainment.