* 9424326
* Support for U.S. Scholars to Travel to Belgium for the      Biennial Meeting of the International Society for the       History, Philo &amp; Social Studies of Biology (7/19-23/95)
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Richard Burkhardt, History of Science Society
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 03/31/1996
* USD 15,000.00

Support from this grant will help to defray the expenses of US scholars to
travel to Leuven, Belgium to attend the July 19-23 meeting of the International
Society for the History, Philosophy, and Social Studies of Biology (ISHPSSB).
This meeting, the seventh biennial meeting of the society, is the first meeting
of the society to be held outside North America. ISHPSSB has come in the course
of its twelve year history to be the primary setting for historians,
philosophers and social scientists of biology to interact with one another and
with practicing biologists on issues of common, professional interest. Past
meetings of the society have been highly stimulating and fruitful. Invaluable
scholarly contacts and interchanges have developed from conference sessions.
1995 is a propitious time for this society to hold its first European meeting
given that 25% of the participants at previous meetings have been coming from
outside North America; that significant work in these fields is advancing apace
at various European centers; and that the last several years have witnessed new
national societies established in Europe for the study of biology from
historical, philosophical and social scientific perspectives. These travel funds
are being used to assist graduate students and independent scholars in attending
the 1995 meeting. Funding is being limited to those with official participation
in the program: presenting papers, delivering commentaries, and/or chairing
sessions. Grant recipients are being selected by a travel grants award
committee. Grants are being administered through the History of Science Society.