* 9424264
* Mathematical/Computational Tools for Mapping Brain Data     Bases
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/1996,02/22/1999
* Ulf Grenander, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Paul Gilna
* 02/22/1999
* USD 285,000.00

Modern whole brain cryosection and digitization techniques coupled to modern
tissue section and staining methods allow anatomists to provide exquisitely
detailed in vivo information regarding the anatomical structure and function of
individual brains. The difficulty lies in two areas: images and sections within
the same anatomy must be registered. But more fundamentally, even when
registered, normal variation across disparate anatomes makes pooling of inter
anatomical data difficult, if not impossible. In this proposal, we strive
towards the development of algorithmic tools for the fusion of anatomical and
functional data as measured via gross whole brain cryosections (0.05-0.1 mm
resolution) and stained tissue sections in the macaque monkey brain. The major
focus of this proposal is on the development of _ as manifest in the adult
macaque, allowing for the mapping of a single atlas to multiple individual
targets. The atlas contains all subvolumes of biological significance to the
investigator in our work these would include the sulci and gyri, deep thalamic
nuclei, ventricles and various sub areas in the occipital lobe, including
primary visual cortex (area V1) and other visual areas. Our representations
provide a tool for the algorithmic generation of smooth maps (maps preserving
differential geometric lengths, areas, volumes) from an atlas (template) and its
subvolumes to a family of target anatomies. These maps allow for the fusion and
pooling of geometric and physiologic information from varied experimental
preparations into one common coordinate system or data base. As part of such a
representation of normal macaque anatomical variability, a probabilistic measure
will be constructed from a family of representative macaque whole brain
anatomies. The probability measures normal anatomical variation in act ual brain
anatomy. This will provide neuroanatomists with a direct tool for placing their
samples into a common coordinate system with a precise degree of certainty or
confidence. Such a measure of anatomical variability reflects both the
underlying stability of pre-defined anatomically labeled regions, i.e. subareas
and volumes such as sulci, eyri, and different visual areas and their
covariation relative to a single biologically meaningful coordinate system.