* 9424270
* Mathematical Sciences:  Interacting Particle Systems and    Hydrodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Fraydoun Rezakhanlou, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1998
* USD 40,000.00

9424270 Rezakhanlou Abstract An outstanding and long studied problem in
statistical mechanics is to establish the connection between the microscopic
structure of a fluid (or a gas) and its macroscopic behavior. Perhaps the most
celebrated problem in this context is the derivation of the Hydrodynamic and
kinetic equations from small scale dynamics governed by the Newton's second law.
This problem is still wide open but some variants have been reaently treated.
The investigator's research concerns the analysis of particle systems simulating
a fluid or a dilute gas. Recently the investigator has derived the Boltzmann
equation for the macroscopic particle densities for a class of one dimensional
lattice gas models. Roughly speaking one shows that after a suitable scaling the
microscopic particle density converges to a solution of the Boltzmann equation.
The convergence is expected to be exponentially fast and the exponential rate
can be expressed by a variational formula. Our world appears differently at
different scales! For example a fluid or a gas is a collection of an enormous
number of molecules that collide incessantly and move erratically without any
particular aim. How do these molecules then manage to organize themselves in
such a way as to form a flow pattern on a large scale? Roughly the reason is
that the local conservation laws of mass, momentum and energy impose constraints
not immediately visible on the microscopic scale. The investigator's research
concerns the relationship between the microscopic structure and the macroscopic
behavior of fluids and gases. The analysis of the mathematical models consisting
of a large number of interacting particles is proved to be useful in
understanding the intricate behavior of fluids and gases. Moreover, interacting
particle systems turn out to be the most efficient way of simulating the flow
patterns of dilute gases.