* 9424074
* Summer Research Program for Undergraduates in Cell and      Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1998
* Jill Patterson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 03/31/1998
* USD 142,674.00

The Center for Biology at the University of Wisconsin- Madison will direct a
summer program to provide research opportunities to talented undergraduates in
cell and molecular biology in order to encourage and prepare them for graduate
studies. Building on expertise gained from five previous summer programs for
minority undergraduates, prospective faculty mentors and program staff will
provide an environment designed to foster critical thinking, creative problem
solving, and independent and productive research skills. Twenty-four committed
faculty (22 having mentored in previous summers) will lead in the planning,
implementation and evaluation of the summer program. The core the program lies
in individual, independent research experiences under the mentorship of faculty
members with shared research interests in cell and molecular biology. Research
experiences will be enhanced by a seminar/workshop series to promote student-
student and student faculty interactions, to provide growth as independent
researchers and to prepare students for graduate study and career choices. The
capstone experience will be a symposium in which students formally present
results to colleagues and faculty. The program will integrate multicultural and
social activities, which are vital for providing the students with a productive,
enjoyable and satisfying summer research experience.