* 9424649
* GOALI/IUCRP:  A Multi-Objective Design System for Forging   Difficult-to-Process Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Ramana Grandhi, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 03/31/1999
* USD 143,049.00

9424649 Grandhi In this research, a novel scheme for integrated design of
preform die shapes and process conditions for difficult-to-forge components will
be developed. Industry provided design goals and performance requirements will
be taken in formulating the die shape design procedures. The novelty lies in the
combined use of multi-objective die shape evolution and process control design
optimization procedures along with viscoplastic finite element analysis. The
design scheme makes use of the relationships of microstructure and field
variables, finite element modeling, and shape optimization approaches. The
deformation energy, variance of strain-rate and temperature distributions in the
workpiece are used as multiple-objectives to control the processing of high
temperature materials. This approach takes into account the nonlinear material
behavior and a constantly changing boundary value problem by using an automated
process parameter design at critical steps of deformation. The optimized designs
will be experimentally validated at two industrial sites, one representing
aerospace and the other heavy machinery parts. As a result of two collaborating
industries, material selection will include "exotic" titanium aluminide as well
as "high volume" steel. Successful demonstration of this research is expected to
have a positive impact in terms of cost and quality of forging, especially for
intricate designs and hard to process materials. With a manufacturing "pull"
from the industrial partners, the research results are likely to be implemented
rapidly. ***