* 9424421
* Mathematical Sciences:  Ramsey Theory, The Theory of CompactLeft Topological Semigroups, and Their Interactions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Neil Hindman, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Earnest
* 11/30/1998
* USD 109,815.00

This project involves research in Ramsey Theory, the theory of compact left
topological semigroups, and their interactions. Significant results in Ramsey
Theory have been obtained by utilizing the algebraic structure of the space of
all ultrafilters on a discrete semigroup. As a compact left topological
semigroup, this space possesses an algebraic structure. This structure leads to
strong combinatorial results. Conversely, combinatorial results have been
applied to improve the understanding of this algebraic structure. This research
is in the general area of Combinatorics. Combinatorics attempts to find
efficient methods to study how discrete collections of objects can be arranged.
The behavior of discrete systems is extremely important to modern
communications. For example, the design of large networks, such as thus
occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in computer science
deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of combinatorial
research. Ramsey Theory is the branch of discrete mathematics which deals with
the question of what sort of homogeneous structures one can expect to find in
some one cell of a finite partition of specified sets (or sometimes in any
suitably large subset). It began as an applied subject and has continued to find
applications to fields as diverse as logic, game theory and analysis.