* 9424510
* HIV in Wastewater: Presence and Viability
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Leonard Casson, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 07/31/1997
* USD 374,520.00

9424510 Casson This is an award to renew support of research being conducted
under NSF Grant No. 91-24510. The objective of this research is to determine the
significance in environmental engineering practice of the presence and viability
of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) in wastewatep and following various
stages of treatment. The overall objective of work during the renewal period is
to continue investigation of the viability of the HIV in aqueous media and to
determine the effectiveness of disinfectants for its inactivation. The project
will involve cell- associated HIV survivability studies, continued development
of methods for concentration and recovery of cell-associated HIV in wastewater
following various stages of treatment, optimization of the concentration and
assay procedures and improvement in the detection limits for indigenous cell-
free HIV. The survival characteristics of the HIV under environmental stresses
have not been well-established. While there is no present indication that
environmental media into which the virus is discharged have any role in
spreading it from infected to non-infected individuals, the virus has been shown
to survive for significant periods of time in environmental media. The results
of this research are expected to provide the basis for any changes, if any are
found to be needed, in the engineering design of collection systems, treatment
processes and systems for management of wastes containing significant amounts of
this virus in the context of its survival characteristics and potential
infectivity. ***