* 9424438
* Engineering Research Equipment:  Measurement of Colloid     Forces in Vicinity of a Fluid Interface Using Atomic Force  Microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1996
* John Berg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

ABSTRACT John C. Berg University of Washington CTS-9424438 The Department of
Chemical Engineering at the University of Washington proposes herein in
acquisition of a scanning probe microscopy facility, including the capability of
atomic force microscopy (AFM). It would be used primarily for obtaining direct
measurements of colloidal forces between particles and fluid interfaces as a
function of the distance of approach, particle and interface composition, etc.
This is not a routine application of the instrumentation, and detailed
measurements of this kind have not yet been reported in the literature. They are
nonetheless vital to ongoing investigations in the author's laboratory,
including flotation and oil-assisted agglomeration processes for the successful
recycling of toner-printed papers and the design of water-based coating. The
facility would also be used in new investigations contributing to fundamental
understanding of the "hydrophobic interaction" and the interaction of colloid
particles within a fluid surface. Finally, the facility would find exhaustive
use in the examination of solid particle and extended-surface morphology and
composition, critical not only to much of the work in the author's laboratory,
but also to the work of other investigators at the author's laboratory, but also
to the work of other investigators at the author's institution.