* 9424018
* REU Site: Summer Research Experience for Undergraduates     in Nanostructured Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Stephen Ducharme, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/1998
* USD 180,000.00

9424018 Leslie-Pelecky This REU Site award will provide support for thirteen
undergraduates to undertake research with 30 faculty members in an
interdepartmental, interdisciplinary research program through the Center for
Materials Research and Analysis and the EPSCoR cluster on Nanostructured and
Complex Materials, during an eleven week summer program. The program will
preferentially recruit students from the midwest and plains states, with an
emphasis on attracting highly qualified minority and women students. Additional
support for underrepresented groups will be available through interactions with
campus groups such as the Society of Black Engineers and the Association for
Women in Science's local chapter. Some of the primary research topics in
nanostructured materials include: the correlation between magnetic properties
and microstructure in permanent magnet and magneto-optical materials, ultrahigh
density magnetic recording media, Langmuir and Langmuir-Blodgett films,
mechanically alloyed materials for magnetic and structural applications,
sputtering techniques for the production of thin films and small particles, high
temperature superconductivity, and surface sciences. %%% This project will help
undergraduates in physics, chemistry, and engineering develop the research and
professional skills necessary for success as working scientists and engineers in
the high technological workplace.