* 9424466
* Mechanisms of Indirect Selection
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1997
* Michael Greenfield, South Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/28/1997
* USD 43,221.00

NSF proposal # IBN-9407162, Mechanisms of indirect sexual selection in an
ultrasonic pyralid moth; Co-PIs Michael D. Greenfield and Robert D. Collins.
Non-technical summary In many animals the basic processes of sexual selection
include male male competition and female choice. It is generally believed that
female choice can involve preferences for mates who provide direct benefits such
as care of offspring and preferences for mates who provide indirect benefits via
the genes that they contribute toward the offspring. Recently, theoretical
biologists have confirmed that several different models of indirect sexual
selection are plausible. However, experimental evidence for, and distinctions
between, these models are meager. This paucity largely exists because many of
the species in which sexual selection is studied are not amenable to the
controlled experiments needed to test assumptions underlying the various models.
In the current project we will overcome these previous difficulties by studying
female choice in an unusual pyralid moth, Achroia grisella, that can be observed
and raised in the laboratory. Female choice in A. grisella occurs via an
indirect mechanism - selection based on male ultrasonic signals. We will employ
a variety of breeding experiments to study the heritabilities of male signaling
characteristics and of female preferences for these characteristics. The general
viability of offspring of females who mate with preferred males will also be
noted. Our findings will provide assessments of the alternative hypotheses (1)
that indirect female choice is arbitrarily based on genetic attributes which are
unrelated to general viability and (2) that the genetic attributes chosen are
related to mate and offspring viability. Study of A. grisella will also increase
our fundamental understanding of ultrasonic signaling and perception, and it may
lead to improved control strategies of this (and related) species, a pest of
honeybee colonies.