* 9424396
* Mathematical Sciences: Interactions Between Functional      Analysis, Harmonic Analysis and Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Stephen Montgomery-Smith, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 78,859.00

9424396 Montgomery-Smith This project involves work on two different fronts. The
first involves harmonic analysis on abelian groups whose dual is ordered. The
project involves taking traditional results from harmonic analysis, specifically
those concerning analyticity and the conjugate function, and generalizing them
to a new setting. This project will be based on a synthesis of a classification
theorem of Hahn on ordered groups together with modern techniques such as
martingale theory, Browninan motion and the geometry of Banach spaces. The
second project involves spectral properties of semigroups. This work has
applications to the asymptotic behavior of differential equations in the case
where the coefficients are infinite dimensional. Functional analysis seeks to
understand the rigorous side of the kind of analysis that was needed to study
functions that arise as solutions of differential equations. Harmonic analysis
is concerned with studying the Fourier transform of functions. Probability,
theory originally invented to understand events of chance, is now a technical
subject related to measure theory. This project involves a blending of theses
areas of mathematics. The results will be of use to a broad spectrum of
mathematicians with the potential for application in systems theory.