* 9424472
* Local Polymer Dynamics in Solutions, Melts, Blends, and     Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1995,10/31/1998
* Mark Ediger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/1998
* USD 268,260.00

9424472 Ediger The local segmental dynamics of a given chain are determined by
chemical structure, intramolecular potentials, and the chain's environment.
Optical experiments, NMR experiments, and molecular dynamics computer
simulations will be performed to investigate these aspects of local dynamics in
polymer solutions, melts, blends, and glasses. One project will utilize
molecular dynamics computer simulations to investigate whether Tg is related to
the extent of cooperative motion which occurs in response to a conformational
transition. Simulations are an ideal tool to understand the microscopic features
of local polymer motion when they are tested by experiments which allow an
assessment of realism. A second project will use a recently developed
photobleaching technique to explore the molecular origins of physical aging.
Physical aging causes degradation of the properties of glassy polymers over
time. These experiments will also help to unravel the fundamental nature of the
glass transition in polymers. A third project will use low-field NMR
spectroscopy to study how the two components of a polymer blend influence each
other's local dynamics. These influences determine the mechanical properties of
the blend. Ultimately, a prediction of blend properties from component
properties may be feasible. %%% Local polymer dynamics play an important role in
the structure/property relationships of amorphous polymers. Local dynamics are
directly responsible for a number of important polymer properties such as the
glass transition temperature and the temperature dependence of the viscosity. A
fundamental understanding of local polymer dynamics may allow the modification
of existing materials to enhance specific properties and possibly the
development of new materials. ***