* 9424436
* Effects of Increased UV-Radiation in the Arctic:  Support   for a Workshop by SCOPE and the International Arctic        Science Committee
* O/D,OPP
* 11/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Martyn Caldwell, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 07/31/1995
* USD 10,000.00

The polar regions are the areas of the earth where the effects of increased
ultraviolet radiation first can be detected. Indications of increased
ultraviolet radiation have been reported in both polar regions. Increased
ultraviolet radiation can have severe effects on humans, as well as on marine
and terrestrial ecosystems. The Arctic, with a population of millions of people
(including indigenous populations) may be the first populated area to be
affected. Some major changes may have to occur in northern societies and
settlements, especially those harvesting marine and terrestrial ecosystems. In a
few years this issue may become a concern for media, with the public and
politicians asking the science community what we know and what should be done.
The International Arctic Science Committee, of which the United States is a
member, has initiated a process leading to a report summarizing our present
knowledge, and a science plan covering effects on humans, terrestrial and marine
ecosystems, and possibly effects on northern societies and settlements. This
award will provide partial support for a small workshop of experts to summarize
the results of a 1994 open scientific meeting on the effects of ultraviolet
radiation in the Arctic. The workshop is co-sponsored by the Scientific
Committee on Problems of the Environment. The report will summarize the current
state of knowledge and help prioritize research topics in this important field
of Arctic research.