* 9424553
* Industry-University Cooperative Research:                   Molding of Thermosets
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Cornelius Hieber, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 06/30/1998
* USD 140,000.00

Abstract - Cohen - 9424553 This is a Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison
with Industry (GOALI) award to enable the PIs, working with industrial partners,
to extend the knowledge and science base available for the molding of
thermosets. They will perform detailed comparisons between numerical predictions
based on computer simulations and molding experiments, including pressure-
versus-time traces at various locations in the cavity as obtained with flush-
mounted pressure transducers. They will focus on thermosetting materials of
industrial interest which are frequently highly filled. In addition, recently
developed fast-reacting thermosets commercially available for the plastic
packaging of microelectronics devices will also be investigated. A large
fraction of the work will be devoted to the kinetic, rheological, and thermal
characterization of the materials in order to determine the critical parameters
that govern the moldability of a thermosetting compound. The numerical-
simulation work will elucidate the physics of the process and will allow for the
optimization of process conditions. The project involves Motorola, The Ford
Motor Company, and Advanced CAE Technology. Motorola technical staff will
perform instrumented spiral-flow experiments in a manufacturing transfer-molding
machine using specialty epoxies developed for encapsulation. Ford's engineers
will perform controlled injection molding of bumpers and instrument panels using
a variety of thermosets such as polyesters, phenolics and ureas. The results
will be compared with numerical simulations. Advanced CAE Technology will
collaborate with Cornell on several aspects of the characterization of the
materials.