* 9424317
* Functionalized Rigid Polymers
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1998
* T. K. Kwei, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 11/30/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9424317 Kwei The primary objective of the research is to elucidate the influence
of substituent groups on the solubility, gelation, formation of staaked layer
structure, side-chain crystallization, and miscibility of rigid polymers. Side
chain substitution of rigid polymers to improve solubility is now a well-
established strategy. Past work on sulfonated poly(p-phenylene terephthalamide)
resulted in a polymer which was soluble in many solvents. The solutions,
however, turned into gels upon standing. The birefringent gels showed nematic
liquid crystalline structures and were thermoreversible. The polymer showed
potential as a solid polymer electrolyte for high-energy battery applications.
When crosslinked, the mechanochemical response to electrical field stimulation
was similar to the responses of flexible polyelectrolyte gels. %%% The study
consists of four parts. The first part is concerned with the kinetics of
aggregation of sulfonated aromatic polyamide in solution and the subsequent
transformation of the solution into a gel. Dynamic light scattering measurements
will be used to monitor the aggregation phenomenon. In the second part, the
study on metal-ion conducting solid-polymer polyelectrolytes and electric-field
stimulation will be continued. The third part of the study includes substituted
poly(p-phenylenes) having novel structures and molecular composites derived from
these polymers. Investigation of side chain crystallization and stacked layer
structures is an important aspect of the work. The fourth part of the study
involves the synthesis of substituted cellulose to test whether semi flexible
main chains having long alkyl side groups can self assemble into stacked layer
structures. ***