* 9424494
* CRB: The Functional Significance of Biodiversity in Changing Environments:  An Experimental Approach Using Microcosms
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Timothy Casey, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1998
* USD 150,000.00

9424494 MORIN This research focuses on several issues linked by the need to
understand the functional significance of biodiversity to effectively conserve
and restore populations, communities, and functioning ecosystems. A series of
experimental studies of protists in aquatic microcosms are designed to test
predictions about how diversity within populations, communities and ecosystems
affects responses to changing physical environments. First, experimental
manipulations of both species richness and temperature will test whether
changing physical conditions affect community structure and ecosystem processes,
and whether initial biodiversity affects the responses seen. Second,
manipulations of the presence of density-dependent competition and predation
will whether recent models of interspecific interactions in changing
environments accurately predict different responses of species to gradual
increases in temperature. Third, manipulations of the presence or absence of
population growth and rates of temperature change will test whether the ability
to adapt in response to rapidly changing environments depends on rates of
environmental change, and whether rates of adaptation differ between
populations. This problem addresses the interplay between population components
of biodiversity and population processes in changing environment. The
conservation and restoration of communities and ecosystems re quires basic
information about functional links between populations, communities and
ecosystems. An important parallel thrust is the rigorous identification of
linkages between population dynamics, community structure, and ecosystem
function. Such linkages can only be made in systems where these processes can be
measured and explored. Rather than focus on a single level of ecological
organization, novel insights will be gained from these studies that will
integrate across the hierarchical levels of population, community and ecosystem
ecology. This level of integration is particularly tract able in microbial
communities established in experimental microcosms, where various aspects of
biodiversity and changing environments can be readily controlled and
manipulated.