* 9424236
* Dissertation Research:  Spatial Organization and State      Expansion in Southern Transcaucasia, 1300-600 B.C
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Carol Kramer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1996
* USD 12,000.00

Kramer Under the direction of Dr. Carol Kramer, Mr. Adam Smith will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will study Urartu settlement pattern as
revealed in a series of archaeological sites. Between the ninth and sixth
centuries B.C., the ancient state of Urartu spread from its capital on Lake Van,
conquering much of what is today eastern Turkey, Armenia and Iranian Azerbaijan.
As it expanded, Urartu imposed a new spatial order on the territories it
acquired. In his research, Mr. Smith will study an number of sites in Armenia.
These span a range of time and include both pre-Urartu, early and late Urartu
settlements. He will employ an electronic mapping system to construct accurate
site plans and supplement these data with schematic drawings on artifacts from
Urartu sites. On this basis he will determine how imperial control is both
reflected in and reinforced by architectural arrangement. He will study the use
of space and the control of access into specific areas. This research is of
interest for several reasons. First, it will shed light on the development of
state level societies in a poorly known portion of the world. Secondly, it will
help to develop an analytic technique with the potential for widespread
archaeological use. Finally it will assist in the training of a promising young
scientist.