* 9424287
* An Investigation into the Socio-Legal and Cultural Bases of Democracy in South Africa
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1998
* James Gibson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/1998
* USD 316,798.00

9424287 Gibson This project seeks to trace the progress of democratization and
political change in the new South Africa. It focuses on the systematic
assessment of the causes and consequences for the legal and constitutional
institutions of South Africa of intolerance in the political culture. To do so
it assesses political tolerance and intolerance as demonstrated in the beliefs
of both masses and elites. Survey research methods will allow the investigators
to accomplish four related goals: 1) analyze the distribution of intolerance,
considering its level, its breadth, and pluralism of distribution; 2) assess the
etiology of intolerance, testing a number of hypotheses that have emerged from
studies in Western literature; 2) examine the consequences of intolerance
especially for interpersonal political interaction, and political participation;
4) test the pliability of intolerance by determining the extent to which
citizens can be "talked out of" their intolerance or into giving "sober second
thought" to repression of their political enemies. The surveys will be conducted
under contract with a reputable South African firm under the supervision of an
onsite South African collaborator. This research on South Africa should increase
our knowledge about how democratic legal culture emerges out of the background
of dictatorial government. %%% This project seeks to trace the progress of
democratization and political change in the new South Africa. It focuses on the
systematic assessment of the causes and consequences for the legal and
constitutional institutions of South Africa of intolerance in the political
culture. To do so it assesses political tolerance and intolerance as
demonstrated in the beliefs of both masses and elites. The investigators will 1)
analyze the distribution of intolerance; 2) assess the origins and foundations
of intolerance; 2) examine the consequences of intolerance especially for
interpersonal political interaction, and political participation; 4) test the
plia bility of intolerance by determining the extent to which citizens can be
"talked out of" their intolerance or into giving "sober second thought" to
repression of their political enemies. This research on South Africa should
increase our knowledge about how democratic legal culture emerges out of the
background of dictatorial government. ***