* 9450556
* Microwave-Induced Coal Gasification for Production of       Activated Coke and Synthesis Gas
* EHR,ESR
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Chang-Yul Cha, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Reiss
* 07/31/1996
* USD 140,777.00

Abstract 556 Cha Microwave-Induced Coal Gasification for Production of Activated
Coke and Synthesis Gas The project's overall objective is to perform exploratory
research that supports industry for the development of an advanced coal
gasification process that utilizes Wyoming natural resources and also to
establish faculty and student exchange programs with the industry. To achieve
these program objectives, the program consists of two tasks. Task 1 covers
fundamental research to investigate microwave-induced reactions involved in coal
gasification. Task 2 provides activities to establish a cooperative research and
a co-op program for undergraduate and graduate students with the DOW Chemical
Company and the FMC Corporation. The experimental results obtained from Task 1,
exploratory research, will assist the industry in developing a simple, clean,
and economic process for the removal of NOx, SOx, and other pollutants from the
flue gas. Successful development of a microwave-induced coal gasification
process will significantly reduce the price of activated coke, and will
eventually lead to reducing the overall cost of pollution control. An efficient,
economic, and environmentally-friendly process for the production of activated
coke will improve the economy of Wyoming along with an increase in employment in
Wyoming. Task 2 will offer three undergraduate students and one graduate student
practical training and industrial experience that will assist them in their
search for permanent employment after graduation. An ongoing joint research
program among the University of Wyoming, DOW, and FMC will also result.