* 9450744
* Calculus and the Bridge to Calculus
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* W. Frank Ward, Indian River State College
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 07/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9450744 Ward Faculty in the Department of Mathematics at Indian River Community
College are developing instructional materials for the use of the graphing
calculator to support teaching with the Harvard Calculus Consortium materials
that are appropriate for a two year college audience. Materials are being
developed for both teachers and students. The teacher supplement contains
examples and instructions on how and when to effectively use a graphing
calculator as an instructional tool. Less emphasis is placed on traditional
lecture and more emphasis is placed on exploration and group problem solving.
The material integrates practical applications taken from astronomy and physics
and other areas that use mathematics. Students generate real data through the
use of a Calculator Base Laboratory System (CBL). The device enables the
collection of real time data for analysis with the graphing calculator. The
collection and analysis of real data provides the means to integrate practical
laboratory experience into pre- calculus and calculus. The instructional
materials include the use of the CBL system. The student supplement is designed
with an emphasis on using technology to explore mathematical concepts and write
about the findings. Projects address four types of activities: (1) "get started"
activities to familiarize students with using the calculators; (2) activities to
help students understand concepts; (3) projects to promote deeper understanding
of concepts that may be used as group projects or for advanced students; and,
(4) investigation projects for topics beyond what is discussed in class. This
range of activities will benefit the slower student by providing activities for
understanding as well as the advanced student by providing enrichment material.
The conceptual approach combined with real applications, emphasis on
understanding and problem solving benefits all students.