* 9450147
* VPW:  He-Atom Scattering Studies of Alkali Metal Overlayers (Materials Research)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Renee Diehl, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 02/29/1996
* USD 131,134.00

Dr. Renee Diehl's research involves the study of structures, dynamics and phase
transitions in overlayers of alkali metals on metal and graphite surfaces. The
main technique to be employed in this study is He-atom scattering (HAS), and
experiments will be carried out in the laboratory of Professor R. B. Doak on a
state- of-the-art apparatus. The main purposes of these experiments are to study
the He-atom interaction with alkali surfaces, to study the dynamics of the
alkali metal bond to metal surfaces as a function of alkali metal coverage, and
to study the lattice dynamics of thick alkali metal films. The goal is to
increase the understanding of simple metal adsorbates, simple metal surfaces and
how He atoms couple to them. Exploratory experiments will also be carried out
using low-energy electron microscopy (LEEM) on graphite interacalation in the
laboratory of Professor I. Tsong. These experiments should provide new
information on the microscopic process and kinetics of alkali metal
intercalation into graphite. Interactive activities to be carried out include:
teaching a graduate level course in surface physics; initiating and organzing a
high-profile seminar program which will bring women scientists and engineers
from all over the US to speak at Arizona State University; and planning a women
in physics colloquim series aimed at increasing the visibility of women
physicists, particularly ones who are in their early careers and who will
benefit most from the exposure. Lunchtime meetings of women in physics and
related disciplines will be initiated in order to discuss research interests and
issues such as climate, families, and employment prospects.