* 9450175
* Primate Evolution in Madagascar:  Phylogeny, Function       and Development (Anthropology)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Laurie Godfrey, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1995
* USD 145,955.00

This research is an outgrowth of recent paleontological expeditions to
Madagascar. The research include: (1) Functional anatomy of extinct lemurs,
encompassing descriptions and functional interpretations of previously unknown
carpal and pedal materials, vertebrae, and pelves. The goals are reconstruction
of positional behavior of extinct lemurs, description of new species, and
analysis of patterns of long bone structural adaptation. (2) Lemur evolutionary
ontogeny. Indroids (including the giant extinct forms) have patterns of dental
and somatic growth that are exceedingly unusual for primates. Available
ontogenetic series will be examined and compared, using new analytical
strategies. (3) Geographic variation, sexual variation and phylogeny of lemurs.
A multivariate analysis of subfossil lemur skeletal variation will be conducted
and a taxonomic revision of the lemurs will be undertaken, including phenetic
and cladistic treatments of characters previously studied only among extant
lemurs. Interactive activities include a course on "The Evolution of Ontogeny"
and a graduate seminar designed according to student needs on topics such as:
problems in allometry, mathematical modelling in evolutionary biology, sexual
dimorphism, the evolution and extinction of Malagasy primates. In addition,
guest lectures will be offered with special emphasis on subfossil lemurs.