* 9450684
* The Greater Chicago Consortium for Chemistry Reform
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Jack Kaeck, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 12/31/1994
* USD 49,776.00

9450684 Wink The faculty in the department of chemistry at Chicago State
University (CSU), William Rainey Harper College (HC) and the University of
Illinois at Chicago (UIC) will join in a consortium to create, share, and
evaluate curriculum changes in chemistry and related areas. Their efforts build
upon networks already established for the purposes of curriculum reform. This
new Consortium will create versatile, multi-faceted, and well-tested options for
implementation at peer institutions. Each institution is responsible for the
independent generation of one or more comprehensive curricula that will be
implemented on their campus and later on the campus of one of the other
Consortia members. CSU faculty will initially focus on a two-year combined
physical sciences and mathematics program. HC faculty will initially focus on a
two-year combined physical sciences and mathematics program. HC faculty will
address both the general and organic sequences and non-major courses. UIC
faculty will work on projects related to introductory chemistry, chemistry for
engineers, and upper division courses. The personnel will also collaborate from
the inception of the program on two inter-campus projects, The Data Project and
The Chemistry Hook, designed to create a general set of materials to introduce
research and life-related examples into chemistry courses. An annual symposium
on science education issues will also be sponsored by the Consortium. ***y