* 9450588
* MPWG:  The Douglass Science Institute Program Series:       Encouraging Precollege Women to Persist in Math and Science Studies
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Ellen Mappen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Larissa Rogers
* 08/31/1996
* USD 99,786.00

9450588 Mappen The Douglass Science Institute (DSI) Program Series provides in-
depth "hands-on" mathematics and science experiences in a single-sex environment
for high school women to encourage their persistence in mathematics and science
studies. It is planned as a multi-year intervention effort. Research and general
literature on the underrepresentation of women in the mathematics, science, and
engineering pipeline, as well as on the education of girls, provide evidence
that intervention programs during the high school years are essential to reverse
the attrition of girls from mathematics and science studies. Differential
treatment, lack of encouragement, and of knowledge about career options in
mathematics and science, lead to negative attitudes towards these disciplines,
limited participation in curricular and extracurricular mathematics and science
activities, and lower achievement rates. The Series is offered by the Douglass
Project for Rutgers Women in Math, Science, and Engineering, and is held at
Douglass College, the women's undergraduate unit of Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey. The Program Series is a student-centered model that
provides a continuum of "hands-on" involvement in mathematics, science, and
engineering, as well as motivational activities, for high school women over a
four-year period. Students begin the program during the summer preceeding the
ninth grade, and will be able to continue with it over the following three
summers. The program for ninth graders is the initial phase of the series.
Students who complete the ninth grade program are encouraged to apply for
programs which will take placed during the summers preceding their tenth,
eleventh, and twelfth grade years. The Series incorporates many of the
characteristics which have been found to be integral components of "exemplary"
intervention programs, including "hand-on" instruction and cooperative group
work, a multi-year, residential experience on a college campus, rol e models,
and activities for parents. Funding from NSF will be used for evaluation and
modification of the 10th grade program (to be offered for the first time in
1994), and for development of the first year of the 11th grade program (1995).
The segment for Ninth Grade Women is funded primarily by the AT&amp;T
Foundation. (Other supporters of the Program Series include the Merck Institute
for Science Education, the William Randolph Hearst Foundation, the R.W. Johnson
Pharmaceutical Research Institute, and the Schering-Plough Foundation.) The
Series can serve as model for others in efforts to increase the numbers of young
women in the mathematics, science, and engineering. ***