* 9450371
* AMP: THE METROPOLITAN DETROIT ALLIANCE for MINORITY         PARTICIPATION
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1994,10/31/2000
* Hanley Abramson, Wayne State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2000
* USD 4,163,748.00

9450371 Abramson The Metropolitan Detroit Alliance for Minority Participation
has been formed to address the issue of minority underrepresentation in the
sciences, mathematics, and engineering (SEM). The Alliance represents a
consortium of six Detroit area universities: Wayne State University (the lead
institution), Lawrence Technological University, Madonna University, Oakland
University, University of Detroit Mercy, and University of Michigan - Dearborn.
The objective of the Alliance is to increase the number of minority SEM
graduates from these institutions from the current level of 180 to 720 by 1999.
In addition, the Alliance will aim to place 150 of these graduates in graduate
programs. The consortium has made a substantial commitment of matching funds to
assist in bringing these goals to fruition. To create a region-wide environment
of moral and financial support for attainment of these objectives, the Alliance
will expand to include the area's public schools, community colleges, and
business community. Major foundations will be approached to further undergird
the Alliance. A number of projects aimed at facilitating student passage along
the critical points in the SEM career pathway have been designed. Summer
institutions and workshops, concentrating on science topics and improving math
and study skills, will bridge the transition from high school and community
college to the university. A program for parents will stress their critical
supportive role in their child's education. Retention in the university will be
enhanced by emphasizing cooperative learning approaches to mathematics and
science instruction, using upper-level and graduate students, as well as
scientists and engineering from industry, as mentors or tutors. Dedicated
counselors, scholarship programs, and electronic bulletin boards will provide
additional support mechanisms. The Alliance will sponsor seminar programs,
affording students the opportunity to present their research exp eriences and to
hear guest speakers. An annual day-long symposium focusing on career
opportunities in SEM fields will be held. Region-wide distribution of
promotional literature describing project goals will aim at attracting students
to the program. The Alliance will publish a newsletter, disseminating
information on activities within the Alliance, as well as AMP program news.
Evaluation for the Alliance program will focus on both outcome and process.
Outcome evaluation will document progress toward attainment of objectives.
Process evaluation will document program implementation. The success of this
project is heavily dependent on obtaining wide community support for its goals.
As those goals are realized, institutionalization of the most successful aspects
of the project is anticipated to occur. Progress towards institutionalization
will be followed by the Alliance's governing board, composed of the presidents
of the six consortium members. ***