* 9450635
* Enhancing Interdisciplinary Interactions Through a Modular  Science Curricula
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Richard Taylor, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/1995
* USD 49,997.00

9450635 Pacey Through the development of a modular approach to chemistry and
relate sciences, we propose to address the following issues. Students: student
pool is bifurcated into well-prepared and ill-prepared "at-risk" students;
students with interdisciplinary interests must decide among traditional majors;
science literacy among the nonscience students is extremely low; student
learning is more visual, making the lecture format less effective. Instruction:
rapid expansion of science has over-extended curricular content ("more is good"
philosophy); liberal education needs preclude expansion of science requirements
for majors; research experiences are too focused at the senior level; the
divisional structure of Chemistry (and, to some extent, the departmental
structure of science) is inconsistent with the practice of science. Our premises
are that: a comprehensive overhaul of chemistry instruction (both structural and
content) is needed; an incremental approach will not achieve the objectives of
improved instruction; inquiry-based instruction should replace the content-based
approach to many topics in order to better reflect the practice of science;
current curricula lead to wasteful duplication of material, particularly among
departments; curriculum reform should be based on a top-down plan that
emphasizes student outcome in the development of the model.