* 9450760
* A Comprehensive Calculus Project for Comprehensive          Universities
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Robert Miner, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Calvin L. Williams
* 06/30/1998
* USD 209,992.00

9450760 McKnight Reformed calculus materials developed by Ostebee and Zorn at
St. Olaf College are being used in the teaching of first year calculus at The
University of Oklahoma. Faculty in the Department of Mathematics are extending
this model of calculus reform by undertaking tasks representing adaption,
assessment, faculty and graduate student development, components for pre-service
teachers, and dissemination. The St. Olaf first-year calculus model is being
adapted and extended to fit a large, comprehensive university setting including
the range of difficulties implied by this (large lecture with recitation, GTA-
taught classes, honors classes in an open-admission university, etc.). The
project includes the development of a model for GTA training along with
supporting materials and training videotapes, a model for faculty development,
including materials, suitable for sustaining such a calculus program, and
careful assessment of student performance. Reports on assessment and evaluation
will be useful to other comprehensive universities seeking similar reforms. An
important component addresses pre-service secondary mathematics students:
adaptation of the GTA training materials for prospective mathematics teachers;
training experiments involving pre-service students; participation in GTA
training sessions; and, observations both in university classes and in a local
high school which has adopted the St. Olaf's model for calculus. Dissemination
plans include packaging materials for dissemination, production of written
materials, and visits and locally held workshops. At least one monograph will be
prepared for publication.