* 9450144
* PPD: Full Inclusion in Nonformal Science Centers
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1994,04/30/1996
* Willis Copeland, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 04/30/1996
* USD 74,998.00

HRD 94 50144 University of California @ Santa Barbara Willis Copeland, Principal
Investigator Full Inclusion in Nonformal Science Centers &amp; ABSTRACT Efforts
to improve career development opportunities in science for people with
disabilities have traditionally focused on science education in the public
schools. This limited focus has commonly overlooked a large and potentially
effective arena for such career development. Nonformal science education
experiences such as those offered by "science centers" museums, nature centers,
zoos, aquaria, parks, and visitor's centers have been reported by scientists to
have had considerable formative influences on early development of their
careers. Educators in these science centers, however, typically have not been
trained to apply knowledge pertinent to work with students with disabilities.
The purpose of this project is to remedy this oversight by providing
instructional materials and conferences for science center staff concerning
inclusion of people with disabilities in science activities. Major activities of
the project will be to: (1) assemble, synthesize and translate information
pertinent to the education of people with disabilities in nonformal science
centers; (2) produce a Resource Guide presenting pertinent information emerging
from a symposium on educational and legal issues pertaining to the full
inclusion of people with diverse abilities and needs; (3) conduct a conference
for science center educators to disseminate the information developed from the
symposium and contained in the Resource Guide to assist these educators in
serving people with disabilities effectively; (4) distribute the Resource Guide
to all science centers in California; and (5) negotiate with a commercial
publisher for national distribution of the Resource Guide. Project staff will
convene a symposium of 15 people with complementary experience and expertise to
develop a conceptual plan for the Resource Guide. The group will include science
center educators, representatives from disability related organizations, and
experts in science education of students with disabilities. The participants
will recommend materials for the Resource Guide and develop a conceptual
organization for the material. The project will commission three articles for
inclusion in the Resource Guide to synthesize knowledge about science education
of students with disabilities into a format appropriate for science center
educators. Project staff will compile and edit the Resource Guide containing the
three articles and the materials identified by the symposium participants. The
project will use three strategies to disseminate the assembled information to
the target audience of science center educators: (1) a dissemination conference
for 200 science center educators; (2) printing of the Resource Guide to be
distributed to science centers in California; and (3) pursuit of commercial
publication of the h) 0*0*0* Resource Guide for national distribution. The
project will undertake an extensive evaluation effort which will collect initial
formative data on practices and attitudes of science center educators to guide
the development and conduct of the project and summative data to assess the
project's success. ***