* 9450118
* A Study of the Effect of Temperature on the                 Interfacial Properties of Liquid Crystal Films in the       Presende of Competing Interactions (Materials Research)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Luz Martinez-Miranda, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1996
* USD 106,698.00

The molecular arrangement in a liquid crystal (LC) film differs in the bulk
compared to surfaces and interfaces. An LC film deposited onto a grooved
substrate experiences a competition between the aligning forces at the LC-air
interface, which force the molecules to align normal to the surface, and
aligning forces at the LC- substrate interface, which forces the molecules to
align parallel to the plane of the substrate. In previous studies on smectic A
liquid crystal films, a critical thickness was measured beyond which the long-
range aligning forces from the groove interface dominate over the short-range
aligning forces imposed by the air-LC interface. There is a range in
thicknesses, which spans approximately 10um, where the competition between
short-range and long-range aligning forces is most pronounced. The aligning
forces are responsible for many pretransitional phenomena as well as surface
memory effects inside the films. In this project, the unstable region just above
the critical thickness in smA droplets will be studied as a function of
temperature to ascertain the interplay between short and long range aligning
forces. Attention will be paid to the region immediately above the LC-solid
substrate interface. Interactive activities consist of the following: (1)
teaching a graduate course in liquid crystal physical properties, taught as part
of the Chemical Physics Interdisciplinary program at Kent State University; and
(2) organizing outreach activities for high school students and first and second
year college students. This second activity will include visits to area schools
as well as the development of demonstration kits. A major goal is to convey the
interdisciplinary nature of liquid crystal research and of science in general.