* 9450300
* RCMS:  RESEARCH CAREERS FOR MINORITY SCHOLARS AT TEXAS      A&amp;M UNIVERSITY
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Gail Thomas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 08/31/1997
* USD 434,875.00

9450300 Watson Research Careers for Minority Scholarsat Texas A&amp;M University
The primary focus of the Research Careers for Minority Scholars (RCMS) Program
at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) is to increase the number of minority
students in science, engineering and math (SEM) and in the social and behavioral
sciences (SBS) disciplines who graduate at the B.S. level with strong,
comprehensive research experience and enter graduate programs leading to careers
in academic, government or industry. Far too few minorities attend graduate
school in most fields, but especially in SEM fields. National data shows that
approximately 20% of SEM students attend graduate school immediately following
the reception of their Bachelor Degree each year, but because minority
enrollments in graduate school are so low we would like to at least double that
percentage. The proposed five-year funding will support 70 RCMS students, 60
will be supported in the SEM disciplines and 10 in the NSF supported SBS
disciplines. Participants in the RCMS program at TAMU are selected from
undergraduate under-represented minority students at Texas A&amp;M University
who have a GPA of 3.0 or greater. Half of the students in the program over the
past five years have been minority women. Junior and Senior students are
actively involved in research projects with faculty mentors. They also service
as role models through their involvement in RCMS outreach activities to public
schools with high minority enrollments. Freshmen and sophomore participants
attend a variety of seminars designed to introduce them to the research
opportunities available nationally and at TAMU. These seminars are hosted by
faculty research mentors, senior minority scholars, representatives from other
research institutions, and professional from private sectors. Other core
activities of the RCMS program include participation in faculty mentorship,
presentations at the RCMS/AMP Research Symposium. special Research Problem
Courses, AS URT ( A Seminar in University Research and Teaching), RCMS Meetings
(GRE Preparations, Summer Internships, Fellowships), RCMS/AMP Student Teaming in
Research, and Ph.D. Pipeline Bridging. TEES will be matching funds with PI, Co-
PI, Graduate Student and program Coordinator salaries and fringe benefits. TEES
will also match 45% of the modified total direct cost. We propose to get more
undergraduate who are under-represented minorities to graduate with a B.S. and
enter graduate school in one of the SEM/SBS disciplines. This RCMS program will
be a continuation of a five year program that was implemented in 1989. 130
students participated in that program and 52% have graduated with a B.S. with
44% of them currently enrolled in a graduate program and 13% are currently
working on a Ph.D. Participants will present their research project findings at
a conference/symposium to faculty, administrators, industry supports and program
directors. The program coordinator and PI's will also present the RCMS program
at conferences such as ASEE, NAMEPA.