* 9450254
* RCMS:  RESEARCH FOR MINORITY SCHOLARS IN THE CENTER FOR     MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGIES
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* John Foster, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 08/31/1997
* USD 269,966.00

9450254 Foster Research Careers for Minority Scholars Program at Prairie View
A&amp;M University The College of Engineering and Architecture (CEA) at Prairie
View A&amp;M University (PVAMU) proposes a five-year Research Careers for
Minority Scholars (RCMS) program which is focused towards increased
participation of African Americans in manufacturing related SEM disciplines.
This project will be operating in conjunction with a major funded program at
PVAMU - the Center for Manufacturing Technologies (CMT). The RCMS project will
select twenty-five African American SEM students annually to work with CMT
faculty and staff. The goal of the RCMS program will be to act as a feeder of
high quality, research-experienced African Americans into Ph.D. programs in
those manufacturing disciplines defined as critical technologies of the 21st
century. The fundamental mission of the CMT-based RCMS program is to ensure that
African Americans participate fully in those critical and emerging technologies
related to the U.S. manufacturing effort. The program will have direct impact on
students in the discipline areas of engineering computer science, chemistry and
physics at PVAMU. RCMS students will be encouraged upon completing their
undergraduate degree to take part in the ongoing M.S. to Ph.D program between
PVAMU and Texas A&amp;M University. RCMS students will be involved with the
following activities: i) academic year projects, ii) summer research
internships, iii) annual manufacturing conference, iv) M.S. and Ph.D. pipeline
forum, v) manufacturing curriculum development, vi) manufacturing technology
transfer, vii) manufacturing student outreach, and viii) manufacturing student
recruitment. The Center for Manufacturing Technologieq is led by Prairie View
A&amp;M University in partnership with Texas A&amp;M University System. The
Center for Manufacturing Technologies was officially recognized as a center for
research development, technology transfer and industrial extension by the Texas
A &amp;M University System Board of Regents in May of 1993. In July of 1993 the
U.S. Army Material Command made a five year, $10.6 million commitment to CMT to
conduct research on electronics manufacturing and dual-use technologies, provide
technology transfer ad industrial extension services to the consumer and defense
electronics industry, and to initiate an M.S. to Ph.D. Pipeline program for
African Americans in the manufacturing disciplines. The five-year performance
goal of the pipeline program is to graduate five African Americans each year
with a Ph.D. in one of the CMT-sponsored manufacturing disciplines. It is
expected that 25 African Americans will be in the M.S. to Ph.D. Pipeline at any
one time, either at PVAMU or TAMU. Institutional commitment to the CMT RCMS
program is a dollar for dollar match for all student scholarships and support
costs. The program will be evaluated both internally and externally. Internal
evaluation will take place on a semiannual basis through a CMT advisory panel.
External evaluation will occur on an annual basis through the National Science
Foundation. The methods of evaluation would entail the success record of RCMS
students moving into Ph.D. tracks at other institutions.