* 9450188
* Frederick B. Rentschler, Manufacturer (History and          Philosophy of Science)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Anne Millbrooke, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1996
* USD 76,500.00

Dr. Anne Milbrooke will conduct research and write a biography. Her topic is
Frederick B. Rentschler (1887-1956), an influential manufacturer of aviation
equipment from 1919 to 1956. She will investigate what Rentschler did, the
environment in which he acted, the people with whom he interacted, the reasons
given for his actions, and the effects of his actions. Among the themes she will
explore are the relationships among individual and institution, management and
manufacturing, engineering and innovation, corporation and Congress, and
aviation and American society. Rentschler's story begins with his early
industrial background in Hamilton, Ohio, and his transition to aviation through
Army assignments during World War I and subsequent appointments at the Wright
Aeronautical Corporation. In 1925 he founded the Pratt &amp; Whitney Aircraft
Company, and a few years later he joined William E. Boeing in organizing United
Aircraft &amp; Transport Corporation. In 1934 Rentschler organized United
Aircraft Corporation. From corporate headquarters he managed the Pratt &amp;
Whitney, Chance Vought, Hamilton Standard, and Sikorsky manufacturing divisions.
He dealt with military customers and the Congress that also had commercial
customers. Rentschler was chairman of United Aircraft Corporation until his
death in 1956. Interactive activities over a two-year period include: teaching
courses entitled "Women in Science and Technology," "The American Century of
Science and Technology," and "Made in the USA - a History of Manufacturing. Dr.
Milbrooke will present seminars on her research.