* 9450467
* SSC:  "Summer Science Camp"
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Elden Shaw, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 10/31/1996
* USD 328,242.00

SSC-9450467 Cal State U Fresno Fnd Fresno, CA Shaw, Elden and Juanita Muniz-
Torres "Summer Science Camp" The proposed Summer Science Camp (SSC) at
California State University, (CSUF), will help to address the
underrepresentation of ethnic minorities in science, engineering, and math
careers. Specifically, the proposed program will serve 48 underrepresented
minority middle school students per year for three years and will consist of
three components: 1) A four-week summer residential program at CSUR; 2) Academic
year follow-up; and 3) Project assessment and evaluation of both the summer
program and academic year follow-up activities. This is the second submission of
this proposal. Suggestions made by the reviewers for enhancing the proposal have
been carefully considered and the proposal has been revised to reflect their
comments. The summer program will provide students experience in the following
areas: 1) Integrated coursework in algebra and geometry; 2) Engineering concepts
and laboratory activities; 3) Computer literacy; 4) Computer aided design; 5)
Refinement/development of oral and written communication skills; and 60 Career
exploration. The successful implementation of integrated math, science, and
laboratory experiences will be assured through the use of Mathematics
Applications Curriculum for Science, Engineering and Technology (MACSET)
activities. These unique hands-on experiences approach problem solving using
practical applications found in everyday life, such as electrical appliances.
The academic year follow-up activities will be directly linked with the proven
CSUF Mathematics Engineering Science Achievement (MESA) Program. MESA is a
statewide program that addresses the need to increase the number of
underrepresented minorities pursuing college degrees in math, engineering and
science. The CSUF MESA Program has several components already in place that will
provide academic year support to summer program participants. These areas in
clude: 1) In-school MESA clubs; 2) Saturday Academies; 3) Academic advising; 4)
Career speakers, mentoring, and role models; and 5) Field trips to industry and
universities. ***