* 9450848
* A Model Undergraduate Mathematics Laboratory and Regional   Technology Assistance Center
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Bruce Crauder, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 06/30/1996
* USD 116,384.00

9450848 Evans The Department of Mathematics at Oklahoma State University
operates a modern, comprehensive mathematics laboratory called the Mathematics
Learning Resource Center (MLRC). The functions of the MLRC are being expanded to
serve as a Model Laboratory and Regional Technology Assistance Center. The
Center serves colleges and universities in a five state region providing
information, software instruction, curricular materials, and public domain
software through an active outreach program that includes hands-on workshops,
local and remote site visits, special sessions at regional meetings, and a
computer bulletin board. The bulletin board is accessible through either
electronic mail or anonymous file transfer protocol (ftp) on the internet.
Telephone, fax, or mail is available for those who do not have access to the
internet. An important function of the Center is to disseminate recent reforms
in the mathematics curriculum and to assist clients in familiarizing themselves
with whatever technology may be necessary to implement the reforms. NSF-funded
projects and curriculum reforms related to technology are featured. The Center
also provides advice on obtaining funding for acquisition of equipment and
software. Long term plans are to foster a network of such regional centers
around the country.