* 9450160
* The Two-Year College in the Twenty-First Century:           Breaking Down Barriers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1995,02/28/2001
* Marvin Nelson, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/2001
* USD 1,185,405.00

; R o o t E n t r y F V @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t u O b j e c t
P o o l ) ) : ; &lt; = &gt; ? @ A B C D F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; v ^ S&amp; &amp; _ ^ S&amp; &amp; _ WV ^ F &amp; o &amp; _
&amp; G &amp; G u F t S =WV = ^_ WV ^ F &amp; G &amp; u ~ F tQ F &amp; E@ F
&amp; &amp;9GJu$ F &amp; &amp; wJ v W G P &gt; = u 3 u F &amp; &amp; T L V + F
&amp; t &amp; 4&amp; &amp; &amp; F &amp; &amp; GL&amp; WN94-50160 Monroe PROJECT
SUMMARY The project will improve learning opportunities for students at two year
colleges--those that transfer, those that will become technicians in the high-
technology workplace, and all students for whom physics serves as a part of
their college education. It will do this by establishing a network of physics
faculty in two-year colleges. The network will consist of 15 regional
organizations, coordinated and linked by a national steering committee. The
development of the network of colleagues will allow two-year college faculty to
share their successes as teachers and scholars with each other and with the
broader physics community, it will increase their awareness of current
developments in physics education research and innovative teaching strategies,
and it will decrease the sense of isolation felt by many two-year college
faculty members. During the four year project, fifteen Regional Coordinators and
their Regional Teams, selected and mentored by a Steering Committee, will
organize and host small local meetings and will lead participants as they
develop project s and programs within their regions relating to critical and
topical issues that may be particularly important in the region. Many of these
issues will be developed from the work begun at the 1989 topical conference
entitled Critical Issues in Two-Year College Physics and Astronomy - 1990 and
Beyond supported by the American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) and the
National Science Foundation (NSF) and at the 1992 NSF Workshop on the Role of
Professional Societies in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
Education in Two-Year Colleges. To enlarge the network and provide a national
forum, the Regional Coordinators and three elected delegates from each region
will participate in a national meeting, convened as an AAPT Topical Conference,
where various speakers and consultants will engage participants in a more global
discussion of critical issues and issues of particular and timely pedagogical
significance. These conferences will make recommendations for national reform.
By the conclusion of the project, the Steering Committee will have produced
three proceedings from the annual meetings, will have compiled and published
demographic data better describing the two-year college physics education
communities, and will have written a major report characterizing the two-year
college faculty and its impact on the physics education community of our
country. In addition, fifteen regional structures will have been established,
under the auspices of AAPT, which will allow for the continued collaboration on
issues of importance to the physics education communities. Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Duncan McBride William C. Aigner @ @ ; S u m m a r
y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 9 @ ; @ , Microsoft Word 6.0 5 ; e = e u j j j j j j j
1 % &amp; T A 4 j j j j j ~ j j j j W 94-50160 Monroe PROJECT SUMMARY The
project will improve