* 9450568
* Advanced Communications Mentor Network for Enhancing        Research Competitiveness in Maine
* EDU,ESR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Henry Bourgeois, Maine Science and Technology Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard J Anderson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 325,000.00

Abstract 568 Thibeault Advanced Communications Mentor Network for Enhancing
Research The Maine Science and Technology Foundation (MSTF), in collaboration
with the Maine Development Foundation and the Maine Department of Economic and
Community Development, proposes a pilot network that will provide one-on-one
mentor firm-researcher clusters for access and utilization of advanced
communication technologies. The immediate goals of this project are: o Identify,
develop, and implement user-specific solutions involving the application of
advanced communication tools to increase research and technology development
productivity and competitiveness. o Evaluate approaches by which the research
and development productivity and competitiveness of end-users in a cluster
partnership are enhanced through applications of advanced communications tools.
o Foster extended industry/faculty collaborations among cluster members. o
Evaluate the efficacy and sustainability of local mentoring capabilities for
advanced communications in the Portland, Orono, and Presque Isle regions in
Maine. o Develop and implement a systematic approach to maximizing the creation
and sharing of knowledge available with Maine, as well as throughout the world.
With assistance from the host institution and mentors, each industry/faculty
cluster will be exposed to a variety of advanced communications technologies
which support four key task areas; they are basic tasks, but capture what needs
to occur more often in Maine: (a) mail and file transfer; (b) informational
retrieval and bulletin board development; (c) teleconferencing technology use
related to collaborative research and development partnerships among business,
higher education, and not-for-profit research organizations; and (d) distance-
based research and employment. Cluster members would develop research
collaboration opportunities to be supported by appropriate advanced
communication technologies they would select after a n intensive awareness
process. Each collaborative pilot research proposal would be peer reviewed under
the direction of the Research Excellence Partnership, Maine EPSCoR's Steering
Committee. Funds would be made available, on a competitive basis, to go through
a planning effort with the end point of developing a comprehensive proposal to
an appropriate federal agency. A component of the effort would specifically
encourage submission to the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and the
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs. Senior Program Director