* 9450557
* Knowledge Transfer to Stimulate Exploration for Wyoming     Natural Gas
* EHR,ESR
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Ronald Surdam, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Reiss
* 06/30/1996
* USD 199,223.00

Abstract 557 Surdam Knowledge Transfer to Stimulate Exploration for Wyoming
Natural Gas The program is designed to be the first stage in a major long- term
effort to forge mutually beneficial linkages between the University of Wyoming
and Industry, an effort given high priority by the State of Wyoming. The program
is focused on knowledge transfer in the natural gas industry in Wyoming as
representing the best available opportunity to model University-Industry
interaction. Wyoming's immense natural gas resource occurs in accumulations
unconventional in form, emplacement, and history. Exploration techniques
designed to locate conventional stratigraphic and structural traps are blind to
these unconventional, subtle traps. Personnel at the Institute for Energy
Research (IER) are developing techniques to identify, delineate, and predict the
productivity of hydrocarbons in subtle traps, and these techniques have been
applied successfully in several hydrocarbon- producing areas, resulting in
significant reduced risk and increased profitability for industry. These areas
have extensive databases to work with and company research staff with whom to
interact. The petroleum industry in Wyoming is sparse and dispersed, and is
composed generally of small operators without research staff. It is vital at
this time that the IER communicate the knowledge necessary for finding and
developing natural gas accumulations in subtle traps in Wyoming basins. This
will require that a means of crating linkages and transferring knowledge be
developed that takes into account the particular conditions of exploration and
production in Wyoming: the industry is dispersed; and knowledge transfer must be
careful and direct, truly understandable and applicable in the field, and truly
interactive so that optimum research benefits are derived. An interactive
program of knowledge transfer is proposed, in which the IER strategy will be
demonstrated in developing the Jonah gas field and a series of workshops will be
implemented through collaboration between the IER, the Wyoming Geological
Association, and McMurry Oil Company. Research at the IER is ongoing; and the
accelerated development of Wyoming's natural gas resource brought about by the
knowledge transfer made possible by this initiative will increase the capacity
of the IER to guide its research on the basis of feedback from Industry and to
compete successfully for federal R&D funding. At the same time, this program
will be the model for establishing and nurturing University-Industry linkages
that will be extended to other industries in Wyoming as the importance of these
linkages is recognized and actively supported.