* 9450148
* The Role of Age-Related Changes to Cortical and             Trabecular Bone in the Occurrence of Traumatic and          Atraumatic Vertebral Fractures (Engineering)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Michele Grimm, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1997
* USD 179,724.00

Two modalities of injury can result in wedge fractures of the vertebrae:
atraumatic, osteoporotic fracture and seat-belt induced fracture during
vehicular frontal impact. To reduce occurrence of these fractures, enhanced
knowledge of the fracture mechanisms and determinants of vertebral strength is
required. The objective of this research is to improve the current understanding
of these areas of biomechanics. Ultrasound technology will be used to determine
material properties for developing finite element models of spinal functional
units, and the contributions of cortical and trabecular bone to vertebral
strength will be assessed. Whole body and regional impact experiments will be
conducted to determine the correlation between fracture mechanics and mechanical
properties. Computational and experimental results will be compared for
validation. Interactive activities will include teaching a combined
undergraduate/graduate course in biomaterials during each of the first two years
and an advanced course in biomaterials the third year. Additionally, seminars
will be organized featuring experts in bioengineering. About 50 percent of the
speakers will be women researchers. Workshops will be organized and
opportunities for male and female students to visit research laboratories of
women in industry, hospitals, and other universities will be offered through the
Society of Women Engineers and ASME.