* 9450022
* EPWG:  The Preparation of Gender-Sensitive Science Teachers in the University of Delaware's Secondary Science Education Program
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Kathryn Scantlebury, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 07/31/1998
* USD 502,820.00

9450022 Scantlebury This project will study the impact that incorporating gender
equity training into the secondary science education program has on the teaching
practices of preservice and cooperating inservice teachers. Both groups will
participate in summer workshops, coursework, seminars, and meetings which will
have gender equity in the sciences as a central theme. Key components include:
providing gender equity training for preservice and cooperating inservice
teachers; providing professional development for both groups; utilizing
inservice cooperating teachers in teaching preservice methods courses; examining
the effect this involvement has on the cooperating teachers' gender-sensitive
classroom practices; mentoring of preservice teachers by cooperating teachers
and university faculty; establishing dialogues between university science
faculty and teachers. Preservice teachers need specific training in equitable
teaching strategies and supervision by high school science ("cooperating")
teachers who are sensitive to gender equity issues. The project is aimed at
encouraging preservice and cooperating teachers to develop the characteristics
of gender-sensitive science teachers through: changing current coursework for
preservice teachers; working directly with cooperating teachers; including
scientific research opportunities for preservice teachers; transfer of
educational and scientific research to the classroom; linking programs to other
ongoing state and local efforts; providing integration between the Colleges of
Arts &amp; Sciences and Education, and local school systems; and presenting
research at national meetings. ***