* 9450020
* EP/PPD:  Promoting and Retaining in Math, Engineering and   Science (PRIMES)
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/1994,06/30/1999
* Mark Strauss, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/1999
* USD 1,660,246.00

HRD-9450020 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Mark G. Strauss, Ph.D.,
Principal Investigator "Project PRIMES: Promoting &amp; Retaining In Math,
Engineering &amp; Science" ABSTRACT This Experimental Project is designed to
address the underrepresentation of persons with disabilities in science,
engineering and mathematics (SEM) careers and those actively pursuing degrees in
these fields. Project PRIMES has two main goals: (1) increasing the enrollment
and retention of students with disabilities in SEM at the high school and
college levels, and 2) increasing the understanding of the factors which
contribute to this inequity. The goal of increasing the enrollment and retention
of students with disabilities in SEM in high school and college levels are to be
addressed through three tasks. (a) Workshops will be conducted for high school
math and science teachers and guidance counselors, high school students with
disabilities and their families, and state vocational rehabilitation counselors.
The workshops will discuss methods to overcome handicapping conditions in an
academic pursuit of SEM. Topics covered include: state and federal regulations
governing educational access; funding availability at the local, state and
federal levels; availability of technology to increase access to laboratories
and computers; availability of referral and human resources to identify and
assist in reducing or eliminating handicapping situations; teaching the
necessary preparation for successful transition from high school to college. The
high school students with disabilities participating in these workshops will be
targeted for direct recruitment by SEM college departments. Internet and e-mail
access will be provided for the high school via the University of Illinois
Computer Service in order to facilitate peer-to-peer support between students in
different high schools and mentoring support provided by college students with
disabilities w ho are enrolled in SEM. Mini-grants will be awarded to math and
science teachers to provide necessary access technology and to develop either
new teaching/laboratory modules or to modify existing ones to increase the
integration of students with disabilities. (b) The SEM department faculty at the
University of Illinois will be provided educational workshops on how to teach
for students with disabilities. Many of the issues addressed in the workshops
will be discussed. Similar mini-grants to college professors will be offered to
improve the quality of the educational experience for students with disabilities
enrolled in SEM. One professor in each SEM department will function as a mentor
and advocate for the students with disabilities in the department. (c) A region-
wide awareness program is planned. A professionally developed poster
illustrating persons with disabilities successfully engaging in SEM fields at
the high school, college and post-graduation levels will be sent to high school
math and science departments and guidance counselor offices in Illinois and to
children's and science museums in a five state region. The second goal related
to increasing understanding of the factors that contribute to the
underrepresentation of people with disabilities in SEM will be addressed by
collecting and analyzing data from anonymous pre- and post- surveys completed by
workshop participants. The surveys will ask participants to express their
experiences, views and attitudes about people with disabilities in SEM careers.
The most important and impeding issues will be integrated into future workshops
and disseminated through national publications and presentations. The knowledge
gained in this project should act as a model for other high schools and colleges
to follow to increase the enrollment and retention of students with disabilities
in SEM.