* 9450742
* A Computer-Based Introductory Differential Equations Course
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Robert Borrelli, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 10/31/1997
* USD 250,127.00

9450742 Borrelli The aim of this project is to design a syllabus, and modules to
support that syllabus, which adds computing and mathematical modeling as
essential components for the introductory ordinary differential equations (ODE)
course. Many modules are be self-contained units whose main focus is a topic
involving the construction and analysis of a mathematical model using a
computer-based approach. Some modules are designed to shed new light on
traditional topics found in introductory ODE courses. The material is being
produced and field-tested by a Consortium of seven institutions and is being
made available to the authors of the next generation of textbooks on
differential equations. The overall administration of this project is at Harvey
Mudd College, but the work will be done at all seven Consortium institutions:
Cornell University, Harvey Mudd College (CA), Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
St. Olaf College (MN), Washington State University, Stetson University, and West
Valley College (CA). Building on the network and experience accumulated during a
previous DUE grant on faculty enhancement, the Consortium is broadening the
scope of its newsletter C ODE E to publish information about the new ODE course
syllabus and modules before, during and after test-runs. In addition, C ODE E is
disseminating information about other ODE projects around the country. A
textbook publisher is adding additional support for workshops, computing
programming expertise, and evaluation.