* 9450578
* Development of a Core Facility for Biotechnology Research
* EHR,ESR
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Joseph Ma, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Hoehn
* 07/31/1997
* USD 168,000.00

OSR-9450578 Ma Development of a Core Facility for Biotechnology Research The
proposed activity is to establish a core facility for research and development
in biotechnology at the West Virginia University Robert C. Byrd (WVU-RCB) Health
Sciences Center under the current federal Good Manufacturing/Laboratory Practice
(GMP/GLP) regulations. Formation of a GMP/GLP facility would be cost-intensive,
but would also greatly improve research infrastructure at West Virginia
University, and strongly enhance our ability to obtain research grants from both
federal and industrial sources. Because such a facility consists of federally
approved laboratories for product development and characterization, this
facility would also have the capacity to participate in collaborative commercial
ventures with private sector biotechnology companies. Due to the extensive costs
associated with the establishment of a complete GMP center, the requested
funding from the EPSCoR Experimental Systemic Initiative program will be used to
develop a start-up facility to include: 1) a GLP laboratory to characterize
chemical and biological materials, such as for quality control of starting
materials and/or biotechnological products; 2) a cell culture laboratory to
develop methods for cell biology research and the screening of xenobiotic
biotransformation; and 3) a small-scale manufacturing facility to produce
biotechnological reagents and polymeric and lipid membrane-derived systems for
cellular targeting of bioactive compounds. This core facility will be used for
long term stimulation of competitive research at the WVU-RCB Health Sciences
Center and serves as a base for future establishment of a full GMP facility to
foster biotechnological development in West Virginia. The anticipated outcome of
the proposed activity is three-fold. The first is to promote multidisciplinary
research by combining cellular targeting strategies, physicochemical and
molecular biological methods in studies such as those included in the current
proposal. The second is to establish the GMP/GLP laboratories as planned to
support future development in industrial applications of biological research and
technology/knowledge transfer to the private sectors. Thirdly, this core
facility will be used for long term development of competitive research and
funding by federal and/or industrial sources.