* 9450864
* A Facility for the Interactive Analysis and Display of      Meteorological Data
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Clifford Mass, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 08/31/1996
* USD 24,826.00

This project is establishing an undergraduate laboratory in which computer-aided
analysis and display will be used for instruction in atmospheric sciences. The
facility allows the integration of interactive analysis, manipulation and
display of meteorological data into the department's curriculum and serves an
increasing student population. The department has already made considerable
efforts in software development, establishing a data acquisition infrastructure,
and in pilot attempts applying workstation analysis in the classroom. A
considerable range of courses makes use of the proposed facility, from
introductory classes to predominantly major's classes in synoptic meteorology,
forecasting, and dynamics. In addition, the new laboratory is increasing and
enhancing the undergraduate research opportunities in the department. This
facility allows students to examine atmospheric structures and processes with an
ease and a level of detail not previously possible and aids student
understanding of the complex three-dimensional structures of weather systems.
Considering the department's substantial experience in meteorological software
development and data storage technologies, it is expected that the laboratory
software and instructional approaches that are developed for the proposed
facility will be important contributions to undergraduate instruction in the
discipline; these advances will be made available to the entire atmospheric
sciences community.