* 9450302
* SSC:  "Summer Microscopy Institute for Middle School        Students"
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Annette Saturnelli, Newburgh City School District
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 10/31/1996
* USD 187,500.00

SSC-9450302 Newburgh Enlarged City School Dist. Newburgh, NY Saturnelli, Annette
"Summer Microscopy Institute For Middle School Students" This program is
designed to provide 50 minority 7th grade students with the goal orientation
needed for success. As individual aspires to reach a goal, only if he/she
believes it can happen. The goal creates the appetite for learning. An
environment (a uniquely designed high-technology, simulated research and
development facility) has been created where students will engaged in problem-
solving projects and provided with opportunities for sustained interaction with
minority role models so that they may begin to imagine themselves in these
roles, project themselves into the future, and visualize themselves as
scientists, engineers, and science teachers. In addition, as science
teaching/mentoring experience will be provided for 8 minority high school
students, members of the New York State Science Honor Society and currently
enrolled in higher level science courses. An inservice course will be conducted
that will enable teachers to acquire appropriate strategies for teaching science
in a multi-cultural setting to minority students and to develop and implement
intervention strategies for a awakening interest in and increasing participation
of minority students in science. The program also includes activities for the
parents of the students. The proposal focuses on teams of students, equipped
with advanced technology, who are engaged in integrated science and math
problem-solving research appropriate for students entering the 7th grade. The
approach takes advantage of and encourages the students' imagination and natural
curiosity with the world. At the core of this learning environment are two
scanning electron microscopes, a scanning tunneling microscope, and a
transmission electron microscope (already donated by, or on loan from, our
industry/higher education partners). The interactiveness of the microscopes
emphasiz es visual and kinesthetic learning and addresses the need for a mode of
learning congruent with the student's perception of what science education
should be like today.