* 9450142
* Competitive Analysis of Online and Distributed              Systems (Computer Science)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1995
* Sandra Irani, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 02/28/1995
* USD 71,844.00

This research focuses on algorithms that work limited information. Three topics
are addressed, and each is motivated by an application in online or distributed
computation. These topics include: (1) Distributed computation where a group of
agents must collectively solve a problem. Each agent receives part of the input,
and a graph is used to represent knowledge that is shared between the agents.
The goal is to determine how to use shared information between the agents as
well as to determine the value of sharing information. (2) These issues will be
addressed with respect to problems in distributed job scheduling and network
routing. Metrical Task Systems where the set of tasks (inputs to the system) are
restricted. The restriction on the input is part of the description of the
system. A unified approach will be developed to a variety of online problems by
developing a general, simple algorithm which uses the system specification to
approximate the best online algorithm for each particular system. (3) The use of
a statistical adversary, which provides a way of bringing theoretical results in
online algorithms closer to practical concerns by considering only those inputs
which exhibit typical statistical features. It is a middle ground between
probabilistic analysis and competitive analysis where the input is generated by
an unlimited adversary. The use of a statistical adversary for problems in
finance and computer systems will be considered. Interactive activities include:
teaching a research seminar in online algorithms; leading weekly meetings with
computer theory students to discuss research problems; involvement into the
Columbia Chapter of the Society of Women Engineers; & women in the Computer
Science Department.