* 9450535
* SSC:  "The UNCG Summer Sport Science Camp"
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Allan Goldfarb, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 10/31/1997
* USD 124,986.00

SSC-9450535 U of NC Greensboro Greensboro, NC Goldfarb, Allan, Thomas Martinek
and Dennis Quick "The UNCG Summer Sport Science Camp" Funding is sought to
support a four week, non-residential summer science camp for middle school
children of undeserved populations with demonstrated potential for leadership in
sports who have yet to demonstrate the same potential for science or math. By
showing how science and math can be used to improve sport performances,
investigators hope to capitalize on the popularity of sports as a vehicle for
establishing scientific concepts and as a tool for motivating students to study
both science and math. A total of 48 students from 16 schools in the North
Carolina region served by University of North Carolina Greensboro, known as the
Piedmont Triad region will be served by this program. Science, mathematics and
physical education teachers from each school will participate in intensive
laboratory activities designed to teach basic concepts about exercise physiology
and sport biomechanics, along with various physical activities designed to
integrate performance with science and math. Teachers will attend a five day
precamp workshop as preparation. Teachers and the principal investigators will
work together to design sport science experiences for the schools' science
clubs. Students who were initially enrolled in the camp will be brought back to
the University's laboratories for special enrichment activities during the
academic year. This project builds on experience gained in a 1992 sport science
camp designed for high school students that was funded through the NSF-funded
Statewide Systemic Initiative Program. ***