* 9450267
* THE EDDIE FILES:  Instructional Television Programs and     Teacher Support Materials to Interest Students in Math and  Careers (Grades 4-6)
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1996
* Steven Heard, Foundation for Advancements in Science & Education
* Standard Grant
* Alverna M. Champion
* 03/31/1996
* USD 500,000.00

9450267 Heard The producers of FUTURES, Interactions, and Good Morning Miss
Toliver have developed a new PBS in-classroom series for students aged 8-12.
This series, titled The Eddie Files consist of four 15 minute segments crafted
for teacher use. Each segment is dense with wonderful career applications of
math, science and technology, effective classroom techniques modeled by Ms. Kay
Toliver and narration/navigation provided by a fictitious youngster named
"Eddie". Eddie a fictitious student in Ms. Tolliver's class, takes students to
the real world where they meet people in real jobs. Students learn about real-
life applications of mathematics through the eyes of Eddie. The series is
released through a multiple distribution strategy including PBS Learning
Services, videocassette tapes and will be available for broadcast into the home.
Ancillary materials consisting of a teacher support print component, lesson
plans, potential staff development activities and student explorations has been
produced and is being distributed. Extensive and sustained outreach and
promotional activities accompany the release of the program to ensure broad
utilization of the series. ***