* 9450566
* Unleashing the Power of Molecular Design and Synthesis for  Science and Technology
* EDU,ESR
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Daryle Busch, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* James Hoehn
* 09/30/1997
* USD 260,000.00

Abstract 566 Busch Unleashing the Power of Molecular Design and Synthesis for
Science and Technology The objectives of the proposed program are: (1) to create
and establish the Kansas Advanced Synthesis Laboratory (KASL) for the following
purposes: (a) to educate undergraduate and graduate student by providing the
only laboratory courses in the State on advanced chemical synthesis, (b) to
provide a special facility that will maintain special equipment and facilitate
research in synthetic chemistry, (c) to develop a facility for custom synthesis
(at low cost) of unavailable substances needed by other scientists in the State
of Kansas, (d) to augment human resources by adding an outstanding synthetic
chemist to the faculty in Kansas who will serve as the Director of KASL, a
technician who will assist the Director, KASL Scholars, and KASL Summer Faculty
Students, (e) to increase the productivity of synthetic chemists who have not
recently been active in research by involving them in the educational and
research components of KASL; (2) to complete the statewide computer network
being established under EPSCoR for doing molecular science over and electronic
highway, for the following purposes: (a) to provide a powerful molecular
modeling capability on the desktop of involved molecular scientists throughout
the state, (b) to facilitate collaborations through the realtime exchange of
scientific information, including collaborative thinking, by molecular
scientists, (c) to assist statewide in chemistry education by the sharing of
chemistry software and presentations over the State of Kansas education network,
(d) to provide access by molecular scientists to databases and software
particularly germane to their science; and (3) to contribute to professional
development by sponsoring an international conference on an important subject in
the developing of new substances, the XIX International Symposium on Macrocyclic
Chemistry.