* 9450458
* A Conference to Discuss the Mathematics and Science Teacher Preparation and Enhancement Programs at Predominantly       Minority Institutions
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Curtis D. Howard
* 06/30/1996
* USD 183,695.00

9450458 McBay This project addresses the need to assess the status of the
mathematics and science teacher education programs at predominantly minority
institutions to determine what changes, if any, are required to ensure that
future graduates of these institutions and current teachers who receive in-
service training from these institutions are able to provide the quality of
mathematics and science instruction needed by today's students. The Quality
Education for Minorities (QEM) Network will convene a conference of
approximately 80 people from among the Deans of the School of Education or
Chairs of the Department of Education and Chairs of the Mathematics, Biology,
Chemistry, or Physics Departments at 20 minority institutions that are major
producers of minority teachers. Conference participants will assess the status
of the current mathematics and science teacher education programs at these
institutions; discuss national teacher and mathematics and science curriculum
standards and challenges in meeting them; learn about advanced instructional
technologies and model strategies at participating institutions; and identify
potential strategies and collaborations to ensure the production of graduates
who can meet the standards expected. Conference Proceedings will be produced and
broadly disseminated. A special target audience for the Proceedings will be
other predominantly minority colleges and universities with teacher education
programs throughout the country.