* 9450945
* Improvement of Undergraduate Science Instruction with       FTIR Spectroscopy
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Ward Knockemus, Huntingdon College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 08/31/1996
* USD 9,386.00

9450945 Bezoari The project will enhance undergraduate science courses by
providing students with hands-on experiences in spectroscopic analysis on the
microscale level. The plan centers on the acquisition of a Fourier Transform
Infrared (FTIR) spectrometer with computer data handling and library search
capabilities. The primary use of the instrument will be in the Organic
Chemistry, Instrumental Analysis, and Physical Chemistry laboratory courses.
Students will gain important experiences by: a) applying theoretical principles
to contemporary problems Including ground- water, soil, and air pollution
monitoring, and analysis of commercial goods such as solvents and food-packaging
(polymers and additives); b) learning techniques of sample preparation; c) using
the computer to enhance sensitivity and analyze data with multiple scans,
spectral overlay, and quantitative methods; d) carrying out searching and
matching of spectra with the library data bank; and e) seeing the internal
hardware arrangements used in the FTIR spectrometer. The project is meaningful
because students need to experience how compounds are analyzed and detected on
the microscale level with modern instrumentation. Furthermore, these experiences
will provide the foundation to promote a better understanding of other modern
spectroscopic methods of analysis (e.g., FT-NMR).