* 9450081
* Practical Numerical Algorithms for Large Eigenvalue         Computations (Mathematics)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Jane Cullum, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1995
* USD 110,815.00

This research focuses on devising and analyzing practical numerical algorithms
for the solution of large nonsymmetric eigenvalue problems. Such problems arise
frequently in the numerical simulation or analysis of physical or man-made
systems in many different disciplines. The algorithms are based upon Lanczos
recursions, are not application specific but will be tested on matrices arising
in various applications. Arnoldi algorithms will also be considered but only as
they relate to Lanczos algorithms. The basic forms of both these types of
methods do not explicitly transform the iteration matrix, and this is crucial
for very large matrices. These algorithms are of interest because they appear to
be able to compute other portions of the spectrum in addition to the magnitude
dominant eigenvalues, and preliminary numerical experiments indicate that this
is a very promising approach. There are however many open questions about both
the applicability and viability of nonsymmetric Lanczos procedures. Therefore,
the overall goals of this research are understanding the strengths and
weaknesses of both of these types of methods, their applicability, and what is
required to obtain practical robust Lanczos algorithms. This research will be a
combination of analysis and extensive numerical experiments. Three types of
interactive activities being carried out are: (1) A graduate course on practical
numerical algorithms for large scale eigenvalue problems; (2) A 'field-directed'
interdisciplinary seminar with a significant proportion of women speakers; and
(3) A brown bag lunch series for women students only, designed to serve as
counselling sessions on any topics proposed by the students.