* 9450209
* Educating All Our Children:  Translating Research into      Policy and Practice
* EDU,ESR
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1997
* Howard Hiatt, American Academy of Arts and Sciences (AAAS)
* Standard Grant
* Paula Duckett
* 01/31/1997
* USD 135,000.00

9450209 Hiatt The Academy of Arts and Sciences, under the direction of Howard
Hiatt, M.D., as the Principal Investigator, will conduct a series of conferences
intended to enable participants and the broader community, especially those
involved in the Urban Systemic Initiatives (USI), to understand and address the
problems faced by children living in poverty and the impact of these problems on
urban learning communities. Two of the conferences, "The Economics of Child
Poverty," (conducted jointly with the Children's Defense League) and "Economic,
Health and Family Status Indicators" will be funded by the National Science
Foundation. The conferences will bring together social science researchers,
community and government agencies, members of funded USI cities and other
interested parties. They will probe beneath factual associations to understand
the primary and secondary causal mechanisms for children's learning and living
problems. Their objectives include: * reviewing existing knowledge. * focusing
public attention on conditions affecting the teaching and learning of
mathematics and science. * suggesting educational programs that will lead to
systemic reform. * promulgating conference results. * identifying topics for
further research.