* 9450658
* Revitalizing Scientific Inquiry In The Undergraduate        Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1994,01/31/1995
* David Craig, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 01/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9450658 Craig The structure of the undergraduate chemistry curriculum is
determined by the American Chemical Society Committee on Professional Training
(CPT). While the curricular standards established by the CPT have succeeded in
defining and regularizing educational standards for the training of professional
chemists, changing student populations have created pressures on this curricular
structure. This curriculum planning project is designed to enhance the
educational experience of both majors and non-majors by modeling the educational
process more closely in parallel to the way in which scientific discovery
occurs. Curricular structures and support materials will be designed to
emphasize problem solving, interdisciplinary applications of chemistry, and
increased ease of access to chemical information. This goal will be accomplished
through the efforts of five curriculum initiatives. Four-person teams selected
from primarily undergraduate colleges will participate in these initiatives.
They are Modular Course Design Initiative; Laboratory Innovation Initiative;
Intermediate and Advanced Interdisciplinary Course Initiative; Visualization and
Database Access Initiative; and Assessment Tools Initiative. The Collaborating
institutions are Allentown College, Buffalo State College, Finger Lakes
Community College, Hobart &amp; William Smith Colleges, James Madison
University, Millersville University, Pennsylvania State University, River
College, Rochester Institute of Technology, University of Pittsburgh, York
College of Pennsylvania.