* 9450415
* RCMS:  MINORITY STUDENT RESEARCH EXPERIENCES
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Adedeji Badiru, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 08/31/1997
* USD 437,500.00

9450415 Steen The University of Oklahoma (OU) Minority Engineering Program (MEP)
is excited about the addition of the National Science Foundation's (NSF)
Research Career for Minority Scholars (RCMS) project. The project will be a
perfect addition to the OU MEP. OU MEP and the university have made a true
commitment to provide enhanced higher education options for minority scholars.
This commitment exceeds one million dollars annually in support of operating
expenses, scholarships, and fee waivers to minority students majoring in
engineering and has allowed the OU MEP to reach a total enrollment of 484
students for the Fall 1993 semester. The minority engineering undergraduate
enrollment constitutes over 20 percent of the College of Engineering enrollment
--a truly phenomenal achievement! This minority engineering enrollment includes
some of the best students in the nation. For example four OU students have won
the National Black Engineer of the Year Award - Student Leadership Category in
the first seven years of the award. The University of Oklahoma minority
engineering student population provides the opportunity for unparalleled success
in meeting the objectives of the RCMS project. The OU MEP RCMS project is
designed for excellence. The centerpiece activity will be a quality research
experience under the supervision of faculty mentors. The project objectives will
be accomplished using two tiers of research experiences and activities. Tier I
will be a developmental stage for twenty freshmen and sophomores and will focus
on academic achievement, personal development and an introduction to the world
of research. Tier II is designed for 20 to 35 advanced students and will focus
on a research experience and related activities. Tier II participants will also
prepare technical research papers, make oral presentations at monthly meetings,
attend regional and national conferences related to their research projects,
submit their research for presentations and public ation, and serve as mentors
to younger students. The RCMS participants will also have enhanced opportunities
to experience research outside the university. The project staff will work with
corporations and national laboratories to provide summer internships. The
participants for the NSF RCMS project will be selected from the minority
engineering student population at the University of Oklahoma. The minority
engineering enrollment is composed of approximately four hundred and fifty
undergraduates with a significant number of all three underrepresented minority
groups: American Indian, Black and Hispanic. The minority engineering enrollment
is also national in scope with students from Alaska, Washington, Oregon,
California, Idaho, New Mexico, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, Arkansas,
Missouri, Illinois, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Maryland, New York, Tennessee,
Louisiana, Mississippi, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Florida. The
participants will be selected based on academic ability, motivation, financial
needs and careers goals. Participants will be provided a stipend for their
participation in the project. Evaluation of the project will be based on
required data to NSF and such factors as number of participants, retention rate
of participants, number of technical paper submissions and quality of research
experiences.