* 9450451
* SSC:  "M3 Summer Camp for Science and Mathematics:  Master, Maintain, Matriculate"
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Cathy Abeita, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 06/30/1997
* USD 294,834.00

SSC-9450451 American Indian Sci &amp; Eng Soc Boulder, CO Hill, Norbert Jr. and
Cathy Abeita "M3 Summer Camp For Science and Mathematics: Master, Maintain,
Matriculate" The goal of the M3 Summer Science Camp for Science and Mathematics
is to build a solid foundation to foster and encourage American Indian students'
understanding, development, and use of science and mathematics so that they
master and maintain their skills in these areas. The ultimate desired result is
an increase in the number of American Indian students matriculating in college
in mathematics, science, and engineering, and persisting in these majors through
to graduation so that they can enter careers in these fields. The M3 Summer Camp
and subsequent academic year program includes three interrelated components: 1)
St. Norbet College. The summer program brings together 42 rising American Indian
eighth grade students from tribes in three geographic regions of the country--
Great Lakes, Southwest, and Southeast. Fourteen students will come from each
region, in teams of two or three from schools/school districts in their
respective regions. The students will work together for fifteen days at St.
Norbert College in DePere, Wisconsin. 2)Regional Summer Follow-up. Following the
fifteen-day experience, students will participate in a five-day summer program
held concurrently in each of the three regions. This component links the
students, their respective schools, designated mentors, and industry/corporate
sites and is designed to significantly impact the interest and skill level of
the participating students in the fields of mathematics and the sciences. The
five-day program sites are: Great Lakes: St. Norbert College, DePere Wisconsin,
Southwest: Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico, and Southeast:
Pembroke State University, Pembroke North Carolina. 3) Academic Year Follow-up.
The third component is AISES' implementation of academic year follow-up to help
ensure that the participants' interest and skill level is maintained and
strengthened. The follow-up will be conducted through network linkages between
the student participants, their respective mentors and schools, the regional
sites, and AISES. The M3 project will operate for three consecutive years. ***