* 9450533
* MPWG:  Experiment Based Physics for Girls in Elementary and Middle Schools
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Meera Chandrasekhar, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 08/31/1997
* USD 99,790.00

9450533 Chandrasekhar The project is a collaboration between the investigator, a
professor in the Physics Department at the University of Missouri, and the
Science Coordinator of the Columbia Public School system. This third year
funding will permit development and implementation of an experiment-based,
hands-on program which will introduce girls in the 5th, 6th and 7th grades to
the physical sciences. For units in Optics, Sound, Electricity, Magnetism and
Mechanics, and Energy/Rockets, a series of modules will be developed. Each will
develop a concept (e.g., the reflection of light) through a series of logically
sequential games, simple experiments, building of gadgets, toys, art projects,
and laboratory experiments using simple scientific equipment and "gee whiz"
exploratorium-style exhibits. By introducing the girls to a number of different
ways of observing and using the same concepts, we will allow them to see how a
simple concept is developed on a logical basis to understand complex scientific
phenomena. Through this program, we expect to motivate the girls by conveying
that science is fun, but more importantly, familiarizing them with simple
scientific equipment, developing their building and experimenting skills, and
their capabilities of logical reasoning. This effort initially was set up for
grades 5 and 6 as an extra-curricular program, meeting twice a week for four
weeks. By the end of the 1993-94 academic year, the Optics unit will have been
tested in seven of the eighteen schools, and the Mechanics unit in two schools.
The Sound and Electricity/Magnetism units will be ready for testing in the Fall
1994. The popularity of the program among girls, parents, and teachers has
resulted in this proposal to expand the effort to integrate some of the material
into the regular curriculum for grades 5,6 and 7, in addition to to including
the 7th graders in Columbia's new middle schools. The project's expansion led to
the following additional acti vities for this third year: (a) reorganization of
the material by grade levels and its classification as curricular and extra- or
co-curricular; (b) integration of the material into the grades 5-7 curriculum;
(c) establishing co-curricular activities in the new middle schools (grades
6-7); (d) training for teachers in grades 5-7; and (e) development of modules
for one new unit on energy and rockets. ***