* 9450336
* SSC:  "Summer Science Camp"
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Leroy Moore, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 05/31/1997
* USD 209,840.00

SSC-9450336 U of Tennessee Memphis Memphis, TN Moore, Leroy "Summer Science
Camp" The University of Tennessee, Memphis Summer Science Camp (SSC), a four-
week, computer science and mathematics discovery project, increases the
awareness and curiosity of 50 underrepresented 7th graders for Science,
Engineering and Mathematics (SEM) careers. based on the concept of "learning by
doing," the SSC project design is driven by the objective to increase their
students' factual knowledge and skills about algebra and science concepts via a
series of computer-based, interactive physical science experiments. Assigned
mentors, in an apprenticeship relationship, demonstrate how the mathematics and
science concepts are utilized in finding solutions to problems in their research
laboratories. Student support activities, including a parental component,
increase the students' perceptions about their own abilities, resulting in a
feeling of "I can do it." Exposing students to a variety of SEM practitioners
(role models) and work sites, and demonstrating the role of science and
mathematics in work settings, further stimulates students' interest in and
enthusiasm about SEM careers. An academic year Saturday Camp maintain student
interest heightened during the SSC, by engaging them in a "research" activity
related to minority health and social concerns. The UT Memphis SSC feeds into a
local high school science/mathematics intervention, Project ACHIEVE, designed to
increase the pool of minorities prepared to enter health professions. Such
collaboration with the project "Project ACHIEVE" creates an educational pathway
that fosters students' continued interest in and excitement about science and
math. Following their SSC experience, students are tracked, via the UT Memphis
Minority Student Tracking System. Given the continued paucity of Black youth in
this local setting who elect to pursue science and math studies, the SSC is an
important step in stimulating them to become aw are of and become interested in
careers in science and math.