* 9450129
* Attachment Processes in Early Social and Emotional Development (Social Psychology)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Elizabeth DeMulder, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1997
* USD 167,862.00

Attachment theory proposes that the child's early attachment relationships are
fundamental influences on social and emotional development. The continuing
challenge of this relatively young research area is to elaborate and refine the
concept of attachment by developing measures and research designs that allow for
greater accuracy and specificity. This research will contribute to this effort
by assessing individual differences in attachment security beyond the infancy
period in the home environment, and by examining links between security and
theoretically relevant child behaviors and perceptions. Patterns of attachment
with mother will be investigated in relation to internal representations of the
mother-child attachment relationship, of the self, and of peers, both in the
home and in the daycare/preschool. The study will employ a short-term
longitudinal design, with data collected on 80 children over two years. This
project will dovetail with a larger longitudinal study concerned with
socialization of emotion and social competence with peers. The meshing of these
two studies will provide a powerful empirical data set with which to examine
multiple interactive factors in early social and emotional development.
Interactive activities include: (1) teaching a graduate level developmental
psychopathology course not currently available at George Mason; (2) organizing a
series of seminars, presented by women faculty in the science and engineering
departments and guests speakers, on the topic of "Becoming a Scientist; and (3)
coordinating a "Women in Science" research festival with poster presentations by
women graduate students, faculty members and researchers from the National
Institute of Health. Other activities include team-teaching developmental
psychology seminar, mentoring undergraduate students who are preparing senior
theses, and training and supervising graduate students in research methodology.