* 9450007
* MPWG: Connecting Women Across the Computer Science Pipeline: From High School through the Ph.D
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Susan Rodger, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 08/31/1996
* USD 104,963.00

9450007 Rodger This model project seeks to attract and retain women in the
computer science pipeline through a variety of activities targeted at students
from high school through graduate school. High school teachers and faculty from
Rensselaer are to be involved. There are plans to connect 20 local high schools
to the University by providing computer accounts at Rensselaer for the high
school teachers and females students at these schools, with access via modems or
networks. The female undergraduate and graduate students, as well as faculty in
the computer science department, will participate in electronic discussions and
activities with the high schools. Women at different stages in the pipeline will
serve as mentors and/or mentees, receiving knowledge from those further along,
and passing it to those below. In addition to the electronic network, activities
for the high schools include talks by female computer science professors and
female graduate students about their research and their field, three workshops
for professors from the University and high school teachers to plan activities,
and a two-week summer program. Additional activities for female undergraduates
and graduate students include transition programs, formal seminars by
distinguished female computer scientists, informal meetings for discussion of
issues, and a 10-week summer research program for undergraduates. Women are
underrepresented in the field of computer science, particularly at the highest
levels. The goal of the proposed work is to attract high school women to
computer science, and to retain interested women in the computer science
pipeline from high school through graduate programs. Dissemination plans include
sharing key components of the effort with the chairs of computer science
departments at universities within the U.S. to enable them to replicate
applicable aspects. ***