* 9450281
* SSC: Summer Science Exploration Camp.
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Sylvester Ekpenuma, Claflin University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 05/31/1997
* USD 193,689.00

SSC-9450281 Claflin College Orangeburg, SC Ekpenuma, Sylvester, Philip Charpie
and Bettye Stokes "Summer Science Exploration Camp" The Science Exploration Camp
project planned for Claflin College will conduct a four-week, non-residential
math and science course program to serve fifty minority students entering the
7-9 grades during the three summers of 1994-1996 with the first year program
scheduled to rum from July 5-29, 1994. Peer groups of students will be selected
from adjoining school districts of Orangeburg , Calhoun and Bamberg counties in
South Carolina which have a high concentration of minority students. The project
will be supervised by four faculty, four undergraduate assistants and a
secretary. The program will comprise of interactive, hands-on experiences and
demonstrations in the applications of science and technology that will direct
the students to questions such as how and why that will ultimately introduce the
learning of basic concepts. Exploration of the applications in various areas of
science and technology will serve as a springboard to instructions in areas such
as engineering and physics, basic mathematics (algebra and geometry) and problem
solving skills essential foundation for success in the core courses required for
science and technology programs; use of computers, microbiology, chemistry, and
improving general academic skills such as note-taking,oral and written
communications. The methodology been tired here is to start from the
applications that interest the students and then introduce the concepts later.
To complement the classroom demonstration and instructions, field trips that
will also include hand-on activities will be taken to expose the students to
professionals in the various fields so that the students can relate classroom
study to careers and appreciate that science is what we do in real life and not
just what we study only in the classroom. Also, the participants will be
encourage through career awareness g roup discussions and demonstrations
involving minority professionals to pursue studies leading to careers in science
and technology. The academic year follow-up component will include school
visitations by program faculty to assist in science demonstrations and a campus
weekend demonstrations and presentations involving the participants and their
peers.