* 9450353
* RCMS: Research Careers for Minority Scholars Program at City College
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Neville Parker, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* William A. Sibley
* 08/31/1997
* USD 400,000.00

9450353 Parker RCMS at the City College of the City University of New York,
Phase II In the second phase of RCMS funding, City College of the City
University of New York proposes an ongoing comprehensive effort aimed at
encouraging minority students to enter research careers in engineering and
science, beginning with the recruitment of potential RCMS Scholars from City
College undergraduates and culminating in their placement in appropriate
doctoral programs. The hear of the program to shaping the next generation of
minority researchers in Phase II will continue to be a four-year multifaceted
approach based on a careful balancing of enrichment programs, research
experience, academic counseling, professional counseling, communications
development, community awareness, summer internships, and graduate school
counseling. RCMS shall of course continue to draw on the resources of the many
existing special programs for outstanding students at the College, but the RCMS
Scholars will continue to have many additional opportunities for academic
enrichment. Through their involvement with faculty mentors, RCMS scholars
continue to be given first-hand experience with scientific research. In
addition, RCMS will continue to provide an environment where Scholars can become
actively involved members of a close-knit community of scholars and students
from several disciplines. RCMS Scholars, both among themselves and along with
scholars from similar program, will participate in a number of activities that
draw them together as a group, teaching and learning from one another, as well
as from the faculty, each Scholar guided and supported in a wide range of
experiences that comprise his or her apprenticeship as a prospective researcher.
Moreover, the program not only will benefit the intended group of RCMS Scholars
and increase the probability that they will pursue careers as researchers, but
will also enrich the academic experience of all students and faculty at the
College. This eff ort to recruit researchers is envisioned as at once the hub of
various special activities on campus and as a means of bringing into clearer
focus a great many key issues in the effort to increase the numbers of minority
researchers in science and engineering. RCMS shall also continue to draw on
other resources by continuing to forge collaborative relationships with
colleges, universities, research laboratories and community-based organizations.
With a highly successful summer internship program already in place with several
universities across the United States, RCMS is already well positioned to
significantly expand on the summer internship program. RCMS, in Phase II, will
maintain a steady state of 60 RCMS undergraduate scholars as well as 15 "AMP
Affiliates" -- New York Alliance undergraduate students transferring from
community colleges to the RCMS. The total cost of the project over a four year
period will be $2,514,845, with NSF providing $1,669,663, City College
contributing $545,212, and CUNY-AMP providing $300,000 for "AMP Affiliates,"
with $30,000 for supplies. RCMS will in turn provide ancillary support to all
AMP students at City College consisting of enrichment activities, counseling,
mentoring, communications workshops, monthly scholars' meetings and the like.
RCMS will also seek out additional funding. An evaluation will be conducted to
learn the extend to which the program has been successful in identifying and
fostering the development of students who go on to careers as research
scientists and engineering. This assessment will involve direct measurement of
the impact of the program upon students and learning from mentors and other
associated faculty how they view the program's accomplishments. To these ends,
pre- and post-program evaluation instruments will be designed, applied, and
analyzed.