* 9450980
* Acquisition of a Blow Molding Machine for Plastics          Processing Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Robert Farrell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 08/31/1996
* USD 76,007.00

9450980 Farrell Industry requirements for graduates of a bachelors degree
plastics engineering technology program must include skills in plastics
materials, design and processing, and the graduate must also be prepared to
develop and present new ideas. As a cornerstone to the program of study, the
students 1) use leading edge computer technologies, including solid modeling,
finite element analysis, mold flow, mold cooling and polymer flow, 2) have a
comprehensive laboratory experience resulting in a understanding of the
operation of processing machinery and proper processing condition to produce
high quality parts, 3) are required to develop and manage an engineering
project, 4) present the project before their peers and professionals in their
field. The purpose of this proposal is to obtain modern laboratory plastics
processing equipment that will substantially enhance the undergraduate plastics
processing laboratory experience. The requests consists of an extrusion blow
molder, a set of blow molds to demonstrate process capabilities, and the
acquisition of a computer simulation package to relate simulation analysis and
laboratory experience. The justification for this equipment is based on the
innovative way in which it will be used to improve undergraduate students
learning experience in plastics processing.