* 9450690
* Searching for Exciting States: Curricular Reform in         Chemistry at MSU
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1995
* Stanley Crouch, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Stanley Pine
* 12/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9450690 Crouch Curricular changes are proposed that will introduce chemical
principles in the context of relevant issues (the environment, health care,
utilization of energy, etc.). Instead of teaching chemical concepts in the
conventional fashion (of microscopic-to- macroscopic), our approach will begin
by identifying the concepts associated with some chemical system; thereafter,
the system will be studied from the top down, presenting and explaining chemical
details on a "need-to-know" basis. These approaches will require using
techniques that significantly enhance the amount of active learning that will
take place in classrooms and laboratories, with a concomitant emphasis on
learning by doing rather than by listening. There will be extensive computer
utilization for allowing interactive independent study and self-testing, and for
nomenclature, chemical bonding, etc. Appropriate uses of information
technologies will reduce dramatically the amount of time needed for conventional
classroom lecturing, and provide, instead, time for identifying and
understanding the unity, coherence, and relevance of various chemical concepts.
Laboratory settings will stress group-learning and team-oriented experiments so
that students may cooperate in solving laboratory problems without merely
following a cookbook, and in some cases, without the costs of providing each
student with a full set of laboratory tools. To plan a broad revision of the
curriculum, two types of workshops will be held. Faculty from small colleges,
where innovative educational modes have already been introduced, will be invited
to the first workshop to present ideas and discuss ways to implement such
changes in the environment of a large university. A second workshop will invite
participants form various Michigan State University departments that require
chemistry courses as part of their curriculum. This workshop will focus on
planning actual course outlines to better serve the needs of the clients, while
maintaining the elements of the proposed curricular revisions. ***y