* 9450592
* MPWG:  FEMME CONTINUUM
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1994,04/30/1996
* Howard Kimmel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Larissa Rogers
* 04/30/1996
* USD 89,587.00

9450592 Kimmel This New Jersey Institute of Technology FEMME Continuum project
will serve post fifth and sixth grade girls who are Intro to FEMME alumnae. The
partners in this project are the Newark Museum, the New Jersey Marine Science
Consortium and Liberty Science Center. The non- residential program will be
comprised of five academic year workshops conducted during the spring semester
of 1995, a four-week summer component to be held during July of 1995, and a
follow-up session in September 1995. Instruction will be provided in science,
math and engineering, as well as oral and written communication skills.
Continuing experiences will be provided through follow-up site visits to: the
Pocono Environmental Education Center in Dingman's Ferry, Pennsylvania; the
Marine Science Consortium in Sandy Hook, New Jersey; the Newark Museum and the
Liberty Science Center in Jersey City, New Jersey. In addition, the student
participants will receive academic and career counseling, and will continue to
interact, both formally and informally, with female professionals engaged in SEM
careers, including faculty, as well as with university students. Participants
will be involved in daily structured athletic events to encourage teamwork and
cooperative efforts. Existing study groups will continue to foster cooperative
learning habits in the investigation of scientific, math and engineering
concepts. Program staff will include three female elementary school teachers and
three female high school math/science teachers, and NJIT SEM faculty. The pre-
college teachers will form teams composed of an elementary teacher and a high
school teacher to work with the students. A program coordinator will work part-
time during the 1995 spring semester and full time for five weeks in the summer.
All participants will be provided with information and applications for other
summer precollege enrichment programs in SEM following completion of this
program. ***