* 9450593
* MPWG:  Science Horizons for Girl Scouts
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Joy Wallace, Montshire Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/29/1996
* USD 56,651.00

9450593 DeFrancis The Montshire Museum of Science, in collaboration with the
Swift Water Council of the Girl Scouts of the U.S.A. and the Women in Science
Project of Dartmouth College, proposes to develop and pilot a program to
encourage young women, grades 7-9, in science and mathematics. The program will
provide participants with experiences to increase their confidence in science
and math, to increase their interest in science and math courses (and other
educational experiences in these fields), and to spark their consideration of
careers in science and math. Project participants will be young women from New
Hampshire and Vermont drawn from the Cadette Program of the Swift Water Council
of the Girl Scouts. Approximately 80 scouts will participate in the pilot
program. Following its development, Montshire Museum and the collaborating
organizations intend to conduct the program on an on-going basis, assuring that
the experiences will be available to many thousands of young women in the two-
state region. The program will be composed of the following elements: (a) a
series of workshops in hands-on science education held at the Montshire Museum
of Science involving Girl Scouts and led by Museum staff and Dartmouth "Women in
Science" undergraduate students; (b) visits by the Girl Scouts to Dartmouth
College science labs organized by undergraduate Dartmouth women conducting
research projects in these labs; (c) science activities developed by the Girl
Scouts, with help from the women Dartmouth students and Montshire Museum staff,
and presented in community settings in their home towns; (d) a culminating event
for participating Girl Scouts and their parents to be held at Montshire and at
Dartmouth College; and (e) a pre-project workshop to disseminate gender equity
issues widely to volunteer Girl Scout leaders, teachers from the participants'
home schools, and others. An experienced evaluator of informal science programs
will be integral to the project, providing sum mative data to assess the
project's impact. Information about it will be widely disseminated to encourage
use of the project as a model for application elsewhere. ***