* 9450369
* AMP: ALL-NATIONS ALLIANCE FOR AMERICAN INDIANS
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1994,10/31/2000
* Joseph McDonald, Salish Kootenai College
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2000
* USD 5,280,560.00

9450369 Young American Indians are the least represented of all minorities in
Science, Engineering and Mathematics (SEM). The overall goal of this project is
to establish a comprehensive interactive All-Nations Alliance and network to
increase substantially the quality and quantity of American Indians receiving
baccalaureate degrees and graduate degrees in SEM. The foundation of this
alliance is 24 participating tribal colleges located in the following nine (9)
states: MT, WA, ND, SD, NE, MN, MI, WI, KS. The tribal colleges are the
functional units of the alliance developing and implementing project activities,
recruiting and selecting students, tracking students, maintaining a
comprehensive telecommunications network, establishing retention programs, and
providing student support services. The alliance will develop and implement
innovative programs with input from both the Indian community and the SEM
community to enhance matriculation of American Indian students at the following
three critical transition points: (1) high school to college
(tribal/community/four-year); (2) two-year college (tribal/community) to four-
year SEM degree-granting institutions; and (3) four-year institutions to
doctoral degree-granting programs in SEM fields. Tribal colleges will develop a
pipeline network by establishing linkages with local middle/high schools and
four-year SEM degree- granting institutions. Through this unique longitudinal
pipeline networking program, the All- Nations Alliance proposes to increase the
numbers of American Indians receiving baccalaureate and doctoral degrees in
science and engineering by six to ten-fold by the year 2000. One of the
objectives of this proposal is to reduce by a least one half the dropout/stopout
rate for American Indians in the education pipeline with effective retention
programs. The All-Nations Alliance will be supervised by a Governing Board and
administered by two institutions: Salish Kootenai College (SKC), a tribal
college, and M ontana State University (MSU), a SEM degree-granting institution.
Initially, SKC, working closely with 23 tribal colleges, will be responsible for
programmatic activities and MSU will be responsible for fiscal management. By
Years 4 and 5 of the five year program, both programmatic and fiscal management
will be transferred to SKC and the participating tribal colleges. The All-
Nations Alliance will establish a collaborative network of research scientists
at universities and research laboratories to serve as mentors for American
Indian students. In addition, the alliance will establish productive linkages
and partnerships with other SEM-based programs, businesses, industry,
organizations, state/federal agencies and foundations. The two lead
institutions, SKC and MSU, offer a comprehensive array of in-kind contributions
to the project. Additional sources of support for this project in cost
sharing/matching have been identified by the tribal colleges through other
grants and foundations. Project evaluation and assessment will be a continuous
process and will follow the NSF User Friendly Handbook. A seven (7) person
Extramural Peer Evaluation Team will conduct periodic detailed evaluations of
program activities, accomplishments, and identify specific needs and
deficiencies. Information on successful programs will be disseminated to other
institutions via monthly newsletters, telecommunications, video tapes, and
annual reports. ***