* 9450676
* Molecular Science
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1995
* Orville Chapman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stanley Pine
* 12/31/1995
* USD 49,996.00

9450676 Chapman Economic change and new technology are driving educational
reform. The transition from the Industrial Age to the Information Age is causing
great change in the institutions of our society, and the universities and
colleges are not exempt. New technology--powerful computers, sophisticated
client-server systems, high-resolution graphics for visualization, multi-media,
virtual reality, and broad-band fiber-optic cable are transforming our economy
and our society; they will alter forever what we mean by "education." An
Alliance of the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), California State
University, Fullerton (CSUF), and twenty-four community colleges in the greater
Los Angeles area has worked together for many years in improving chemistry
instruction. The Alliance now requests funds to plan a proposal that will
reorganize content into a new molecular science curriculum and make maximum use
of new educational technology. In preparing this proposal our attention is
focused on informing our faculties, gaining broad faculty support, and achieving
consensus for action. To achieve these goals, we propose four planning grant
activities. First, we will host a seminar that features distinguished speakers
in economics, technology, curriculum reform, science philosophy, science
education, cognitive science, and educational innovation. Second, Professor
Orville Chapman of UCLA will present a one-quarter seminar course that defines
the issues, presents the proposal, and facilitates debate and discussion. Third,
members of the planning group will travel to sites of technological innovation.
Finally, we will have a two-day faculty retreat at Lake Arrowhead to fine tune
the new curriculum and plan for action. ***y