* 9450117
* Behavioral Plasticity and Phylogenetic Constraint in        the Social Evolution of Bumble Bees (Biology)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Sydney Cameron, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1997
* USD 142,887.00

Behavioral plasticity in social organization has been linked to the evolution of
the strikingly different levels of sociality exhibited among the Hymenoptera
(ants, bees, and wasps). This research will study this idea with comparative
behavior and phylogeny of the bumble bee subgenus Fervidobombus. Species of
Fervidobombus, by virtue of their inter- and intraspecific phenotypic diversity
in social organization among widespread geographic populations, are ideal for
testing hypotheses concerning the role of behavioral plasticity in social
organization. The evolution of diversity in social traits within Fervidobombus
can best be understood through explicit reference to phylogeny. If, for example,
colony size and social organization are local adaptations (reflecting behavioral
plasticity) to geographically varying environments, then it would be expected
that the social traits and environmental variables would cluster together on the
same branches of a phylogenetic tree. This hypothesis will be tested optimizing
behavioral traits onto a phylogentic tree and testing for association. The
proposed research will lead to new comparative data on Fervidobombus social
organization and to the completion of a species phylogeny based on nucleotide
sequences from the mitochondrial genome. Interactive activities include: (1)
developing a modern graduate level systematics course; (2) developing a
systematics laboratory for use as an interactive facility; and (3) developing a
computer facility for use as a teaching and training tool. Additional
interactions with students and faculty include an early career female-scientists
seminar series and museum lunch.