* 9450235
* Making Scientific Concepts Come Alive Through Historical    Dramatizations and Active Student Learning Strategies:  A   History-of-Science Approach to High School Physical Science
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1999
* Barbara Becker, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 09/30/1999
* USD 1,189,563.00

9450235 Becker The Southwest Regional Laboratory(SWRL) proposes to develop,
produce, field-test, refine, evaluate, and disseminate a series of eight
instructional modules for secondary school physical science or general science.
Each module builds upon a video-taped portrayal of a selected episode in the
history of science which is rich in conceptual challenge, conflicting points of
view and cultural context. The units will include statics, kinematics, dynamics,
electricity and magnetism, heat, light, the structure of matter, and modern
problems in physical science. Some of the portrayals will include building the
Brooklyn Bridge, Galileo's observations of falling bodies, Emilie du Chatelet
and Voltaire's studies of collisions, Count Rumford's experiments with heat,
Newton's optics, Marie and Pierre Curie's experiments with radiation. Issues of
stability and change, scale and structure, and systems and interactions will be
central to the development of the materials for each unit. The materials should
motivate students who have shown little interest in science, challenge their
conceptions of the structure and workings of the physical world and build
greater understanding of the process and culture of scientific activity. The
videos are supplemented with student reading selections with both excerpts from
original documents and modern interpretive text. Protocols for group and
individual projects including cooperative learning activities, student
presentations and laboratory investigations and teacher guides for class
discussion and debate are also provided. The videos are produced by KCET;
Evaluation is carried out at SWRL ***