* 9450917
* Integrating Multimedia and Data Visualization into an       Introductory Computing Course
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1997
* J. Thomas Allen, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 02/28/1997
* USD 51,430.00

9450917 Allen The Department of Computer Science at Furman University proposes a
Multimedia Teaching Laboratory to support its undergraduate introductory service
course CS16, Introduction to Computing. In addition to five hours of weekly
lecture material, CS16 students participate in a two hour weekly lab. The
practical experience gained in the laboratory activities is an essential
component of the course. The proposed laboratory would be used for the
development and implement of new course lab activities. Currently the department
is revising the course's content to integrate multimedia computing, data
visualization, and networking concepts. A basic understanding of these concepts
is essential for our graduates who enter careers in science, industry,
education, government, and the professions. All of these fields will experience
significant changes as a result of the rapid growth of digital information
technologies. This curriculum development effort represents a significant
upgrading of the traditional undergraduate literacy course in computing.
Consequently, it serves as a potential model for other computer science
departments who are seeking ways to make this "bread and butter" service course
more relevant, more exciting, and more useful for their students. We expect to
publish course materials (a textbook with accompanying disk containing
laboratory activities is already under contract) to enhance this potential.