* 9450995
* Integration of Molecular Modelling into the Chemistry       Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Nancy Devino, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 06/30/1996
* USD 45,000.00

9450995 Devino This project will integrate molecular modelling into the
chemistry curriculum at Dickinson College. A primary goal of our revised
curriculum is to blur the boundaries found in traditional chemistry programs.
The distinction between lecture and lab is blurred in the one-semester,
discovery-based introductory course. The intermediate and upper level courses
break down the traditional divisions within the field of chemistry, reflecting
the fact that real-world problems in chemistry are best solved using an
interdisciplinary approach. This concept is further emphasized in the Integrated
Lab sequence for junior and senior chemistry majors, which includes independent
laboratory projects from overlapping areas of chemistry. A second goal is to
teach students to visualize molecules, understand their physical properties and
predict their chemical reactivity. These tasks are central to all disciplines of
chemistry, and will be incorporated into each student's independent research
project. The primary goals will be accomplished through purchase of: (1) student
computers on which to run molecular modelling software; (2) an instructor
workstation for high-end computational chemistry as well as demonstration
purposes; and (3) a file server plus additional accessories to network all of
the computers. State-of-the-art molecular modelling software and hardware
requested here, only recently accessible to the undergraduate market, are the
tools we propose to use as the unifying theme in the curriculum. The
incorporation of sophisticated computer technology into our curriculum will help
prepare students for postgraduate education or employment opportunities in
chemistry.