* 9450952
* Thru-Hole Soldering and Surface-Mount Technology Electronic Laboratory Development
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Arnulfo Garcia, Texas State Technical College-Harlingen Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1996
* USD 52,939.00

9450952 Garcia This project proposes the development of a course to train
undergraduate students in thru-hole technology and surface-mount technology.
This course would be made available to students from four programs of study
including Electronic Technology, Electronic Servicing Technology, Biomedical
Equipment Technology and Instrumentation Technology. New trends in electronic
soldering, assembly, rework, and repair have brought about a revolution of
soldering techniques. Basic hand skill soldering techniques of the past are
being replaced in industry by sophisticated High Reliability Interconnection
Technologies. These changes have resulted in the need for students to become
familiar with new equipment, learn new procedures, and become competent in new
soldering techniques in order to be a marketable employee. Very few
undergraduate institutions are teaching new soldering techniques. Most
industries are sending their employees to speaialized learning centers where
they can master tasks required to be certified in thru-hole soldering and
surface-mount technology. This project is unique in that it not only proposes
curriculum for thru-hole soldering and surface-mount technology, it also
includes an arrangement where students can gain certification in these areas of
specialization upon successful completion of the course.