* 9450071
* PPD:  Enhancement of Mathematics and Science for Fourth and Fifth Grade Native American Students with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Leigh Jeanotte, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 03/31/1998
* USD 1,336,552.00

9450071 SCHMITT The University of North Dakota proposes to implement a three-
year experimental program designed to increase science and math studies for
Native American students with disabilities who are in the fourth and fifth
grades. The program will have participation of staff from the College for Human
Resources Development, the Center for Teaching and Learning, the School of
Engineering and Mines, the College of Arts and Sciences, the Graduate School,
and Native American Programs. The project is designed to increase the awareness
of parents, school personnel, college faculty, and students of the educational
and career options in math and science open to Native American students with
disabilities. Efforts will be made to enhance the curriculum, teaching
strategies, hands-on and culturally-appropriate experiences, and counseling
options for these students. Computers, the necessary adaptive equipment, and
training in their use will be made available to the students. The project will
increase the team building and liaisons among school personnel, college faculty,
parents, and professionals in math, science and engineering. This interaction
should result in permanent changes to the infrastructure of the school system
and the curriculum and opportunities open to the students. The project will
involve a summer institute for school personnel, parents, faculty, and
mentor/role models and two institutes involving these persons and 30 fourth and
fifth grade disabled Native American students from schools on or near
reservations. A hands-on, culturally appropriate project will be designed and
implemented in each participating school.***