* 9450053
* EPWG: Rural High School Girls and Science:  Meeting the     Challenge through a Comprehensive Approach
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Angela Ginorio, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 12/31/1997
* USD 911,897.00

9450053 Ginorio The project, Rural High School Girls and Science, addresses the
needs of rural high school girls with special attention to ethnic minorities. It
uses a system-wide approach, targeting not only girls interested in science, but
also their teachers, counselors, and parents. The project serves sixteen rural
schools throughout the state of Washington. In each school, with the support of
the principal, four girls entering the 10th grade, three science teachers, and
one counselor will be involved in an intensive summer experience and a year of
follow-up activities. The girls will attend a two-week residential camp; the
teachers, a one-week institute; and counselors, a three day workshop. As part of
the follow-up there will be school-generated activities for other students and
parents. Each participating school will receive a set of the curricular
materials developed during the summer programs and a grant for special science
projects. In the last year of the project, a state-wide conference will bring
together participating students, teachers, and counselors to share curricular
materials and begin a public education effort. The selection of schools in
clusters will magnify and maintain the effects of this intervention beyond the
project funded period. Materials generated by the project will enable non-
participating schools to duplicate many parts of the project. ***