* 9450367
* SSC:  "Summer Science Camp: A University and Industrial     Partnership to Enhance Minority Science Education and CareerPerspectives"
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Robert Maher, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 10/31/1996
* USD 199,998.00

SSC-9450367 U of Nebraska-Lincoln Lincoln, NE Smith, James III, John Rohde,
Robert Maher, Jody Redepenning and Suzanne Rohde "Summer Science Camp: A
University and Industrial Partnership to Enhance Minority Science Education and
Career Perspectives" To increase racial minority participation in science,
engineering, and mathematics (SEM) careers, the university of Nebraska-Lincoln
is seeking funding for a National Science Foundation Summer Science Camp. This
residential Summer Science Camp Project will serve 40 middle school youth
annually from the Lincoln, Nebraska, Public School District. The Project will
recruit underrepresented minority students from low-income backgrounds whose
parents lack a college degree and involve these students in educational
activities following their seventh or eighth grade year. Over the 36-month
period from 1 April 1994 to 31 March 1997, there will be 120 total Project
participants. one of the Project's strengths is that it will draw on the
complementary talents of university professors, active professionals in the
field, and certified public school teachers working together as an integrated
team. The paid staff will include a Project Coordinator, six Educational
Consultants from the university faculty, three certified secondary-education
Instructors, and four live-in Residential Advisers responsible for supervision
and peer interaction in the residence halls. Uncompensated volunteers will
include a team of mentors drawn from SEM-based industries in the locality.
Leadership will be provided by a Director who has over 20 years' experience in
educational administration and whose salary is paid by the University of
Nebraska. The Summer Science Camp will consist of three components. First,
eligible students will be recruited for the Project, selected for participation,
and invited to an orientation meeting with their parents in the spring. Second,
during the six-week summer component, participants, will be offered a variety of
activities including motivational science and math enrichment courses, field
trips, practical applications, and actual research experiences at the
University. These activities will enhance students' awareness of SEM career
options, prepare them to succeed in the related preparatory courses, and build a
sense of community for positive peer support. Third, through the academic year
component, the Summer Science Camp Project will make available numerous
resources to promote the continued academic success of participants. The faculty
involved in this Project will publish its details and results in professional
journals. ***