* 9450388
* RCMS:  RESEARCH INITIATION FOR SCIENCE EXCELLENCE
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1994,10/31/1996
* Maghar Manhas, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William E. McHenry
* 10/31/1996
* USD 235,900.00

9450388 Robb Early introduction to research is a most effective means for
inducing young people to choose careers in science or medicine. In the Research
Initiation for Science Excellence (RISE) program, we propose bringing minority
(African-American and Hispanic) students into an intensive research environment,
starting as freshmen or sophomores in college or as high school senior.
Approximately 15 such students -- the RISE scholars -- will be selected each
year for the five years off the project. Approximately 9 students each year will
be chose from students at Stevens Institute of Technology, an engineering and
science college in Hoboken, NJ and from the College of St. Elizabeth, a liberal
arts college for women in Morristown, NJ. The remainder will be chosen from high
school seniors in two inner city districts, Union City and Jersey City, NJ. The
RISE scholars will receive stipends enabling them to participate in UPTAM
(Undergraduate Projects in Technology and Medicine), a 10-week residential
summer research program at Stevens. In addition to individual research projects
in biology, chemistry, and medical technology, the UPTAM participants take part
in seminars and colloquia, trips to research establishments, and a short course
in presentation training. This highly successful program has, in its 22 year
history, introduced over 300 college students to research. Nearly all of these
have gone on to graduate or medical school. In the past, some individual
minority students (including some very talented high school students) have been
successful UPTAM participants. This proposal seeks to institutionalize the
recruitment of minority participants on a larger scale. Minority students often
find it difficult to thrive in an intense academic or research environment
because of inadequate training in laboratory techniques and deficiencies in
science and mathematics background. We are proposing academic year research
initiation training in laboratory and instrumen tal techniques to help remedy
this. Other tutoring, retention, and counseling programs for minority students
are already available at Stevens. Stipends for the RISE scholars, which along
with support for summer research supervisors make up the major part of the funds
requested, are a necessity, since these students would otherwise have to take
summer jobs. Selection as a RISE scholar will entail support for three summers.
Along with the academic year research and other proposed activities, this should
culminate in the senior year with the writing of an undergraduate honors thesis.
The success of this program can be easily evaluated, since the graduation rate
of minority students in college is known. We anticipate a much higher graduation
rate for the RISE scholars, with many of them continuing on for graduate or
professional training in science. We plan to continue the RISE program after the
conclusion of the NSF support at about the same level (15 students per year).
With demonstrated success, RISE scholarships should be attractive to corporate
donors and to foundations committed to increasing minority participation in the
sciences. Several potential donors, including Hoffmann-La Roche, Schering-
Plough, and Sandoz, who are collaborating with us on research programs for
undergraduates and precollege students, have already expressed interest.