* 9450464
* SSC:  "Summer Science Camp "Camp Triple E" Extend, Explore, Excel"
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Terry Werner, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 10/31/1996
* USD 228,896.00

SSC-9450464 U of Missouri St. Louis, MO Richardson, Lloyd, Edward Haynie, Melva
Ware and Terry Werner "Summer Science Camp "Camp Triple E" Extend, Explore,
Excel" The camp will operate for four weeks each summer during a three year
period, as a non-residential day camp program. Enrollment each summer will be 50
students. The curriculum is inquiry-based. Students entering 7th, 8th and 9th
grades will conduct one major group study and additional defined investigations
at the St. Louis Zoo, Science Center and Botanical Garden. Campers and their
parents will interact with practicing SEM professionals in career exploration
activities. The rational for this curriculum approach is that all students
should have the opportunity to be motivated by the scientific discovery process.
Research (developing science projects--doing science) can tap into natural
curiosity. This "doing" allows students to learn processes (how to investigate)
that are fundamental to developing personal connection/commitment. Personal
commitment is key to understanding content. (see "Curriculum Models Coming Into
Focus", 2061 Today, American Association for the Advancement of Science, Fall,
1991.) Camp Triple E will be based at Crossroads School which is located 1/4
mile from Forest Park ( a multi-acre park which houses the St. Louis Zoo, Art
and History Museums, the Science Center and numerous recreational facilities for
biking, hiking, skating, ball playing, etc.) The Crossroads School was selected
because no St. Louis Public School buildings are air conditioned and none is
equipped with adequate lab facilities. None of the cooperating
colleges/institutions has adequate space/facilities for a program of the scope
and duration of the summer camp. A description of the Crossroads school
facilities is attached. Project Goal: The summer science camp is an essential
activity is the St. Louis region for increasing access to mathematics-based
careers for African, Hispanic and Native American students. The under-
represented population in science in St. Louis is predominantly African-
American. Camp Triple E will serve a critical function in the continuum of
mathematics and science mastery/enrichment activities designed as the
Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities (CRCM) "pipeline" supporting
students' movement from middle-school to undergraduate school as SEM majors. ***