* 9450487
* SSC: "Science Summer Camp and Academic Year Follow-Up Program
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Alfred Posamentier, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Alexandra King
* 12/31/1997
* USD 295,416.00

SSC-9450487 CUNY Research Foundation New York, NY Shapiro, Norman and Carl
Berkowitz "Science Summer Camp and Academic Year Follow-Up Program" This
proposal for Summer Science Camp builds upon a successful model and is designed
to provide 300 (100 each year) academically talented minority 7th and 8th
graders with the necessary support and enrichment to successfully pass the
entrance examination for the New York City's specialized science high schools
(Stuyvesant High School, Bronx High School of Science, Brooklyn Technical High
School). This is achieved through a four-week summer preparatory period followed
by a one Saturday a month campus program. The four-week summer residential
component serves as the foundation for the introduction of the world of science,
mathematics and technology. Through the development of a peer network, students
are introduced to academic excellence. To reach the project goals, students are
introduced to more advanced concepts in science, mathematics and technology. In
the summer, students are prepared to take challenging courses at the high school
level and are introduced to the skills necessary for the New york City
specialized science high school. This project introduces the necessary support
systems and familiarizes the students with career opportunities in mathematics,
science and engineering. Students are also introduced to the special
opportunities of the specialized high schools and other special high school
programs. Following the summer component is a City College of New York Academic
year on- campus program. This phase will include academic activities, special
lectures, sharing time where each student receives the support of peers and
mentors. In addition the principal staff will meet with the participating
student's school principal and guidance counselor, informing them of the
students program participation in order to ensure that the student receives the
necessary school support. Meetings will also be held w ith parents on-campus.
Students will also be provided with advisement on attending the New York City
specialized science high schools and other special high school programs. The
project objectives include: 1) increasing the number of minority students that
apply into the three New York City specialized science and technology high
schools; 2) encouraging highly able youngsters to develop their math, science
and verbal skills in order to increase their prospects for admission into New
York City special science and technology high schools; 3) strengthening
participants positive attitudes toward science, mathematics, and technology
subjects; 4) increasing the pool of participants considering careers in science,
mathematics and engineering; 5) providing personal, career, academic and
financial-aid counseling; and 6) introducing and testing new enrichment
curriculum for wider application. The project evaluation will be directed to
determine the extent that the project goals and objectives are achieved by the
individual participants.