* 9450531
* IDWG:  Kieve Science Camp for Girls:  A Laboratory Camp     for Dissemination Training
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Louisa Sally Crissman, Kieve Affective Education Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 09/30/1995
* USD 91,964.00

9450531 Crissman This Information Dissemination Activity, Kieve Science Camp for
Girls: A Laboratory Camp for Dissemination, replicates the successful Kieve
Science Camp for Girls and cultivates a "ripple effect" in six participating
school districts. Designed to tackle issues known to stifle the confidence and
enthusiasm of girls in science, the project is a based on research and expertise
of the Kieve Science Camp instructors and staff. It is a one year effort to
train and support 24 adult dissemination leaders (12 parents and teachers and 12
leaders from other science camps in Maine). They will be trained through
observation and participation with campers in the Kieve Science Camp for Girls
and through a series of four seminars accompanying the camp experience. The
seminars are designed to help teachers and parents return to their communities
prepared to be advocates for gender equity and experiential education in
science. This project uses a collaborative learning environment to provide
professional development for teachers, to teach the Kieve Science Camp for Girls
model to other camp staff, and to cultivate local actions on behalf of girls in
Maine Schools. The Kieve Science Camp for girls is a residential experience for
120 fourth, fifth, and sixth graders from six rural and resource-poor
communities in Maine focusing on experiential educations. in addition challenges
requiring cooperation and risk-taking are encouraged. The goal of the camp is to
effect a positive attitudinal shift, helping girls see that science is fun, and
developing their confidence to participate fully in the world of science and
technology. The carefully-selected female instructors and staff support the
importance of the role models. ***