* 9450505
* AMP: AMP FOR THE GREATER PHILADELPHIA REGION
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1999
* Corrinne Caldwell, Temple University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/1999
* USD 4,721,957.00

9450505 England The Alliance for Minority Participation (AMP) for the Greater
Philadelphia Region is a five-year collaborative effort of the Philadelphia
Consortium/Partnership which is dedicated to doubling the number of
underrepresented minority students (African American, Hispanic, and Native
American) receiving baccalaureate degrees in science, engineering, and
mathematics (SEM) and entering into graduate degree programs in SEM disciplines.
The Consortium consists of sixteen colleges/universities, metropolitan school
districts, corporate partners, SEM professional organizations, community groups,
and educational support organizations established through the implementation of
the current Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities (CRCM) funded by the
National Science Foundation. Temple University will serve as fiscal agent for
the Consortium. The AMP will not only focus its efforts on retention in SEM at
the undergraduate levels, but it will also place a strong emphasis on the
recruitment of students through early intervention mechanisms tied to pre-
college initiatives in the region. Retention efforts will focus on improving the
quality of the learning environment and the academic performance of minority
students using community-building principles which will emphasize collaborative
learning approaches, including group study and support, and positive and
sustained interaction with faculty. Eight institutions will lead the Consortium
efforts: Drexel University, University of Pennsylvania, Temple University,
University of Delaware, Cheyney University, Lincoln University, Community
College of Philadelphia, and PATHS/PRISM. These institutions will strengthen and
expand their own minority recruitment and retention efforts, and use the
knowledge gained from their experiences to expand effective practices to other
Consortium institutions and beyond. This will be accomplished through the
integration of three areas of concentration: 1) Academic Enrichment which i
ncludes pre-freshman bridge and minority undergraduate support programs,
curriculum review and development, and undergraduate research activities. 2)
Outreach/Transition Activities which includes an early identification mechanism,
articulation programs and graduate programs to promote the development of
minority faculty, and scholarships. 3) Industry Involvement which includes: pre-
professional employment programs, and career awareness activities. Lead
institutions will participate in all project areas, exchange ideas and
information, set specific group and institutional objectives, and assist each
other with program planning and delivery. In addition to the assessment of all
programmatic activities through the use of a database monitoring system all
institutions will be evaluated on their recruitment effectiveness and retention
of minority students in SEM. At present, the SEM retention rates at consortium
institutions range from 50% to 80%. Regularly scheduled regional meetings,
research conferences, newsletters, and electronic media and a resource center
will be used to facilitate networking and dissemination of information. Through
institutional cost sharing (one-to-one match), dedicated staff and SEM faculty
support, and in-kind contributions by Consortium institutions, the proposed
activities will lead to improvements in the quality of the learning environment
for minority SEM students at Consortium institutions, and the development and
implementation of effective SEM recruitment and retention models. The project
will impact approximately 3,500 minority students per year.