* 9451679
* Computer-Based Technology in the Life Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Tim Haresign, Stockton University
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 08/31/1996
* USD 17,160.00

9451679 Haresign There are two major, interrelated objectives of this proposal:
1) To introduce and familiarize students to computer-based technology in the
life sciences, and 2) To use this technology to improve laboratory instruction
in three specific courses: Bioacoustics will be an introductory level course in
which students will make field and laboratory recordings of acoustically active
animals. The recordings will be digitized and analyzed in the time and frequency
domains using custom-written software. Again, using custom software, students
will be able to manipulate specific parameters of the sound, play the altered
sounds back to the animals and so determine the behavioral relevance of specific
acoustic parameters. Students will learn techniques and methods of science
mainly through hands-on experience. In Physiology, an intermediate level course,
students will use the equipment to study such diverse physiological phenomena
as: extracellular multiunit activity, properties of skeletal muscle, mechanical
and electrical activity of the heart, blood pressure and pulse rate, and neural
responses to visual stimulation. Using the computers, students will not only
acquire data, but will also analyze and display it in ways not available for
data obtained with polygraphs or oscilloscopes. Experimental Neuroscience is an
intensive laboratory course for upper level students. Laboratory exercises will
demonstrate a number of neurophysiological concepts (electroreception, signal
transduction and mechanoreceptor activity, muscle spindle properties, central
visual processing) and techniques (single and multiple unit extracellular
recording, level discrimination, raster displays, detailed analysis of
extracellular spike activity). Students taking these courses will show improved
computer literacy and an increased understanding of the concepts presented in
lab exercises.