* 9451287
* RealTime Physics II--Active University Physics Laboratories Based on Tools for Scientific Thinking and Workshop Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Priscilla Laws, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9451287 Laws This project will continue the development of a complete university
introductory physics laboratory program called RealTime Physics (RTP) begun
under a previous ILI-LLD grant. This program is centered around the use of
microcomputer-based laboratory tools for observations and analysis of physical
phenomena. This project will help institutions with conventional course
structures to incorporate interactive teaching approaches in their programs
without restructuring the entire program. RTP labs share a common philosophy
with two previous programs, Workshop Physics and Tools for Scientific Thinking:
1) belief that development of scientific literacy is as important as traditional
textbook problem solving skills, 2) emphasis on the processes of oral and
written communication and peer learning, and 3) extensive use of microcomputers,
not as tutorial devices or teaching machines, but rather for the acquisition of
both qualitative and quantitative information about physical phenomena. The
development of RTP materials has made this holistic, learner-centered teaching
philosophy available to many more institutions by concentrating on using the
laboratory portion of traditional introductory physics courses more effectively.
Our ultimate goal is to develop sequenced sets of laboratories, spanning a
complete range of introductory physics topics. We propose here to develop two
additional RTP laboratory activities guides, thermodynamics and optics, to
complement the guides already developed in mechanics and circuits.