* 9451074
* Simulating Construction Operations Using Virtual Reality
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Richard Larew, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 08/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9451074 Hadipriono Studies have shown that rapid technological advances in the
construction industry have left construction education obsolete. New
construction graduates are expected to perform well on often unprecedented and
complex construction projects. Inadequacies in their construction education have
had grave consequences, including building and bridge failures. To prevent and
remedy this situation, the investigators propose to incorporate simulation
models for Construction Operations using Virtual Reality (COVR) in the
Construction Program at The Ohio State University. Using COVR models students
will immerse in a deep simulation process, allowing them to "participate" and
"be in charge" in virtual construction operations. Initially, COVR will include
the development of two models commonly encountered in state-of-the-art
construction practice as well as in academic context: deep foundation
construction and bridge erection. Since in the future, COVR can be expanded to
accommodate numerous models its potential contribution to the curriculum is
tremendous. In addition, COVR may become a model for other disciplines and
institutions to enhance their undergraduate curriculum. In order for COVR to be
technically sound, creative, well developed, worthwhile, and realistic, the
acquisition of virtual reality instruments is essential. With the NSF support
and OSU commitment to furnish additional/matching support, the acquisition of
the following three instruments are planned: desk-top Binocular Omni-Orientation
Monitors (BOOM2C-DT), SGI graphic workstations (WB-TWO50EX), Beachtron 3-D sound
systems, and World Tool Kit software. COVR models will be completed in 2.5
years. COVR is expected to greatly enhance students' construction education by
encouraging creative thinking and problem solving skills and by providing more
practical training, and a greater feel for construction, as well as a greater
understanding of overall structural behavior, and of understanding the un
derlying causes of construction failures.