* 9451789
* Laser Spectroscopy and Computational Chemistry: Essentials  for a Modern Physical Chemistry Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Theresa Zielinski, Niagara University
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 05/31/1997
* USD 23,606.00

9451789 Zielinski Three modern laser experiments with complementing
computational chemistry components are being incorporated into the physical
chemistry laboratory courses. A nitrogen pumped dye laser and boxcar gate setup
is being used to study the atomic spectroscopy of Ne or Ar. The same laser
system is being used to study the photochemistry of Ru(II) diimine complexes
where short time-scale (10 - 100 ns) measurements of luminescent lifetimes are
being used to analyze the collision induced energy transfer between excited
metal complexes and organic quenchers. The nitrogen laser is being used with
gated integration to implement an introductory Raman spectroscopy study of CCI4,
C2H50H, or C6H6. These experiments use a versatile computer interface and a
departmental PC to control scanning, acquisition and manipulation of data, and
subsequent plotting of results. This is exposing our majors to modern optics and
computer based data acquisition techniques in a non-black box learning
situation. An IBM RS6000 computer workstation is being used to implement the
theoretical complement to each experiment. Spartan v3.0 software is providing a
convenient and easy interface for students to compute and visualize molecular
orbitals and molecular structures. The theoretical studies are intimately
integrated into the spectroscopy experiments using the lasers and the
departmental FTIR and UV-VIS instruments. The full integration of the three
components, spectroscopy experiments, theoretical chemistry, and molecular
modeling, is essential for the modernization of physical chemistry laboratory.
Methods for implementation of these integrated experiments would be of major
interest to other undergraduate institutions seeking to sustain student interest
in physical chemistry.