* 9451673
* Integration of Multinuclear NMR Spectroscopy into the       Chemistry Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1996
* Norbert Pienta, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 10/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9451673 Schauer An "interdisciplinary" inorganic synthesis laboratory is being
developed in the Chemistry department at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill that will cover a broad range of topics including solid-state
chemistry, polymer chemistry, materials chemistry, main-group chemistry,
organometallic chemistry, and coordination chemistry. An effort has been made to
design several experiments around recent research developments to give students
the flavor of modern inorganic chemistry. This proposal requests funds to
purchase a 200 MHz Fourier Transform Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectrometer
that will be utilized extensively for characterization of reaction products in
this laboratory. This laboratory is a required course for all chemistry majors
(taken by 80-100 students per year), and will serve as a vehicle for the
education of our majors on the topic of Multinuclear FT-NMR Spectroscopy. To
handle the large numbers of students involved in our program, the NMR
spectrometer will be equipped with an automatic sample loader, automation
software, and a quad probe that will provide routine access to 1H, 31P, l9F, and
13C spectra. Although student involvement in routine data acquisition with this
instrument will be minimal, the students will be intimately involved in working-
up their own data in the 30-station Chemistry Department personal computer
laboratory. The program that we are establishing will serve as a model for
bringing modern NMR spectroscopy into other programs with similarly large
numbers of chemistry majors. Furthermore, this same instrumentation will be used
to enhance the educational experiences of students in other laboratories where
the numbers are reasonably small, including the honors organic laboratory, the
polymer synthesis laboratory, and the advanced organic synthesis laboratory.