* 9451817
* Integration of Flexible Embedded Control System Design into the Mechanical Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Peter Gorder, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 05/31/1998
* USD 50,100.00

9451817 Thompson This project is helping to carry out a plan to enhance a major
component of the Mechanical Engineering curriculum. The plan requires
modification of existing courses and introduction of new courses and
laboratories. The objective is to prepare our engineering graduates to design
dynamic physical systems which include intelligent sensors and actuators and
embedded control systems. The changes needed to reach this objective are: 1.
Strengthen the electrical engineering science component of our curriculum to
provide more instruction in applied electronics and computer circuits. 2.
Strengthen the dynamic systems modeling and analysis component of our curriculum
to provide analytical and experimental methods in modeling, analysis and
simulation of dynamic physical systems. 3. Strengthen the automatic control
system design technical elective component of our curriculum to provide both
analog and digital control system design, analysis and implementation. This
project is creating a new integrated dynamics and control laboratory which will
serve the two new courses and one of the modified courses. The laboratory
incorporates seven different types of experiments (torsional mass,
mass/spring/damper system, inverted pendulum, 3-D robot, heat transfer,
electronic cooling, and mixing). The detailed design and manufacture of the
experimental apparatus is being performed by teams of honors research students.