* 9451178
* Introduction of Semiconductor Laser Diodes into the         Undergraduate Physics Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Theodore Hodapp, Hamline University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/1997
* USD 15,351.00

9451178 Hodapp Over the past decade, solid-state laser diodes have made inroads
into a wide range of commercial electronics and industrial applications. These
inexpensive, monochromatic, wavelength tunable, intense light sources are useful
not only in CD players but in a number of applications including atomic
spectroscopy and laser- cooling. This project will explore the physics of laser
diodes and their application to atomic spectroscopy as well as introduce first-
year physics students to concepts of laser spectroscopy and a portion of the
advanced physics curriculum. The project will construct a pair of optical
workstations suitable for measuring characteristics of laser diodes as well as
for using the light to perform absorption and saturated absorption spectroscopy
on atomic rubidium. These experiments have been designed with an open-ended
quality to them to allow students to explore the physics, rather than to just
execute a standard cookbook type of lab. As a portion of this laboratory, upper-
division students will be required to present their findings to small groups of
students in first-year physics laboratories. In this way students will not only
learn the concepts more clearly (by having to present them), but the project
will provide an exciting introduction to physics not traditionally seen in the
first-year laboratory. These upper-division laboratories are required of all
physics majors and constitute a significant step forward pedagogically, as it
requires students to develop their own experiments (within the context of the
lab), make their own predictions, and truly discover their own education.