* 9451321
* Development of an Advanced Fiber Optic Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Fred Seeber, Camden County College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1996
* USD 95,988.00

9451321 Seeber The goal of this project is to provide students with a broad
array of experiences and learning activities that will prepare them for
employment in the Fiber Optics field. One of the basic characteristics of
technical education curricula is its ability to respond to rapidly changing
technology. New developments must be incorporated into the curriculum so that
graduates of these programs can compete for jobs and meet not only the present
needs but also the future needs of their employers. Key to this success is the
acquisition of equipment for the development of a long wavelength (850 to 1550
nm) fiber-optic advanced laboratory for communication and power transmission.
Long fiber-optic wavelengths are extremely important to study because of recent
discoveries and advances made in fiber-optic communications. The long fiber-
optic equipment in the near infra-red range and beyond will permit students to
make comparisons to other popular wavelengths now in use. The development of a
long wavelength advanced fiber-optic laboratory will assure that fiber-optic
graduates will be properly prepared for immediate employment now and in the
foreseeable future. Long wave fiber-optic systems are now being studied by a
number of universities and communications industries, i.e. A.T. & T., for the
development of a global highway.