* 9451497
* Scanning Probe Microscopy Laboratory Development
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Daphna Yaniv, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 07/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9451497 Glaunsinger The first multidisciplinary scanning probe microscopy (SPM)
laboratory course for undergraduate students using research-grade
instrumentation will be created in this project. The primary goal of this
initiative is to create a unique SPM undergraduate laboratory course using
affordable, state-of-the-art instrumentation for scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). This ILI-LLD project is a significant
first step in bringing this very important new technique to the undergraduate
curriculum by chemists who are doing cutting edge research in the area. The
course is designed to serve as a magnet to bring together students from
different disciplines and ethnic backgrounds and to help prepare them for the
imminent revolution in nano-science engineering and technology. The course will
incorporate the following key features: (i) Fundamental Principles to provide
students with a working knowledge of STM and AFM, (ii) Core Laboratory
Experiments to illustrate important applications of STM and AFM, (iii)
Laboratory Projects to give students the opportunity to perform short-term
research investigations of their choice, and (iv) Cooperative Learning
Activities to allow students to learn from each other. The primary products of
this project will be a model multidisciplinary laboratory as well as a
laboratory manual documenting all of the tested and refined experiments. The
laboratory experiments will also be available as separate units to maximize the
impact on existing laboratory courses in the undergraduate science and
engineering curriculum. This project will involve expert faculty from the
Departments of Chemistry/Biochemistry, Physics/Astronomy, Geology, Biology
Chemical/Bio/Materials Engineering and Electrical Engineering. The course will
complement many of the existing undergraduate courses and laboratories in the
above disciplines, provide highly qualified students for undergra duate research
projects, and strengthen special programs such as the federally-sponsored
Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Program in Materials Synthesis and Processing
and the Coalition to Increase Minority Degrees. The multidisciplinary SPM
laboratory course will have a positive impact on the quality of science and
engineering education at the university, local, regional and national levels.