* 9451635
* Development of an Interactive Digital Image Database for    Teaching Undergraduate Earth Science Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1996
* Glen Mattioli, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 04/30/1996
* USD 32,309.00

9451635 Mattioli An interactive, point-and-click, digital image database is
being developed to act as a complementary tool to the petrographic microscope in
four core courses in Geology: Introductory Laboratory, Optical Mineralogy,
Igneous/Metamorphic, and Sedimentary Petrology. The database links digital
images of hand specimens and thin sections with relevant observations from other
techniques, models of physical and chemical processes, and tectonic setting. A
student using the database as a self-study guide becomes empowered by
determining the agenda for his or her learning session within the context of a
specific course, and thus is an active problem-solver and not a passive
recipient of information. At the center of the database metastructure is the
"Image Database." It consists of a set of digital images of hand specimens and
thin sections for each of the minerals and rocks, which now form the teaching
collection used in the 4 core laboratories. Every image in the Image Database is
multiply linked and selectable from a dialog box offering the following options:
1) other images of hand specimens of related rock types; 2) other examples of
the same mineral in different rocks; and 3) additional images of
photomicrographs of other primary mineralogical constituents of a rock. Links
are recursive, i.e. once a mineral is selected from option (3), the user can
explore all the images linked to it, and in turn all their mineralogical
constituents. Text, such as brief descriptions of terms normally used to
describe the selected mineral or rock, tabulated chemical data, and graphics,
including mineral structures or rock classification diagrams, also are linked to
the images. Introduction of the image database of rocks and minerals organized
around a conceptual framework based on Earth System Science and plate tectonics
improves our teaching effectiveness by allowing students greater control in the
learning process. Increased computer literacy among our students is an
additional benefit.