* 9451475
* Optical Spectroscopy Laboratory for Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* H Chandrasekhar, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/1998
* USD 39,346.00

9451475 Chandrasekhar The University of Missouri will add modern spectroscopy
experiments to the Optics Laboratory for the upper division Light and Modern
Optics course. The equipment will also be used for demonstration purposes in
Modern Physics and for Undergraduate Research. Atomic Molecular and Solid State
Spectra will be studied. Two modern spectrometers will be set up to perform
Raman and fluorescence/photoluminescence studies at room and low temperatures.
The spectrometers will be set up so that the four experiments can be performed
with minimal or no change in the alignment. This feature is critical in a
limited time laboratory class. A Fabry Perot triple pass interferometer which
lacks a few components will be completed and will be used to perform Brillouin
scattering and laser mode studies. A Fourier transform spectrometer will be set
up to study the vibrational modes in liquids and solids, and will be a
complementary tool to the Raman and Fabry Perot spectrometers. All the above
instruments will be computer controlled. At present our Optics laboratory lacks
all of the above instruments, and we are able only to perform experiments where
data is taken manually, so that intensity measurements and comparison with
theory is not possible. The instrumentation above will provide a closer link
between the theory studied in class and the experiments done in the lab.