* 9451851
* MULTI-Lab: Multimedia and User Interface Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Arie Kaufman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 08/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9451851 Kaufman User interfaces and multimedia technologies will be of critical
importance in computer applications for the nineties and beyond. Facilities for
training undergraduates in these areas are limited, both at Stony Brook and
elsewhere. Training requires collaboration between computer scientists and
psychologists, as well as specialized computer systems that support images,
sound, video, and advanced I/O devices. The Departments of Computer Science and
Psychology at Stony Brook have recently been awarded an NSF Educational
Infrastructure grant to develop an innovative, interdisciplinary curriculum in
the design and implementation aspects of computer-human interaction and
multimedia. The curriculum consists of nine courses: User Interface Development,
Human Information Processing, Computer Graphics, Computer-Supported Cooperative
Work, Visualization, Multimedia, Human Factors in Interface Design, and two
Senior Design courses. We are creating an undergraduate multimedia user-
interface lab, the MULTI-Lab, which enables the implementation of the curriculum
with over 150 undergraduates every semester. The MULTI-Lab is paramount to the
success of our curriculum. Every participating student has hands-on experience
in the design, prototyping, and evaluation of a variety of user interfaces and
multimedia systems. The MULTI-Lab is a data-, audio-, and video-networked
heterogeneous laboratory of multimedia Macintoshes, with a few PCs and Sun Unix
workstations, along with a selection of I/O devices and multi-media peripherals.
The instructional material for the curriculum is multimedia courseware and
software that will be disseminated widely as a set of CD-ROMs and monographs in
a series called "Stony Brook Curriculum in Computer-Human Interaction."