* 9451451
* Incorporation of NMR Techniques into the Chemistry          Curriculum from Freshman to Senior Level Classes
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* James Eilers, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 06/30/1996
* USD 42,948.00

9451451 Getman The project will purchase (1) an automated sample changer for a
Varian UNITY plus 300 MHz NMR spectrometer, (2) ten Macintosh computers, and (3)
software. The purpose of this equipment acquisition is to expose a large number
of students, from freshman through senior levels, to NMR instrumentation and the
capabilities of the instrumental technique. The proposed program will expose
students in a stepwise fashion to increasingly more complex NMR concepts and
techniques over four academic years. In the freshman laboratory course, students
(400 annually) will be introduced to the qualitative and quantitative
application of NMR spectroscopy. During the sophomore level organic laboratory
course, students (approximately 175 annually) will employ proton NMR
spectroscopy for routine structural analysis. The junior level advanced organic
laboratory course will introduce students ( approximately 20 annually) to the
use of carbon- 13, 2-dimensional and more advanced NMR techniques. Finally, the
senior level inorganic laboratory course will introduce students to more
advanced NMR theory and NMR spectra of quadrupolar nuclei, as well as build upon
the students' previous experience with 2-dimensional NMR techniques. In short,
the Varian UNlTYplus spectrometer, when connected to the Macintosh computers and
equipped with an automated sample changer, will serve as the instrumental
cornerstone for a program designed to systematically educate science and
engineering students in the concepts and applications of NMR spectroscopy.