* 9451674
* Introducing DNA and Molecular Concepts into the             Undergraduate Curriculum in a Women's College
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Mary Spratt, William Woods University
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 08/31/1997
* USD 41,990.00

9451674 Spratt William Woods College for Women (WWC) is a 120-year-old private
liberal arts college located in mid-Missouri. This proposal requests a $51,056
grant, to be matched by an equal contribution from the college, to purchase
equipment for the undergraduate biology laboratory. The proposal responds to a
dual need. First, scientific advances in the field of biology are proceeding at
a rate that has outstripped the ability of many institutions to keep pace,
especially small, rural colleges in the Midwest. Particularly, these schools are
deficient in delivering state-of-the-art concepts of DNA, cellular and molecular
biology. Second, for the past seven years, William Woods students have been sent
to neighboring Westminster College (formerly all male) for math/science courses,
conveying the message to students that math and science are "male fields". Under
a new administration, the college has been working to return a strong
math/science presence to campus and has committed substantial resources toward
this end, including employing a tenure-track full-time biology faculty member
and restoring a biology laboratory. This proposal requests NSF support for
equipment that will enable the college to (1) develop an upper level cellular
and molecular biology course to be taught on the WWC campus for both William
Woods and Westminster students and (2) develop a DNA module for insertion into
WWC's reinstated General Biology I lecture and laboratory courses. Through a
dissemination workshop at WWC, the curricular materials developed for these
courses will be shared with area college and high-school faculty.