* 9451949
* A Materials Characterization Instrument for Condensed       Matter Physics Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1996
* Charles Cunningham, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 11/30/1996
* USD 43,430.00

9451949 Cunningham Recognizing the importance of condensed matter physics in
undergraduate science education, Grinnell College seeks to acquire a variable
temperature, high-magnetic field materials characterization instrument that will
be used to integrate condensed matter physics experiments into the physics
curriculum. In keeping with Grinnell's emphasis on innovation in teaching and
practical experience for students, the physics department envisions a highly
flexible instrument which can be used to measure the resistivity, the dc
magnetization, and the ac magnetic susceptibility of a variety of samples. The
proposed instrument will enhance the intermediate and advanced laboratories with
five new condensed matter experiments: the Hall effect, the quantum Hall effect,
the de Haas-van Alphen effect, Curie's law, and the critical magnetic field of
superconductors. These new experiments will enrich the experience of students in
condensed matter physics by allowing them to explore in the laboratory phenomena
which they currently encounter only in textbooks. Through this laboratory
experience, students will explore general concepts, observe important physical
phenomena, and learn experimental techniques in low-temperature and condensed
matter physics. In addition, the proposed instrument will enable advanced
students to do independent projects and summer research in condensed matter
physics.