* 9451979
* Microprocessor Control of Process Parameters in Injection   Molding of Polymers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1996
* Winston Erevelles, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 05/31/1996
* USD 49,281.00

9451979 Sullivan This proposal seeks to enrich the polymer processing experience
of students at GMI by providing modern control of process variables in injection
molding. Current injection molding investigations conducted in the polymer
processing laboratory implement the use of electromechanical controls, which are
satisfactory in illustrating basic interactions between process variables and
part quality. The addition of injection molding experiments which allow for the
isolation of a wider selection of parameters using microprocessor adaptive
control will prepare students for typical polymer processing situations seen in
industry. Further, the proposed equipment will be capable of interfacing with a
computer integrated manufacturing (CIM) environment, allowing for further
enhancement of both the polymer processing and the CIM programs at GMI. Use of
the proposed equipment will extend through all levels of secondary and
postsecondary education. Junior and senior level Mechanical and Manufacturing
Systems Engineering students will be provided with injection molding experiences
which will enhance their understanding of theoretical relationships between
processing variables and part quality. They will also receive microprocessor
control experience appropriate to their work experience. All freshman
engineering students at GMI will benefit from experiences on the proposed
equipment during the course of Introduction to Manufacturing Processes. Finally,
high school women and minority students working with the Principal Investigator
will be exposed to modern polymer processing equipment certain to inspire them
in the pursuit of further education in science, technology, and engineering.