* 9451796
* Enrichment of Quantitative and Technological Skills in      Introductory Anatomy and Physiology Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Gerald Robinson, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 08/31/1996
* USD 65,062.00

9451796 Nelson The Department of Biological Sciences proposes to improve the
quality of its heavily utilized 200-level Human Anatomy and Physiology course
sequence. This two-semester program is taken by as many as 600 students per
annum, most of whom are destined for positions in education, science, and the
allied health fields. For many of these students, this will be their only
training in the structure and function of the human body. In its current
configuration, the laboratory segment of this program is largely anatomical with
instructional aids consisting of charts, models, and preserved dissection
specimens; teaching of physiological principles in the laboratory is restricted
to "demonstration level" activity. We suspect that this emphasis on anatomical
study, as opposed to "hands on" experimental exercises, dominates the laboratory
components of similar courses at other institutions. Thus, many students are
missing a valuable opportunity to enhance their analytical and technological
skills while learning physiology. Our proposal seeks to redress a perceived
decline in the quantitative abilities and instrumentation literacy of our
graduates by providing the means for outfitting the 200-level Anatomy and
Physiology laboratories at Towson State University with low-cost, durable
physiological monitoring equipment. We also propose to use this instrumentation
in novel laboratory exercises in which the students themselves serve as subject
and experimentor. Emphasis will be placed on "hands-on" learning of physiology
and requiring the students to master quantitative skills in order to analyze the
data they collect. Exposure to instrumented physiology at this level will also
provide the students with a foundation in the analytical and evaluative
techniques focal to their fields of inquiry and will accelerate their transition
to professionals. Additionally, by instrumenting our 200-level laboratories, we
will expose prospective students of our advanced physiology laboratories, slated
for a transition to computerized data acquisition, to conventional
instrumentation technology at the sophomore level.