* 9451921
* Cooperative, Bi-institutional NMR Net for Undergraduate     Curriculum Enhancement
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Daryl Ostercamp, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 07/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9451921 Edvenson Moorhead State University and Concordia College will purchase a
medium-field multinuclear NMR spectrometer and supporting hardware and software
to implement a network which to be called NMRnet. The networked spectrometer
will be used by both institutions to introduce improved NMR experiments and
techniques into their organic and upper division chemistry courses and to
support ongoing undergraduate research. The NMRnet will allow students at both
institutions to use personal computers to work-up files exported from the NMR
console, thereby achieving a high efficiency of spectrometer use and enabling
all organic laboratory students (140 in the fall quarter/semester) to obtain
weekly experimental spectra. Students will acquire their own first spectra with
faculty supervision, however, student technicians will normally operate the NMR
spectrometer for the routine organic samples. In upper division courses,
students will independently control the NMR experiment so that they can more
fully understand the NMR technique. The interinstitutional effort will allow
both departments to achieve curricular goals while still maintaining
departmental autonomy and will provide cost savings in equipment purchase and
on-going operational costs. Last, the NMRnet should be the first of a number of
cooperative instrumental projects for the institutions.