* 9451300
* Advanced Undergraduate Electrohydraulic Motion Control      Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Thomas Labus, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 08/31/1997
* USD 36,311.00

9451300 Slater The proposed project addresses the use of electrohydraulic test
stands to educate undergraduate engineers in the area of controls,
instrumentation, and fluid power. The test stands will allow students to
quantitatively evaluate design changes relative to system performance on a real-
time basis. Total system response including transient and steady state can be
monitored and analyzed. This integrated, interdisciplinary approach provides the
student with an exposure to computer-aided design/analysis methods for real-time
electrohydraulic control system design. In parallel, software-based simulation
methods will be used to develop models which can be verified in the laboratory.
Direct verification of principles provides reinforcement and builds student
confidence. Structured methods of logical system design and diagnostic
identification provide students with valuable experience for use in open-ended
industrial design projects, which culminate the senior year. This problem
solving/project experience and computer design/analysis skills are important
capabilities required in today's global economy. The proposed project is
innovative in that the use of electrohydraulic technology for undergraduate
instruction in controls requires an interdisciplinary approach using fluid
power, electronics and computers as opposed to teaching control systems within a
single discipline such as electrical, pneumatic, mechanical, etc. Dissemination
of the results will be through seminars open to both academia and industry. Past
history has shown this to be an effective method for dissemination and adoption
of the methods employed in undergraduate education and industrial instruction.