* 9451037
* A Macintosh-Based Analog/Digital Data Acquisition System    for a Four-Station Biology Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1994,02/28/1997
* Brent Ybarrondo, Adams State University
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 02/28/1997
* USD 11,724.00

9451037 Ybarrondo Adams State College is located in the San Luis Valley of
southern Colorado and serves a primarily rural area with a high minority (i.e.,
Hispanic) population. Because of the isolated location of ASC, the educational
opportunities offered by the Department of Biology are primarily restricted to
those which can be accommodated with limited on-campus facilities and equipment.
While a program in field and environmental biology has traditionally been strong
at ASC, undergraduate experiences in modern "bench" biology have been
constrained by a lack of essential instrumentation. This is particularly true in
upper division laboratory courses to be impacted by the equipment proposed
herein, including: Comparative Animal Physiology, Cell Biology/Genetics
Laboratory, Immunology, and Molecular Biology where currently many
procedures/experimental approaches can only be described and "hands-on"
experience is inadequate or lacking altogether. The instrumentation requested in
this proposal will be enormously productive in terms of enhancing the ability of
the Department of Biology to provide a wide range of sophisticated, contemporary
laboratory experiences to ASC Biology majors in our advanced laboratory courses.
As a result, the educational experience of ca. 125 students per year for a
projected period of ten years will be impacted directly (with many other
students being impacted indirectly), allowing them to compete successfully for
positions in graduate and professional schools and for professional biotechnical
careers following graduation from Adams State College, as well as enhancing
science education in area public schools. Specifically, the Macintosh/MacLabTM-
based analog/digital data acquisition system is a state-of-the-art apparatus
that permits complex analyses of data collected from an extremely wide range of
modern input devices to be easily accomplished. The ease with which complex
analyses o f real data acquired by this system may be undertaken will allow an
inquiry approach in the teaching laboratory as well as enabling undergraduate
student research.