* 9451743
* Interactive Discovery Experiments in Introductory Physics   Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Donald Shaw, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 07/31/1996
* USD 16,924.00

9451743 Hones The project is to establish an introductory physics laboratory
that will emphasize discovery through interactive data analysis, rather than use
the more traditional demonstration and verification approach. To effectively
implement such a program we need computers directly interfaced to the
experiments. We presently have nine Zenith 486 work stations for data analysis,
but we need the interfacing equipment. The heart of the project will be the
development of new experiments or the modification of existing experiments for
the explicit purpose of creating a true laboratory environment in which the
students can participate in the discovery and rapid analysis of physical
phenomena. The significance of the project is the introduction of computers so
that the students will be able to collect the data, analyze it immediately, and
then proceed further with additional measurements and analysis, while they are
still in the lab and not at home. This approach is further enhanced by
interfacing some of the experiments each semester. It makes it possible to
perform more experiments in the allowed time frame and to perform experiments in
real time not possible at all at this level before. This principal users of this
laboratory will be biology majors, and as such several integrated
biology/physics experiments will be implemented, the physics being motivated by
the biological application. This course is considered intermediate in level
among the introductory laboratory courses offered in the physics department,
therefore making it easier to implement the methods in the other courses.