* 9451959
* Southwest Texas Junior College Introductory Physics         Laboratory Project
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1996
* Mary Beth Monroe, Southwest Texas Junior College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 11/30/1996
* USD 18,818.00

9451959 Monroe The goal of this project is to improve the learning of physics at
Southwest Texas Junior College and to improve the retention of students and the
attraction to major studies in physics, particularly among women and the
Hispanic population. This project proposes to develop and implement new
laboratory activities in three physics course sequences during the next two
years. The lab curricula will be adaptions of the curriculum developed by Ron
Thornton and Priscilla Laws, using microcomputers to collect data and perform
analysis and graphing as controlled by the students. The lab activities will be
developed in the area of mechanics, heat, sound, electricity and magnetism,
light and nuclear physics. The project requests support for six networked lab
stations equipped with Mac Quadra 650 microcomputers, Universal Lab Interfaces
and appropriate sensors and probes. In addition, lab equipment to be used with
the MBL tools as well as a laser printer and scanner are requested. The project
expects to more actively involve the students in lab activities and thereby
improve the learning of physics through the new technologies of the
microcomputers and with proven lab curricula. As a result more students will
support physics because of their positive experiences and may elect to continue
their studies in physics. Students will be better prepared for the technologies
of the twenty-first century and science literacy in southwest Texas will
increase.