* 9451656
* A Visualization Laboratory for Computational Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* J. Diaz, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 08/31/1997
* USD 73,000.00

9451656 Diaz Computational science attempts to blend an applied discipline with
computational mathematics, computing, and visualization. Many experiments that
have traditionally been performed in a laboratory are being augmented or
replaced by computational simulations. A computational scientist or engineer
applies computational technology in innovative and essential ways to advance the
respective discipline. Computational scientists and engineers work to obtain a
better understanding of some phenomena through a judicious match of the
scientific problem, the mathematical model that describes it, the numerical
technique employed in its solution, the computer language and the computer
architecture used in its implementation, and the assessment of each of these
steps through visualization. This project builds a visualization laboratory to
support the undergraduate computational sciences curricula. The goal is the
integration of visualization with the computational science courses taken by all
science and engineering undergraduate majors. We are establishing a classroom
demonstration and a visualization laboratory available for the students use
during scheduled laboratory hours. The instructor uses the classroom
demonstration to bring to life important aspects of the material. The
visualization laboratory is integrated into courses that use a problem driven
paradigm for the presentation of the material. This enhances the retention of
computing technology by engineers and scientist and facilitates their use and
integration into other areas of science and engineering curricula.