* 9451370
* Enhancing Earth Science Education Through an Improved       Soils Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Wayne Kiefer, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 07/31/1997
* USD 30,355.00

The project is strengthening the soils curriculum with a hands-on, field-
laboratory approach centered around the acquisition of microwave ovens and
tumblers for conducting weathering and erosion experiments, soil field
laboratories, moisture meters, laser levelers, with an atomic absorption unit.
The course most benefiting from the project is Soils and Land use. Enrollments
average between 2O and 25 per semester with approximately half of these students
enrolled in the teacher education program. Revised units of the course feature:
1) weathering and erosion experiments in the laboratory using the microwave oven
and tumbler; 2) more accurate soil nutrient inventories in various field
settings using portable soil testing laboratories that include
spectrophotometers; 3) time efficient field mapping of erosive slopes using
laser leveling techniques; and 4) exposure to the sampling and measurement of
soil metal pollution through atomic absorption spectroscopy. For each unit
students form hypotheses, test their validity, and describe the results of the
soil processes being investigated. The equipment also benefits 2O-25 pre-service
teachers per semester in the Earth Science for Teachers class. These students
need a better field and laboratory background regarding soils and the
opportunity to use such experiences in building their own lesson plans. Pre-
service teachers submit a major soils lesson plan involving an equipment or a
field demonstration to the grade level they expect to teach. The project also
benefits other courses such as Landforms, Biogeography, Independent Studies, in-
service teacher workshops, and a team taught interdisciplinary science course
for middle school students.