* 9451719
* Modern Optics and Lasers in the Advanced Undergraduate      Physics Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Paul Burrow, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 12/31/1996
* USD 24,495.00

Ducharme 9451719 Optical technology has become an increasingly important
component of the education of every scientist and engineer. This is particularly
true for physicists. Moreover, lasers are intrinsically attractive to
undergraduates, who are often highly motivated to build and apply them. We
intend to capitalize on the laser "magnet" by integrating modern optics and
lasers into advanced laboratories in need of intellectual rejuvenation, into the
undergraduate research program, and into a proposed new laboratory course which
will feature experiments taken from the forefront of optical physics and
technology. The program is structured to progressively implement sophisticated
uses of lasers and modern optical technologies, using them both as teaching
tools and as means of engaging student interest. This project integrates into
our advanced undergraduate laboratories the research directions and expertise of
three of our newer faculty members, as well as current research interests in
other science and engineering departments, and research carried out in several
centers established at UNL by the state-funded Nebraska Research Initiative.
This program will offer our undergraduates the opportunity to acquire concepts
and techniques of optical physics and technology that they will likely use in
their careers. The new laboratory course, "Physics of Lasers and Modern Optics,"
will attract and serve students from other sciences and engineering as well as
physics majors.