* 9451380
* A Project-Oriented Molecular Biology/Genetics Laboratory    Incorporating New Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Jack Girton, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 07/31/1996
* USD 36,192.00

Undergraduate education in the biological sciences at Iowa State University is
undergoing a dramatic change. Beginning in the 1993-94 academic year, a new core
curriculum in biology is being implemented, consisting of two years of
integrated instruction for all life sciences majors at Iowa State. A key
component of the second year of the biology core will be a genetics and
molecular biology laboratory course, which will provide an important opportunity
to capture the interest of undergraduates for research opportunities both during
their undergraduate careers and beyond. We have designed for this laboratory, a
series of challenging, project-oriented exercises that encompass both genetic
approaches to mutant characterization and the most advanced methods in molecular
biology. The project begins with the isolation of yeast mutants perturbed in
pyrimidine metabolism, focusing on the identification of mutants in the uracil
biosynthetic gene, URA3. Students will characterize URA3 mutants by
complementation analyses, and use molecular methods to clone a wild-type URA3
gene. A computer exercise will initially be conducted to familiarize students
with the molecular manipulations carried out in the laboratory. Students will
then proceed to amplify a wild-type copy of the URA3 gene from genomic DNA by
the polymerase chain reaction, to clone this gene in a plasmid vector that can
function both in E. coli and yeast, and to characterize putative recombinants by
agarose gel electrophoresis and Southern hybridization analysis. In the final
exercise, students will complement their URA3 mutants by transforming them with
the cloned, wild-type URA3 gene. The equipment requested provides for growing
and transforming yeast, as well as DNA amplification, purification and analysis.
Iowa State University will provide an equal match for the funding from the
foundation.