* 9451870
* Integrated, Interactive Learning Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1997
* David Cartwright, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 01/31/1997
* USD 23,723.00

9451870 Cartwright The use of modeling for the description of physical, natural
and societal systems is already well established. The increasing power of
computers has allowed the "sophistication" of these models to change such that
students can now perform calculations on models of a complexity not possible for
students of a generation ago. These changes have made it increasingly important
that students learn to assess the assumptions, validity and value of the models
they use and it is important that the content and approach to current teaching
reflects these changes. Furthermore the confidence to challenge and examine
modeling assumptions and an awareness of the relationship between the model and
the real system needs to be developed during the student's formative years at
university. A new course "Exploring Engineering (EG100)", given to all freshman
engineers in their first semester, and which is open to students in the college
of Arts and Sciences, provides a unique opportunity to do this for large number
of students. This can be further developed in the second semester in
"Engineering Mechanics I (EG220)". To do this effectively with freshman level
students requires a different approach to that used in the traditional
laboratory or classroom situation. The advent of fast accurate personal
computers supporting engineering analysis software enables this different
approach. This project will develop an Integrated, Interactive Learning
Laboratory (IILL) using a Macintosh platform running the LabView and Working
Model software. This combination will be central to the IILL and will provide
for a simple, adaptable and self-paced approach suited to a variety of learning
styles. Integration of the model system and the real system will be achieved by
having students use either LabView or Working Model to carry out "what if"
experiments on the model, to gain understanding of, and assess, modeling
assumptions, and then have them make experimental measurements for immed iate
comparison with the model. The purpose of this will be to provide students with
the opportunity to examine, simultaneously, the important connections and
differences between real systems and the models that are made of these systems.