* 9451339
* Leadership Projects in Laboratory Development: A            Bioprocessing Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Karen McDonald, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

Educational programs in bioprocess engineering that emphasize cross-disciplinary
interactions between scientists and engineers and a multidisciplinary team
approach to problem-solving, are urgently required. The implementation of these
programs is difficult, however, because few models exist on which to base the
development of such curricula. This ILI-LLD project will create a bioprocessing
laboratory which addresses two key problems in the current education of
bioprocess engineers: the lack of interaction between engineers and students in
the life sciences and the lack of hands-on laboratory experience with
industrially-relevant bioprocessing equipment. This project will develop a
multidisciplinary bioprocessing laboratory that utilizes interactive multimedia
computer training modules and involves industrial participation in the design,
implementation and valuation phases of the laboratory. Six laboratory
experiments and three multimedia modules will be developed. The
multidisciplinary environment will require students to develop the ability to
communicate with colleagues from the biological sciences and will be facilitated
by interactive multimedia which will be used to help bridge the information gap
between engineering and the biological sciences. Finally, industrial
participation will insure that the laboratory trains undergraduates to meet the
needs of the bioprocessing industry. Industrial representatives will attend end
of the quarter oral presentations by the laboratory groups, and will review the
final products of the LLD project: detailed descriptions of the experiments and
the multimedia modules.