* 9451557
* Applied Mathematics and Linear Algebra in an Electronic     Classroom Environment
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Peter Moore, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 07/31/1996
* USD 6,500.00

9451557 Lawson The Mathematics Department at Tulane University is integrating
computer use into its core applied mathematics and linear algebra courses. These
courses are fundamental to the science and engineering curriculum. The applied
math course is required for all engineering and most science students, and the
linear algebra course is required for math majors and taken by many engineering
and science students. In both courses the role of the software is to enhance
understanding of the basic concepts. Students will be able to use the software
in subsequent science and engineering courses and in the workplace. The applied
math course uses phase plane analysis to help students understand the
qualitative behavior of nonlinear systems arising from a variety of models. It
also uses Mathematica to allow symbolic and numerical analysis of differential
equations. The linear algebra course uses Mathematica and Matlab to achieve
mastery of crucial algorithms such as LU, QR, and singular value dicompositions
as well as provide numerical and symbolic exploration of motivating examples.
Both classes will make fundamental use of computing as an integral tool in each
class meeting, involving the students more actively in the course. Group
activities will play a key role in both classes. Dissemination will occur
through publications as well as presentations at conferences.