* 9451296
* Enhancement of Mechanical Engineering Manufacturing         Processes and Computer Numerically Controlled Machining     Laboratory at Southern University
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Su-Seng Pang, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 08/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9451296 Diwan The nation's industrial sectors are reiterating the fact that
product quality, reliability and cost containment must be vigorously pursued if
the United States will continue to be the world's technological leader, and also
remain competitive in the market place. This has reawakened a new emphasis on
engineering education geared towards design and production. This project
proposes to enhance the manufacturing laboratory and curriculum of Southern
University at Baton Rouge, Louisiana by adding Computer Numerically Controlled
machines. The proposed equipment would enable the faculty: to provide
undergraduate students with quality training opportunities and skills that
reflect the technological advances in the manufacturing industry; to develop new
laboratory courses in computer aided design and computer aided manufacturing -
CAD/CAM; to take a step further in developing a strong manufacturing option for
undergraduate Engineering and Technology students as well as graduate students
in computer science; to strengthen the curriculum, offer students hands-on
practical experience, and a familiarity with equipment they will use in the
industry; and to enhance the capacity of Southern University to contribute
immensely towards the engineering and science educational goals for minorities
in Louisiana, and the United States.