* 9451887
* Improving Geographic Information System Lab Capabilities at an Interdisciplinary University
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* William Niedzwiedz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 08/31/1996
* USD 35,592.00

9451887 Niedzwiedz The Geography and Public & Environmental Affairs programs at
the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay are seeking funds to incorporate state-of-
the-art methods of Geographic Information Systems into our undergraduate GIS Lab
curriculum. Given student demand for GIS courses and the evolution of GIS
technology, our GIS Lab is seriously deficient in equipment and software. The
improvements proposed incorporate results of the NSF supported National Center
of Geographic Information and Analysis (NCGIA) study of core curriculum
requirements for GIS. The improvements will provide our students with strong
hands-on training in raster and UNIX vector GIS systems, GIS concepts,
geocoding, data structures and editing, the building of topology, analytical
modeling, GIS applications and cartographic presentation. The requested
equipment will allow major improvements in the Geographic/Land Information
Systems course and allow immediate development of three new GIS courses:
Advanced Methods in GIS, Environmental Applications of GIS (an innovative team-
oriented course), and GIS Applications in Business (tentative title). Four
additional courses also will experience significant improvement. With the new
equipment, image processing and several levels of networking are made possible.
Additionally, the proposed improvements will allow implementation of a local GIS
Adopt-A- School Program. This innovative program is designed to enrich education
within environmental science, earth science, and geography curricula. The
improvements will ensure that students receive up-to-date training in the
technology and methods that are becoming important tools for the stewards of our
natural, social and economic systems.