* 9451689
* Collaborative Learning Through Interactive Animation for    Mathematics and Computer Science
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Frank Avenoso, Nassau Community College
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 08/31/1996
* USD 38,046.00

9451689 Sher The faculty in the Department of Mathematics at SUNY Nassau County
Community College have experience with using graphing calculators and the
Harvard Consortium Calculus materials in Calculus I and II. The acquisition of
22 486 DX-2 mhz PC's with 17" color monitors equips two classroom/laboratories
for the teaching of calculus using the HCC materials for Calculus I-III with
technology fully integrated. Computer usage occupies approximately one-third of
clasq time where groups of three students work as a team at each computer
station. The lab is available for student use outside of class time as well.
Software, which includes lotus and Derive, is used for inquiry and understanding
of concepts. Pedagogical techniques adapt the Treisman model applied to the
community college environment by Wilkinson and Sher. Each group of three
students work as a team on their group computer station in solving problems
posed by the instructor. Assignments are designed for group interaction with
interactive animated demonstrations of concepts in mathematics. The goal is
improved performance for the students taking core mathematics curriculums. An
assessment will compare affected students with a control group to test this
hypothesis and to test the change in attitude realized.