* 9451110
* Undergraduate Research Experience in Aqueous Geochemistry,  A Geochemistry Class Project and a Teacher Preparation      Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Annabelle Foos, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 09/30/1997
* USD 45,371.00

9451110 Foos This proposal request funding for an inductively coupled plasma
spectrometer (ICP) and field equipment necessary for collection of aqueous
geochemical data for a geochemistry class research project. The objective of the
project is to increase undergraduate exposure to sophisticated analytical
equipment and provide them with a research experience within the context of a
traditional geochemistry laboratory course. The class research project will be
integrated into a series of existing computer based laboratory exercises. The
class will develop a sampling plan, attend a field trip where they will collect
samples plus make on site measurements and they will analyze the samples for
major, minor and trace elements in the laboratory. Students will incorporate
these data into exercises on data quality, graphical presentation of data, ionic
strength, ionic activity, carbonate equilibrium, Eh-pH diagrams and WATEQ4F. The
final results of the project will be presented by the students as a poster at a
regional scientific meeting. The first year of the program the students will
determine the water quality at Silver Creek Metro Park (Summit Co Ohio). The
objective of the study will be to determine if acid mine seeps of a reclaimed
strip mine, within the park, adversely effect the quality of surface water.