* 9451698
* The SEM as an Introductory Tool for Research Methods
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/1994,02/28/1997
* Gary Grimes, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 02/28/1997
* USD 70,275.00

9451698 Grimes A major challenge of Colleges and Universities is to teach the
"process of science" to undergraduates. The best way to learn science is to do
it. For this, one needs curiosity, questions, hypotheses and some tools. To
provide these components to our undergraduates, we propose a course "Methods in
Modern Biology," that will be team taught by cell, molecular, developmental, and
evolutionary biologists. This course will teach students how to ask rational
scientific questions, search for solutions, and find the answers to those
questions using a wide variety of techniques. An SEM is essential in our plan
because it will provide: 1. a link between molecular and evolutionary processes
with complex morphologies; 2. an effective demonstration of the complementarity
of techniques; and 3. a graphic, easily achieved, and often beautiful product
that provides a sense of accomplishment, satisfaction, and excitement for
students. To encourage information exchange among undergraduates, we will
establish an electronic mail network and newsgroup (SEMLAB). Using SEMLAB,
students at Hofstra can exchange reciprocally ideas, problems, solutions,
techniques, etc. with students and faculty at other internet nodes. SEMLAB
should stimulate the interests of our students, because they actually will
become members of the "scientific community."