* 9451274
* Laboratory Development for a Workshop Course in             Introductory Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Jack Wilson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 07/31/1996
* USD 30,367.00

9451274 Roberge We will develop a laboratory suitable for teaching introductory
physics in a "workshop" format, where the lecture, recitation, and laboratory
components of a traditional physics course will be integrated into one learning
environment. The purpose of the project is to assess the viability of the
workshop format in a university setting, by conducting a pilot program for 30
students. If successful, the program will be scaled up to serve approximately
900 science and engineering students per year. We will outfit a laboratory with
computers to run the Comprehensive Unified Physics Learning Environment (CUPLE),
a multitasking, multimedia learning tool which was developed by Rensselaer and
other universities. CUPLE will provide (1) on-screen videos to help students set
up lab experiments; (2) data acquisition via video technologies and other
traditional transducers; (3) a variety of tools for data analysis,
visualization, and modeling; and (4) access via hyperlinks to databases of text,
graphical, and video information. The multimedia software and data acquisition
capabilities of the hardware will enable the students to work jointly on group
learning assignments, problem solving sessions, laboratory experiments, and the
preparation of oral and written presentations. The equipment is a vital
component of the interactive, cooperative learning strategy on which the
workshop format is based.