* 9451071
* Enhancing the UCSB Physics Learning Center for Teaching     Non-science Students
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Rollin Morrison, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 08/31/1997
* USD 53,972.00

9451071 Sherwin The Physics Learning Center (PLC) at the University of
California, Santa Barbara is a facility in the physics building that functions
as an interactive science museum. We propose to equip the PLC as a site for
holding microcomputer-based laboratory sessions, or "discovery sessions," for
the introductory physics course for non-science majors. This course, which has
heretofore had no laboratory component, will be restructured to emphasize the
applications and utility of physics. The "discovery sessions" are intended both
to increase the general scientific literacy of non-science majors and to give
them an understanding of the scientific process. Students in the "discovery
sessions" will collect and analyze time-series data using the Universal Lab
Interface (ULI), and video data using camcorders and the VideoLab software for
digitized video. New, fast microcomputers will be acquired for this purpose.
Multiple setups of several selected apparati will be obtained for use in the
"discovery sessions," as will single copies of certain apparati, such as a fast
oscilloscope, which are suitable for a variety of different uses. The apparatus
and microcomputers added to the PLC under this proposal will also be used by
students in other lower- and upper-division physics courses for individual
exploration and for carrying out computer-based homework assignments. In
addition, the microcomputers will be used by astronomy students for exercises in
astronomical image processing. All apparatus will be available to local K-12
educators through outreach programs. The UCSB College of Letters and Science has
made a commitment to provide funds to match the NSF contribution to this
proposal. The Department of Physics has pledged release time from teaching for
Dr. Sherwin for the 1994 Fall quarter, and will provide a teaching assistant to
help in the development of materials.