* 9451146
* Opening Up the Physical World to Exploration: Probing       Circuits and Transistors Inside an Integrated Circuit
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* James Sturm, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 07/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

Students today seem less skilled and have less interest in interacting with the
physical world than those of earlier generations. It is the thesis of the author
that this is not due to the cultural and societal factors, (e.g. too much T.V.)
but rather due to the advanced state of integration and complexity in advanced
technological products, both in the everyday world as well as in laboratories.
This discourages tinkering and experimentation which are crucial in attracting
young people to engineering. It is proposed to address this issue by modifying a
digital circuit laboratory in electrical engineering so that students can look
inside of and tinker with integrated circuits. Conventionally, students make
digital logic gates in lab by wiring up invisible transistors which are inside
black-box I.C.'s. In the proposed labs, the students will have access to the
inside of a real I.C. through the use of needle probes to physically contact and
connect to individual transistors and circuits on a specially designed I.C. They
will be able to directly relate transistor and circuit performance to the
physical parameters of the transistors and circuits, which they can see by
visual inspection and change by physically contacting different circuits. This
is analogous to examining auto engines by attacking them with wrenches and
playing inside of them, rather than trying to learn about them with the hood of
the car closed and the engine inaccessible.