* 9451804
* Improving the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum with an    Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Mohammad Alauddin, Wagner College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 08/31/1996
* USD 16,221.00

9451804 Alauddin The project will purchase a state-of-the-art atomic absorption
spectrophotometer. The introduction of new laboratory experiments will
facilitate student understanding of this technology and its broad application in
all fields of materials analysis. The undergraduate analytical chemistry
curriculum will be enhanced by incorporating the spectrophotometer into the
laboratory courses of Inorganic and Theoretical Chemistry, Quantitative Analysis
and Instrumental Analysis for majors and Physical Science for non-majors. In
addition, this acquisition will significantly enhance the undergraduate research
capability. The spectrophotometer will provide hands-on training for students.
It will also afford a number of capabilities which are not available to them at
present, such as, calibration, background correction, data storage, editing,
reporting and software control. Students will use the equipment for trace
element analysis of soil, water, rocks and hair samples. Having performed these
analyses the students will be made aware of practical application of the
technique in chemical industries and research laboratories in solving problems
of environmental, biological and geological significance. The project will
provide a wide variety of student experiences which will emphasize operation and
application of the instrument.