* 9451210
* Discovery-Oriented Multidisciplinary Engineering Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Jacob Abel, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 09/30/1997
* USD 87,125.00

9451210 Shieh A discovery-oriented multidisciplinary engineering laboratory
course entitled: Discovery-Oriented Multidisciplinary Engineering Laboratory is
being developed in this project. The course serves two main purposes. First, it
will be offered at the freshman level as a means to retain the students
currently in the engineering program and encourage the transfer of non-
engineering students who are seeking scientific and technical literacy into the
engineering program. Second, it will be offered to minority high school students
and primary, middle and high school science teachers as a major vehicle to
increase the presence of minority in engineering professions and recruit top
high school students to engineering schools. Unlike traditional laboratory
courses offered at the freshman level, this course is not designed to have
students performing experiments for the sole purpose of proving theories which
may be irrelevant to their engineering studies. Instead, the course encourages
students to gain hand-on experience by having them assemble laboratory apparatus
and design the experiments, utilize the experimental data to "discover" the
underlying principles/ theories, and eventually establish realistic links
between practice and theory. The proposed experimental focus areas are of a
multidisciplinary nature, having practical relevancy, and crossing traditional
departmental boundaries. The equipment/instrumentation is adequate for
accommodating up to 20 students in the class. Results and experience obtained
from the development and implementation of this course will be disseminated
through the NSF- sponsored Gateway Coalition, conference/seminar/workshop
presentations, and journal/newsletter publications.