* 9451023
* Computer Assisted Calculus: Using Technology to Promote     Active Learning in the Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Ann Steen, Santa Fe College
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 06/30/1996
* USD 54,073.00

t9451023 Steen Santa Fe Community College is establishing two computer
laboratories for mathematics instruction and providing computer equipment for
several mathematics classroom. They are revising the mathematics curriculum,
beginning with the calculus, to emphasize conceptual understanding and problem
solving. Initially, the project is impacting 1,100 students per year with the
potential of serving more than 3,000 Calculus, Differential Equations,
Statistics, and Precalculus students per year. A laboratory component is an
essential part of the plan. This mathematics initiative is designed to motivate
students for success and stimulate an interest in calculus by emphasizing
collaborative team learning, discovery-based learning, and practical application
models. The laboratory component is providing visual reinforcement of
mathematical concepts and encouraging student exploration and experimentation
through open-ended exercises. Instruction emphasizes solution strategies,
modeling skills, and mathematical reasoning. They are also promoting the
development of students' verbal and written communications skills through
laboratory reports. These student writings foster the ability to explain the
practical significance of application problems and their solutions. An ongoing
formative evaluation is an integral part of the development process and is
guiding them throughout the implementation of the grant. They are collecting and
analyzing data on the effectiveness of the laboratory team approach.
Participating faculty are developing computer-interactive laboratory
assignments.