* 9451777
* Instrumentation Laboratories for Testing of Steel and       Concrete Structures
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Edward Hohmann, California State Polytechnic University-Pomona
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 05/31/1996
* USD 55,429.00

9451777 Cluley Nondestructive testing (NDT) of aging steel and concrete
structures for detecting deterioration and damage to constructed facilities has
been introduced in a concrete testing laboratory. Students use information from
NDT to determine the effects of aging on the resistive capacity of concrete
structures by comparing analyses of concrete frames using the material
properties as found by NDT with solutions which assume conventional design
values for these same properties. Concrete specimens are also tested under loads
through the service range to observe cracking and deflection, and up to the
ultimate load capacity to observe ductile capacity and failure mode. The results
of NDTs on these specimens help explain any discrepancies with resistive
capacities calculated using ACI strength formulas. Testing is also conducted on
steel specimens to determine stresses, column buckling loads, and lateral
buckling of beams. The results are compared with AISC Code predictions and
discrepancies are explained in light of test observations. The service load and
ultimate load tests are conducted using an enhanced test setup which allows
testing of full-scale specimens with the aid of automatic data acquisition
equipment. The experiments in NDT also indicate how to determine where more
rigorous maintenance procedures should be used, and provide information
concerning the appropriateness of the various structural design codes. The
laboratory features group learning by students and emphasizes oral and written
communications.