* 9451000
* Integration of FT NMR into the Undergraduate Curriculum:    Laboratory Courses and Research Projects
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Georgia Arvanitis, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 06/30/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9451000 Arvanitis The project is intended to provide Trenton State College's
undergraduate chemistry majors (and also biology majors) with experience in
using a 300 MHz FT NMR spectrometer. An integrated instructional approach is
planned which begins with the introduction of simple NMR techniques in the
sophomore level organic chemistry laboratory. The instrument will also receive
extensive use in advanced elective courses which require physical chemistry as a
prerequisite. The desire for faculty to include an experimental NMR component in
organic chemistry courses is readily understood and there is a growing trend to
do so. The role that an NMR can play in undergraduate education in the areas of
inorganic chemistry and biochemistry has not been explored to the same extent.
Several new experiments have been designed for these particular courses that are
unique and would be of interest to other colleges and universities. The
instrument will also receive a great deal of use in our undergraduate research
program. The excitement generated by a new sophisticated spectrometer will
inspire more students to become involved in research projects and to pursue
graduate studies in chemistry. The NMR training that the program will provide
will dramatically improve the preparation of graduates for immediate employment
in chemical industries.