* 9451421
* Development of Environmental Geosciences Computer Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Richard Fifarek, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 09/30/1996
* USD 26,686.00

During the past decade the majority of employment opportunities for geology
graduates has shifted from the extractive component of petroleum and mining
industries to companies and government agencies specializing in environmental
concerns. This represents a fundamental, long term trend that will continue
through the remainder of this century. Geologists employed in environmental
fields need a broad background in the geological sciences with emphases in
hydrogeology, surficial geology, natural resources, geochemistry, and
geophysics, and they should be familiar with computer applications that focus on
environmental analysis. In keeping with our broad curriculum that allows us to
focus on training undergraduates in the environmental aspects of geology, we are
developing a computer laboratory consisting of advanced but user friendly
personal computers and software for the purpose of enhancing courses in
hydrogeology, surficial geology, geology of natural resources, and geophysics.
The facility is allowing us to develop innovative laboratory exercises that use
image processing, geographic information systems, computer-aided drafting,
modeling techniques, and a variety of digital data sets, including satellite
images and a unique CUSMAP data set for the region where SIUC is located.
Exercises are being designed to enhance scientific understanding of geologic
processes and relationships between different elements of the earth system, as
well as to emphasize realistic problem-solving applications such as landfill
siting, ground water contamination, assessment of geological hazards, and
assessment of problems associated with resource exploitation. Because of the
visual and interactive nature of these exercises, they enhance the communication
of basic and advanced concepts, stimulate critical thinking, and generate
enthusiasm for independent study. These attributes and the computer skills
acquired are making our undergraduates more competent and competitive in the
growin g environmental work force as well as better prepared for graduate study.