* 9451447
* An Integrated, Comprehensive Design Project for             Rehabilitation Engineering Technology Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Darlene Miller, Vermont Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 08/31/1996
* USD 30,747.00

9451447 Miller This project proposes developing an integrated, comprehensive
design program for the laboratory curriculum in the Rehabilitation Engineering
Technology (RET) program at Vermont Technical College (VTC). This new program
prepares skilled technicians to provide rehabilitation engineering services to
persons with disabilities -- from the design and manufacturing of assistive
devices to working with people with disabilities in adapting their devices to
the home and workplace. The objective of this design project will be to require
students to utilize and/or modify available technology to design an environment
which will improve the vocational opportunities and augment the daily living
capabilities of a person with a disability. Thus, the goal of this proposal is
to purchase a wide array of assistive devices in environmental control and
computer access for students to use in an integrated, comprehensive, design
experience. Working with vocational rehabilitation and users of assistive
technology, the project director will develop a design problem for the students
to solve. Student design projects will be evaluated and critiqued by persons
with disabilities and rehabilitation professionals. The importance of such a
project to the users of assistive technology is that by making assistive
technology accessible and by integrating it into the user's environment, it
expands the vocational potential of the user while improving the quality of
life. The importance of such a project to the student is it expands their
knowledge about all types of assistive devices, increases their problem solving
skills, provides them with a comprehensive design experience, and provides them
with the ability and knowledge to train users of assistive technology in the use
of such equipment.