* 9451995
* Intelligent Machines Laboratory for Undergraduates
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Keith Doty, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1997
* USD 70,042.00

9451995 Doty An undergraduate Intelligent Machines Laboratory (IML) course
includes one hour lecture, two hours of tutorial and three hours of laboratory
per week. The lectures include topics on machine intelligence related to the
laboratory work. The tutorial sessions provide guided instruction in computer-
aided engineering software, electronic circuit design, fabrication and assembly,
trouble- shooting techniques and documentation development. The IML project
addresses the need for practical electrical engineering training at a broader
level than normally possible in a single undergraduate course. Students are
required to define, analyze, synthesize and construct solutions to a variety of
interacting requirements and integrate them into a functioning system--a simple,
microcomputer controlled, autonomous robot with electronic sensors; a robot that
can exhibit "interesting", intentional behavior. Effectively, the IML serves as
a capstone laboratory that provides undergraduates realistic engineering
experience in design, simulation, fabrication, assembly, integration, testing,
and operations of a relatively complex system that requires the integration of
various subdisciplines in electrical engineering. The Intelligent Machines
Laboratory (IML) enables Seniors or second semester Juniors to integrate most of
their undergraduate EE knowledge base into a practical computer engineering
experience. Miniature, autonomous mobile robots have been chosen as the vehicle
for conveying that experience. It is expected the student response to the broad
spectrum demands placed on them in the IML will partially back-drive the entire
EE curriculum in a meaningful and substantive manner.