* 9451070
* A Computer Laboratory to Support General Education          Oceanography and Earth Science Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* William Prothero, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 08/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

9451070 Prothero A new Macintosh computer laboratory is being set up
specifically for our lower division introductory geological science courses. The
two courses this laboratory is serving are Introduction to oceanography (GS-4),
serving 3OO/qtr, and General Geology (GS-2), also serving 3OO/qtr. They satisfy
a "quantitative science" requirement for the degree. Either of these may be the
only science course many students are exposed to in their college career. They
are also where many of our majors are inspired to begin the study of the earth
sciences, which means they are of vital importance both in creating an informed
electorate and in maintaining a steady stream of future scientists. The
development of computer assisted material for both GS-4 and GS-2 is being
actively pursued by W. Prothero (and other Geology faculty) with both NSF and
internal UCSB funding. Our goal is to provide each student with an exciting and
dynamic learning experience through the use of "hands-on" learning tools. We are
creating data rich learning modules that encourage the student to explore and
learn or re-discover fundamental principles or ideas. In these courses, lower
division non-majors have access to analysis tools and data that have previously
been available only to graduate students. We expect these courses to become
models of effective teaching in large class settings.