* 9451165
* Acquisition of Hydrogeologic and Environmental Laboratory   Equipment for Incorporation into the Undergraduate Geology  Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Henry Bart, La Salle University
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 08/31/1996
* USD 24,257.00

9451165 Bart The field of geological education has changed dramatically in the
past 2O years. Part of this progress is reflected in the incorporation of
environmental and hydrogeologic courses in the curriculum. Undergraduates
engaged in geologic study throughout our nation are moving into these endeavors
because of the strong employment possibilities created by a growing industry.
Until recently, environmental and hydrologic study were not part of the
curriculum at La Salle University. The Department of Geology is hoping to
correct this deficiency in our program by purchasing the necessary equipment to
add hands-on environmental and hydrogeologic experiences to our curriculum. This
equipment will be used by freshmen, sophomore, junior, and senior majors, in
earth science teacher preparation, and freshmen introductory classes, and will
serve as an important part of our curriculum in: Introductory Geology,
Environmental Geology, Hydrogeology, Sedimentology, Environmental Geology, and
Student Research. With this laboratory equipment our students will be
complementing their intensive use of standard geologic investigation equipment
and will be capable of investigating the earth in ways never before possible in
our program. Subsurface interface radar will be used for conducting studies such
as bedrock depths, soil profiles, water table information, fracture and fault
mapping. Water studies will include water analysis for characterization of
surface and subsurface quality. The gas vapor soil probe and organic vapor meter
will be used for investigations of possible hydrocarbon contamination of soils.
The radon detector will give students the chance to evaluate radon levels of
soils throughout our region. If supported, this project will create a new and
exciting dimension in geologic investigation at La Salle; and the students we
serve will be better prepared for the challenges of graduate studies, teaching,
employment in environmental sciences, and research.