* 9451939
* Development of a Lower-Division CAD/CAM Laboratory to       Replace Traditional CADD Laboratory for Engineering Design  Graphics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Ronald Barr, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 05/31/1997
* USD 99,931.00

9451939 Juricic This project will develop a national model for the lower-
division CAD/CAM (Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing) laboratories that
will replace present CADD (Computer-Aided Drafting) laboratories for teaching
Engineering Design Graphics (EDG) courses. The laboratory should provide a model
means of attracting and retaining engineering students. The lab software and
hardware, appropriate for lower-division students, will be identified and
integrated, exercises will be developed and documented, and instructor's notes
and tutorials for lab development will be written. In addition to the two PIs
that will lead this project, six leading EDG educators will form an Advisory
Committee, and as many as 25 other EDG educators will participate as consultants
in evaluation and classroom testing of instructional material developed. The EDG
educators represent a variety of institutions-- 2-year, 4-year, and doctoral;
additionally many of the participating institutions have large minority
populations. A group of practicing engineers from six industrial organizations
will provide much needed input from industry. The CAD/CAM based Engineering
Design Graphics laboratories proposed herewith will impact on a large number of
students, perhaps up to 280,000 degreed engineers and nearly an equal number of
two-year college graduates during the expected 5- year lifetime of the new
laboratory.