* 9451560
* Increasing Geohydrology/Geochemistry Input into Science     Curricula Through Integrated Field/Laboratory Studies
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* William Neal, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 08/31/1996
* USD 11,796.00

9451560 Videtich A long-term project is investigating hydrologic and chemical
changes that occur in ground water, wetlands, and ponds as a new golf course on
the campus evolves from a newly-seeded to a well-established course. This
project involves students taking geohydrology, geochemistry, field methods,
sedimentation-stratigraphy, geomorphology, and glacial geology courses. Students
in each class perform an appropriate part of the project. Microbial degradation
of selected pesticides is studied by students in microbiology, who benefit
directly from the project. The data set is used in other science courses as a
local example of an environmental assessment project in progress. Geology,
biology, chemistry, health sciences and natural resources management students
are encouraged to take part in the project through independent research
projects. The primary goal of the project is to enhance earth science programs
through providing a "hands on" and applied science experience. At the same time,
the project creates an interdisciplinary bridge between the sciences. In
addition, the project (1) involves students in an environmental study located on
their campus, (2) enables them to help assure that the university golf course
will not adversely affect the environment, and (3) provides valuable data to the
scientific community and the public on the evolution of the geohydrology and
geochemistry of ground and surface water associated with the aging of a golf
course. The equipment purchased (e.g., hole digger, water sampling systems,
piezometer, water analysis kits, and field computer) also enhances the overall
equipment holdings of the geology department and thereby benefits geology
students involved in other projects.