* 9451257
* High Resolution Environment Satellite Image Receiving       Station
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1997
* John Gibson, Alma College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 12/31/1997
* USD 30,350.00

9451257 Gibson We request funding to purchase and establish an earth station for
receiving high resolution images from the environmental satellites. The station
would be used in several areas of the sciences (initially physics and ecology)
and at several levels, from introductory classes to undergraduate research. It
would also be used in an outreach research program for secondary teachers and
students. Science Classes. Initially we would use the station in PHY 220 Modern
Physics and BIO 402 Ecology, where the physics students would collect images
from the satellites and use them to prepare information products for the ecology
students. The ecology students would then do two projects: a meteorology
project, where they would obtain Lake Michigan surface water temperatures from
the satellite infra red images and ground-truth them against buoy data, and a
vegetation project, where they would use NDVI (Normalized Difference Vegetation
Index) techniques to follow changing vegetation patterns in the state of
Michigan during the fall by assessing chlorophyll changes. Undergraduate
Research. We would develop undergraduate research projects in both biology and
physics, taking advantage of the very large range of possibilities inherent in
the multi-spectral HRPT and VISSR images. Outreach. We would use the satellite
receiving station in an outreach program to involve secondary school teachers
and students in accessible research activities with the high resolution images.
We have a record of success with this type of research involvement with the high
school teachers and their students.