* 9452078
* Introducing Digital Maps and Image Analysis to              Undergraduates in the Field and in the Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Timothy Lincoln, Albion College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 08/31/1997
* USD 53,185.00

Albion College is using a Geographic Information Systems (GIS)/Computer Aided
Mapping (CAM) laboratory, located in the Department of Geological Sciences, to
incorporate digital mapping and image analysis into the College's curriculum.
Albion has a strong program in geology, including a nationally recognized summer
geology field program. The GIS/CAM laboratory includes the equipment necessary
for the creation, manipulation, analysis, and display of digital images using
modern GIS and CAM techniques. This laboratory allows the College to make
substantial, forward-looking improvements in both our geology field program and
the on-campus geology and environmental science curriculum. The summer geology
field program is adding an introduction to digital field mapping; at the end of
the program students return to the Albion campus for a week-long intensive
course on the creation and use of digital maps. Secondly, two new courses on GIS
and digital maps are being developed. An introductory level course introduces
the fundamentals of GIS and CAM to a broad spectrum of students including non-
science majors. The second course allows upper-level students to apply their
GIS/CAM skills to their own geological and environmental research projects.
Finally, the new laboratory allows the revision of traditional geology
laboratory mapping exercises and projects, including an introduction to
quantitative spatial analysis, in as many as nine existing geology courses. This
includes the high-enrollment Introductory Geology course, in which students can
apply GIS/CAM techniques to existing mapping projects. This project is an
integral part of a broader effort to develop a more engaging research-oriented
curriculum using up-to-date equipment and techniques.