* 9452409
* Growth and Characterization of Optical Materials
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* William Oliver, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 07/31/1997
* USD 39,698.00

9452409 Oliver Exciting and important advances in optical and electronic
materials should play a much more significant role in the undergraduate science
and engineering curricula. With this need in mind the curriculum at the
University of Arkansas has been designed to provide a series of four courses in
modern optics for science and engineering students: Optics, Laser Physics,
Applied Nonlinear Optics, and Optical Properties of Materials. Students in
Optics and Laser Physics learn the fundamentals of both physical and wave optics
and they develop specific skills in the design, construction, and analysis of
state-of-the-art laser systems. These skills are further developed in Applied
Non-Linear Optics where students investigate concepts and techniques finding
widespread applications in science and technology. All three of these courses at
Arkansas combine both classroom and strong "hands-on" laboratory experiences to
enhance student interest and maximize the learning experience. The Optical
Properties of Materials course develops a foundation in the structural,
electronic, and optical properties of materials, all of which are integrally
related and vitally important for the continued development of novel optical and
electronic materials and devices. Unfortunately, a complementary "hands-on"
laboratory experience for Optical Properties of materials is not presently
available for the students. This project proposes to reinforce the enthusiasm
shown by science and engineering students in this course with an opportunity to
develop their talents and interests into specific skills. The proposed Growth
and Characterization of Optical Materials laboratory explores several key
aspects of materials research to develop skills in (i) Crystal Growth, (ii)
Physical Characterization; (iii) Electrical Characterization; and (iv) Optical
Characterization of Materials. In each area, the equipment requested will give
the students experience with actual techniques used throughout the optics and
materials research community.