* 9452342
* The Improvement of Biology Laboratory Education Through the Use of Microcomputers
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Patricia Grove, College of Mount Saint Vincent
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/1998
* USD 29,884.00

The College of Mount St. Vincent is seeking to enrich teaching and learning in
the biology laboratory through the addition of Macintosh microcomputers. In many
courses in biology, the mastery of content has taken precedence over enhanced
competence in critical thinking and integration. Laboratories are highly
structured, with little opportunity for independent investigation and analytical
thinking by the students. Compounding these problems, students display a decline
in the level of preparedness for learning biology, and possess a variety of
learning modes that render traditional instructional methods less effective. In
an attempt to overcome these shortcomings, we seek to introduce contemporary
computers and multimedia software into biology laboratory education. The initial
focus will be on the Physiology laboratory, with use of the laboratory stations
by students in several other laboratory courses as well. Several laboratory
exercises in Physiology will be interfaced with the Macintosh microcomputer for
sophisticated data collection and analysis, with additional simulations to allow
students to extend and reinforce the knowledge obtained through their hands-on
work. Computer-based learning materials will be used to help students develop
problem-solving skills as well as content mastery. Multimedia software programs
will be used to help the student to organize information, and to form cognitive
links between various content areas explored in lecture and laboratory.