* 9452553
* Integration of X-ray Micronanalysis and Image Processing    between a New Associate Degree Program in Electron          Microscopy and Other Disciplines
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1997
* Glenn Boda, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 01/31/1997
* USD 49,615.00

9452553 Boda The major thrust of this work is to integrate a unique, newly
implemented two-year Associate Degree Program in Electron Microscopy and its
laboratory facility with other instructional areas within our college. Target
areas for integration include: (1) a two-year program in Biotechnology, (2) a
two-year program in Welding in particular Metallurgy courses, (3) Chemistry
courses, (4) the Biological Sciences, (5) Geology, (6) two-year programs in the
Health Professions, and (7) Image Processing. The mechanism of integration will
involve: (1) the initiation and expanded use of elective research credits
creating joint projects between electron microscopy students and students from
other areas, (2) faculty and students from other disciplines using our
microscopy laboratory facility, and (3) the microscopy facility being used for
demonstrations and instructional presentation by faculty from other
instructional areas. In addition, we hope to implement a course for electron
microscopy students involving projects supervised by industry and/or other
educational institutions. This goal, if realized, will allow non-microscopy
students the rare opportunity to discover and understand how electron microscopy
impacts their areas of major study. The exchange will afford microscopy students
a valuable opportunity to experience the broad range of microscope utilization
by the many disciplines and academic areas routinely using electron microscopy.
The electron microscopy laboratory facility is adequate to meet this increased
student and faculty use except for x-ray microanalysis and image processing
capability. Currently only one scanning electron microscope is equipped with
both capabilities. Our plan is to obtain an x-ray analyzer capable of image
processing and interfacing it with two x-ray detectors (one is already on hand)
installed to two scanning electrons microscopes (also on hand). Thus, two
microscopes can have this capability for little more cost than a sin gle
microscope installation. ***