* 9452143
* Development of Flexible Education Modules Using Hypermedia  and Their Applications in Engineering Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Sudhir Mehta, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 05/31/1997
* USD 99,967.00

9452143 Mehta This project focuses on two core areas common to all engineering
laboratories, instrumentation and communication. Resource modules containing
generic information on the above two areas will be developed using hypermedia
and other computer technologies. These modules will be further used in the
development of two laboratory modules to provide one-on-one instruction, the
latest technological advances, and industrial applications related to the
experiment. A pilot study was conducted in the summer and fall 1993 to test the
above concept. The results of the study showed that student comprehension of the
experimental set-up and its operation had increased and the written reports were
of consistently high quality. The pilot study also generated requests from other
department for using the report writing module in their laboratories. The full
scale project will directly affect three required courses in the mechanical
engineering department and benefit 23O undergraduate students every year. The
resource modules on instrumentation and communication, which will be put on a
CD-ROM, can be used as a handbook without any further development effort or they
can be used in developing individualized laboratory modules with minimal effort.
Faculty from four universities will be using and evaluating these resource
modules. The proposed project will provide undergraduate students with more
relevant and current information, improve their understanding, increase their
interest and curiosity, and improve their communication skills without
increasing the length of the curriculum.