* 9452281
* Mobile Instructional Laboratory to Serve Multiple Sites in  the 2+2 Engineering Technology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Alok Verma, Old Dominion University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 07/31/1998
* USD 56,058.00

9452281 Verma This proposal addresses a new cost effective approach to
laboratory instruction to supplement the new and growing field of distance
learning. The Engineering Technology Department at Old Dominion University
offers televised upper-division programs at three locations throughout the state
of Virginia with other sites planned for the future. In addition to these three
main sites, there are two satellite sites which receive only televised courses.
The upper division curriculum in Mechanical and Electrical Engineering
Technology programs are offered through a combination of televised and live
courses taught on the campus of the community colleges participating in the
program. Inadequate laboratory facilities to teach upper-division courses in
Mechanical Engineering Technology Program, at the remote sites, has been the
biggest draw back of the program since its inception. Two subject areas where
laboratory equipment is critical in maintaining the quality of the program are
Fluid Mechanics and Automatic Controls. It is proposed to develop a Mobile
Instructional Laboratory built inside a 4O feet long trailer to house equipment
for Fluid Mechanics and Automatic Controls. The laboratory facility will move to
one of the sites and stay there for four weeks. It will be equipped with four
modular workstations which can be changed quickly to accommodate a variety of
equipment. Utilization of this facility for two subject areas and between three
sites offers a cost effective solution without comprising the quality of the
program.