* 9452284
* Improving the Laboratory Experience in Engineering          Technology with Modern Computer-Based Instrumentation
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1994,11/30/1996
* Ray Adams, Lake Superior State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 11/30/1996
* USD 55,000.00

9452284 McDonald This project will provide students with important laboratory
instruction in computer-based instrumentation that students appreciate and
industry desires. This new instruction will augment traditional instrumentation
instruction with challenging and interesting laboratory experiences that use
computer-based data acquisition and instrument control. These engaging
laboratory experiences will enhance the students' motivation and enthusiasm
while providing them with essential employment skills. These instrumentation
experiences will occur throughout the curriculum to build the students'
confidence and proficiency with this technology. Students will learn the basics
of data acquisition in technical fundamentals courses. This knowledge will then
be reinforced by using data acquisition in electrical machinery and materials
testing laboratories. Finally, students will use automated testing in senior-
level industrial electronics, machine design, and thermodynamics courses, and
also in senior design projects and independent study experiences. Both associate
and baccalaureate level students in Automated Manufacturing, Electrical, and
Mechanical Engineering Technology will benefit from this project. Modern
industry needs these types of technical graduates who can install, operate, and
apply computer-controlled data acquisition and instrumentation systems.