* 9452059
* Soil Strees-Strain Characteristics Using an Automated True  Triaxial Testing Device
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Dayakar Penumadu, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1996
* USD 25,722.00

9452059 Penumadu An automated electro-pneumatic controlled true triaxial testing
device with flexible boundaries enables students to investigate the importance
of stress path and drainage conditions on the strength of soils. Two types of
laboratory experiments that use this device have been developed. The first
familiarizes students with concepts related to static transducer calibration,
analog to digital conversion, signal conditioning, software and hardware gain
and problems of aliasing. The second type deals with the isotropic and
anisotropic consolidation and testing of soil samples using a predefined stress
path. Stress and strain controlled static shear tests can be performed and
essentially any stress path can be simulated through the data acquisition and
control software. This laboratory capability shows the relevance of the various
laboratory strength tests with actual field conditions using the same testing
device, and illustrates the concepts related to electronic data acquisition and
control. An important benefit is that the same device can be used to illustrate
the drained and undrained stress-strain characteristics of both isotropic and Ko
consolidated soil samples. The samples can be sheared under a predefined stress
path and the observed pore pressure behavior (for undrained testing) can be
compared. Soil testing programs are developed to examine the issues related to
type of consolidation, stress path and the rate of loading.