* 9452958
* Responding to the Call for Change:  Characterizing the      Mathematics Preparation of Elementary School Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Frank Lester, Consortium For Mathematics & Its Applications Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 12/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

Soloman A. Garfunkel DUE-9452958 COMAP FY1995 $100,000 Arlington, MA 02174
Special Project/TP Title: Responding to the Call for Change: Characterizing the
Mathematics Preparation of Elementary School Teachers This project is a one year
national effort having as its goal to examine the content of the
college/university mathematics experiences (viz., course offerings, content
emphases, and alignment with the spirit of current reform efforts) of
prospective elementary teachers. The plan has three objectives: 1. Conduct a
survey of colleges and universities to gather up-to-date information about
current practices in teacher preparation programs. (This objective has already
been achieved through funding from NSF and Exxon Foundation - see Appendix B.)
2. Identify and collect materials (textbooks, materials developed by funded
projects, and locally-developed materials) that are currently being used by
colleges and universities around the United States. 3. Characterize the
materials collected with respect to attributes such as: (1) the unifying themes
("big mathematical ideas") for the materials, (2) the organization, sequencing,
and presentation of mathematics content, (3) the primary pedagogical features of
the materials (e.g., instructional approaches recommended by the authors,
grouping schemes promoted, and types of assessment techniques used), (4) the use
made of technology, including computer software and manipulatives, and (5) the
degree of the alignment of the materials with recently developed (or presently
under development) materials by the various elementary and middle grades
curriculum development projects sponsored by NSF. The project will involve
collaboration among three primary sites: COMAP, Indiana University, and the
University of Chicago