* 9452623
* Implementation of a Vibrations and Acoustics Laboratory     Support of a Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Hashim Mahdi, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 09/30/1996
* USD 47,608.00

9452623 Walters The project involves the establishment of a vibrations and
acoustics laboratory that will not only support the curricula of the department
of mechanical engineering and the department of manufacturing engineering, but
will also aid in the development of lab exercises which integrate fundamental
mathematical concepts into the labs and which build in complexity until a
capstone lab which requires the students to instrument, acquire and analyze a
real problem in industry. An innovative feature of the laboratory development
effort its incorporation with the newly legislated Rio Grand Valley Center for
Manufacturing located at the University. The Center will provide the oportunity
for students to access local manufacturers in support of laboratory exercises.
Manufacturers will also be able to request that student senior design projects
use the facilities of the laboratory to address the manufacturers engineering
needs. The faculty is committed to instruction which is based in laboratory and
industrial experience. With approximately 500 manufacturers in the Rio Grande
Valley, there are a virtually endless number of student projects available. This
project will equip the students and faculty with industrial grade as well as
educational grade equipment. Thus, basic concepts can be demonstrated and
experienced on the educational grade equipment and the student can progress to
the exact equipment which is considered to be an industrial standard.