* 9452544
* Impacting the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum by         Incorporating a Gas Chromatograph - Mass Spectrometer       System into Laboratory Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Eugene Grimley, Elon University
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 05/31/1996
* USD 29,878.00

9452544 Grimley A Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer (GC/MS) System, including
the software to perform spectral searching of the Wiley Spectral Library, is
being used to significantly enhance the undergraduate educational program in
chemistry at Elon College and at four area sister institutions (Bennett, Salem,
and Guilford Colleges and High Point University). Students are gaining hands-on
experience with a powerful analytical instrumental technique. Integration of the
use of the GC/MS throughout the curriculum is leading to: 1. the demonstration
of the basic concepts involved in determining the molecular masses and
structures of a wide variety of chemical species; 2. the complementation of
existing major instrumentation by allowing integration of instrumental
techniques throughout the chemistry curriculum; 3. stimulation and enrichment of
the undergraduate experience, catalyzing the attraction of current and
prospective students to careers in scientific fields, and the opening of
additional career opportunities for students in the sciences; 4. the updating of
courses and the reinforcement of the high level of faculty commitment to the
continued development of the chemistry program; 5. the stimulation of
interaction between Elon College and other area institutions through sharing the
GC/MS facility.