* 9452800
* Environmental Physical and Mathematical Science and         Engineering, and Geoscience Graduate Research Traineeships
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2001
* Ernest Kung, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 572,000.00

Scientific advancement in Environmental Physical and Mathematical Sciences and
Engineering, and Geosciences require comprehensive multidisciplinary education
and research at the cutting edge of science and technology. The requested
program at the University of Missouri-Columbia addresses the related critical
need for human resources by providing PhD level education to five NSF Trainees
in the multidisciplinary investigation of Particulate Systems, both natural and
engineered. NSF Trainees will be recruited through vigorous advertising
throughout the nation. MU has a history of successful recruiting and nurturing
of talented undergraduate students (~70; a major portion of whom are from groups
underrepresented in science and engineering) through the NSF-REU in Particulate
Systems Engineering program. The requested Traineeships will allow significant
opportunities to the brightest of these students, as well as others to be
recruited for the awards. The program will provide Trainees with a challenging
yet supportive environment. Students will receive both the MS and PhD degrees
from the participating academic disciplines in engineering and the sciences, and
the program faculty will carefully plan and monitor the students' teaching and
research development. Curricula for the GRA Trainees will include classes in
thermodynamics, fluid dynamics, particulate systems, atmospheric dynamics,
atomic and molecular physics and chemistry, computational chemistry and
climatology. Experimental research will focus on characterizations and
measurements of particle-vapor (gas) and particle-particle interactions, dry and
wet disposition of particles and gases, trace gas emissions and transformations,
and radiative properties of particles. Theoretical and computationally intensive
projects will focus on sulfur chemistry, particle dynamics and general
circulation models. The education and training of students emphasize integrated
approaches to complex environmental problems. Professional development
opportunities for the Trainees will include internships at the national
laboratories and industrial research centers in the U.S., and possibly at
prestigious universities/institutions in the U.S., Germany, Japan, and Russia
that conducts relevant particulate systems investigations. The University of
Missouri system educational mission charges MU with special responsibilities for
graduate education. The College of Engineering specifically has made major
investments in infrastructure (new building, renovations, equipment, computing).
The project faculty are dedicated to the success of the program, and funding
will lead to truly unique, interdisciplinary opportunities for the Trainees.