* 9452022
* Collaborative Learining in the General Chemistry Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1996
* Nancy Kerner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 10/31/1996
* USD 39,537.00

9452022 Kerner The primary goal of our introductory chemistry laboratory is to
allow the students to experience how chemical principles are derived from data
and engage the students in scientific processes and ways of thinking. Our
approach has been to develop "discovery" based experiments in which students
explore a wide range of parameter space with little advance guidance from the
instructor as to the expected outcome. Our emphasis is on qualitative reasoning,
which we have found is particularly fostered when students work in collaborative
groups with data management handled by computer. Different groups of students
investigate the same properties (e.g., reactivity, solubility, etc) for a
different and specific set of reagents. The discovery of trends is facilitated
by presenting students with multi-instances of the same phenomenon. A networked
computer system (CoLABnet) pools and summarizes the largely qualitative data for
all of the varying group investigated reagents. Student groups are assigned
specific questions to answer which require them to utilize and/or organize the
summarized data using commercial graphing software. Groups present their
findings during post-lab discussion. Preliminary tests have shown that computer
can significantly improve the effectiveness of the course. Computer production
of a class data base shifts the focus from data collation and organization to
data analysis and interpretation. The use of computers permits data pooling on a
scale that would be otherwise impossible. The model emphasizes the uncertainty
inherent in science and the importance of statistical variance. The present
computers are limited to several rooms and do not allow multi- tasking (students
can either enter data to the network or plot data using commercial software, but
not both). Funds are requested to purchase computers capable of multi-tasking
for all of the laboratory rooms.