* 9452920
* Internet Multimedia Applications Workshop
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1995
* Kay Ferguson, Dana College
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 01/31/1995
* USD 13,200.00

9452920 Ferguson The INTERNET MULTIMEDIA APPLICATIONS WORKSHOP is designed to:
1. provide training for 100 Nebraska teachers to use the internet to retrieve
information concerning health care and direct connect software using NASA
imagery from Voyager I and II, and the Viking spacecrafts to obtain information
about space exploration. 2. network teachers with technology experts for
continual on-line support through Phase II and beyond, and 3. prepare teachers
to conduct Phase II with 4,000 students to participate in The Great Debate,
National Priorities for tax dollars, health care or space exploration. During
Phase I, United States Senators Bob Kerrey and Paul Simon will present a dilemma
for debate, "National Priorities: should tax dollars be spent for health care or
space exploration?" This interactive session with the senators, 100 on-site
teachers, and teachers on-line in Iowa, Kansas, and Illinois, sets the stage for
the four rotating hands-on training sessions with the award winning
education/technologists. Teachers will develop and implement application skills
in global technologies, such as internet, CD- Room, digitizing imagery, remote
sensing imagery, E-mail, file transfer, and Gopher sites. Phase II is the
implementation follow-up phase and occurs in the classroom as children use the
internet resources and software to research information on health care and space
exploration. The three week Great Debate occurs on-line with children among four
states. This unique workshop and on-line debate will result in having 100
teachers and 4,000 children actively accessing internet resources and direct
connect software from NASA. These teachers and children will serve as trainers
for other teachers. Additionally, a viable network will be in place among
teachers, researchers, scientists, and education technologists. An action plan
is already in process to refine and replicate this technology/interdiscipli nary
curricular model in other schools in other states. Another major accomplishment
to result from this project is having children explore careers in science,
mathematics, and technology and begin to fill the need of 700,000 more experts
in these fields b 2010. It is intended for this project to also motivate and
excite children about studying mathematics, science, engineering, and technology
to propel United States children to be first in the world: a step toward the
American 2000 goal. ***