* 9452801
* Research and Development in Hypermedia for Knowing Physics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2003
* Robert Fuller, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Lenore S. Clesceri
* 08/31/2003
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9452801 University of Nebraska Fuller This program offers a unique
combination of seven major components: 1. Physics knowledge. Before the trainees
can begin a serious career as educational innovators, they will have solid
content mastery of a science area. 2. The process of knowing - develop a sound
understanding of the research methods and results in cognitive science -
participate in the workshop developed by Robert Karplus and others entitled
Physics Teaching and the Development of Reasoning. 3. Educational research
methods - become familiar with a variety of educational research both
quantitative and qualitative methods. 4. Hypermedia - learn how to develop
instructional lessons using hypermedia including including applications
software, interactive digital video and microcomputer-based laboratory
interfaces. 5. Varied teaching experiences - serve as an assistant in a physics
course at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, participate in a workshop entitled
Developing Student Confidence in Physics - serve one semester as a teaching
intern in the Department of Physics of the United State Air Force Academy. 6.
Global perspective - spend one semester as research assistant in the physics
education group in the Department of Physics of the University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. 7. Dissemination and teacher training experience. The trainees will
spend a semester as an intern in a mulitmedia dissemination and teacher training
company, The Learning Team in Armonk, NY.