* 9452194
* Computing in Mathematics Courses After Calculus: A          Discovery-Based Approach
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Thomas Cecil, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 06/30/1996
* USD 78,271.00

9452194 Damiano A laboratory of networked Sun Workstations provide computer
support in ten different mathematics courses servicing majors and non-majors for
over 150 sophomore and upper division students. Based upon past experience in
writing PC courseware for calculus and using PC's in the calculus, the faculty
in the Department of Mathematics are systematically extending the use of the
computer to the sophomore and upper division offerings in vector calculus,
differential geometry, topology, complex analysis, ordinary differential
equations, applied mathematics and numerical analysis. The project builds on
previous work of department faculty in developing and testing courseware,
including a set of laboratory modules for vector calculus, exercises and
projects in differential geometry, applied mathematics, and ordinary
differential equations, and an interactive electronic text for differential
geometry. This courseware utilizes a discovery-based approach, encouraging
students to work together to formulate and test conjectures based on numeric,
symbolic and graphic investigations primarily with the software package
Mathematica. The approach invigorates and strengthens the learning process for
majors and non-majors alike. The purchase of 20 Sun Sparc Stations equipped with
Mathematica allow full implemention of new courseware in a laboratory
environment which achieves full utilization of the computer in major upper
division courses. The courseware will be disseminated through NECUSE, AMS, MAA
and MER-Network outlets. Laboratory modules and curriculum material will be
submitted for publication in texts and lab manuals.