* 9452028
* A Proposal for the Implementation of a Mathematics Activity Resource Center (MARC)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Franz Helfenstein, Central Oregon Community College
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 08/31/1996
* USD 35,146.00

9452028 Helfenstein Recent reports from prestigious study groups strongly
suggest modifying the mathematics curriculum to produce students who meet the
demands of today's society. Teamwork, technology, creative and critical
thinking, and communication skills are crucial to success in today's
professional world. To ensure better prepared students, the Mathematics
Department at Central Oregon Community College (COCC) implemented major
curriculum reforms which foster skills so crucial to success. This comprehensive
reform effort involves developing and incorporating various
interactive/experiential formats across the curriculum. Central to this reform
program is the creation of the Mathematics Activity Resource Center (MARC).
Project funds are being used to equip the MARC with computers and other
instructional aids. The MARC greatly facilitates activities that encourage
teamwork, discovery, learning-by exploration, open-ended group projects, and
technical writing. The MARC enhances the learning environment for all math
students at COCC by providing a setting physically separate from the traditional
classroom. In addition, the MARC serves as a district-wide resource for
strengthening mathematics education at all levels. The key components COCC is
addressing in its mathematics reform project include: development of a
cooperative learning environment; integration of hands-on activities to promote
skills and concepts; implementation of interactive/experiential activities;
introduction of modern technologies and innovative educational methodologies;
involvement of faculty department-wide; incorporation of realistic and open-
ended problems; and, promotion of technical writing skills.