* 9452785
* Mapping Our City
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Dan Barstow, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 03/31/1998
* USD 383,153.00

ABSTRACT 9452785 Barstow This project is to understand the potential for
implementing instructional materials using Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
to change the way students and teachers in grades 6-12 engage in scientific
investigations. The basic concepts of GIS are introduced in the context of
mapping the local environment around the school. The knowledge learned is
extended and applied in two additional units which explore an area of science or
technology of local interest such as pipes and wires or a plant survey. The
students are not only doing data analysis, but exploring their environment,
collecting their own observations, and using the power of technology to make
connections among the natural and built environments of their locality. The
materials emphasize development of thinking skills, problem-solving, data
analysis, and visualization. Students should learn how one element of the city
affects the others and develop a sense of personal connection to the city. As
the activities focus on urban resources the "economically disadvantaged"
students become "scientifically advantaged" learners since cities are generally
rich in GIS resources. Major corporations and government agencies in the Boston
area have agreed to collaborate. A resource guide for GIS urban education which
includes the introductory material, software guidelines, suggestions for data
sources, and other recommendations is to be developed and distributed
nationally. The project is well-documented and the materials are tested in a
locality outside of Boston.