* 9452654
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Doctoral          Traineeships in Environmentally Conscious Chemical          Manufacturing
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* Robert Davis, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2000
* USD 562,500.00

National and global environmental effects of manufacturing operations require
the development of alternative, environmentally benign technologies. Although
this is true in essentially all industrial sectors, one of the greatest needs is
in chemical manufacturing. This industrial sector is prominent in the American
economy, having consistently maintained a positive trade balance. In order to
preserve the dominance and global competitiveness of this industry, however, it
is recognized that the development and implementation of waste-free
environmentally benign processes are needed. Such environmentally conscious
processing alternatives can only result from the development of innovative
technologies and through the education and training of scientists and engineers
who can integrate technological advances and environmental considerations with
the goal of economic development. Five doctoral traineeships in Environmentally
Conscious Chemical Manufacturing (ECCM) are requested in this proposal. The
training program will be based on coursework and research leasing to the
conception of innovative technologies capable of reducing the harmful
environmental impact of chemical process operations. This training program
emphasized pollution prevention, not waste treatment or environmental
restoration. A diverse group of students will be recruited for the proposed
traineeships through programs which can be effective in bringing women and
minorities to this critical area.