* 9452536
* Computer-based Equipment Platforms in Introductory Labs for Technology Students
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* James Boyd, Franklin Institute of Boston
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 08/31/1996
* USD 19,087.00

9452536 Ferguson The Franklin Institute of Boston will improve its Physics
Laboratory by the purchase of equipment that, together with already existing
computers, will enable enhanced data acquisition and analysis, the further
integration of major physics topics, and the reinforcement of similarities in
physical phenomena. The instrumentation consists primarily of sensors,
peripherals, and transducers. This equipment, together with the addition of
dynamics, optics, microwave and e/m systems will facilitate the collection,
storage and manipulation of data. A single experimental platform selected from
the above-described equipment, such as a sonometer studying wave behavior, when
teamed up with the ability to change experimental results through the use of
power amplifiers, digital function generators, driver/detector coils and
sensors, will result in a more integrated approach to physics instruction. The
physical phenomena of wave behavior described above will then be studied in
optics, microwaves and atomic structure, reinforcing the similarities, through
the utilization of the appropriate systems. The proposed laboratory improvement
is highly significant to Franklin, as a two-year technical college serving a
predominantly economically-disadvantaged urban population. Without full exposure
to the state-of-the-art data analysis methods currently utilized by private
sector industry, the Institute's students, the majority of whom will be entering
the work force upon graduation, will not have adequate professional training in
this vital area. In addition, these students, and those who elect to continue
their education at four-year institutions, will gain a more thorough knowledge
of the general theory through a laboratory which offers the best possible
integration and reinforcement of major physical principles and phenomena.