* 9452430
* Introducing State-of-the-Art Measurment Techniques into a   Junior Modern Physics Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Ronald Ransome, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 07/31/1996
* USD 35,225.00

9452430 Croft This project will enrich our junior year modern physics lab by
introducing state-of-the-art experimental and data analysis techniques drawn
directly from research. The proposers are two nuclear experimentalists and a
solid state x-ray spectroscopist who are committed to the goal of infusing this
undergraduate lab with a taste of the excitement and the power of modern
research methods, while maintaining the role of the lab as a teaching lab. The
proposed experiments are drawn from the expertise of the principal
investigators. Specifically one of the enrichments involves introducing truly
modern particle/nuclear physics techniques into an experiment on the muon
lifetime and the directional dependence of cosmic rays. The second involves a
two part introduction to modern x-ray spectroscopic methods. Students will first
explore nuclear and atomic energy level schemes by fluorescent radiation with a
sophisticated high resolution x-ray detection system. The second part involves
the introduction to x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) the data analysis and
experimental methods. For the actual XAS measurements students will make a data
collection trip to the Brookhaven National Synchrotron Light Source which should
have a particularly high motivational impact on them.