* 9452810
* Spatio-temporal Analysis of Ecological and Physical Systems at Landscape to Regional Scales
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/1994,12/31/2001
* John Walstad, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Paul Jennings
* 12/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

The proposal requests support for five graduate research traineeships for up to
five years in the emerging field of "Spatio- temporal Analysis of Ecological and
Physical Systems at Landscape to Regional Scales." This field focuses explicitly
on space and time as relevant variables for explaining the behavior of
biological and physical components of hydrologic sciences, and forestry. The
proposed training program addresses three targeted GRT disciplinary areas:
Environmental Biology (Ecological Studies and Long-term Projects): Hydrology:
and Environmental Physical and Mathematical Science and Engineering. It involves
a core curriculum and five disciplinary emphasis areas: forest ecology,
hydrology, spatial analysis/modelling, remote sensing , and geographic
information systems (GIS). The training program integrates fourteen faculty in
the Department s of Geosciences, forest science and Forest Resources in (1)
graduate training, (2) funded research, (3) established connections with
government and industry, and (4) existing institutional capacity relevant for
research in the field, especially involving large-are, long-terms datasets, GIS
and remote sensing technology, and spatial analysis techniques. The proposed
program uses existing institutional connections to enhance recruitment, context-
and contact-building opportunities, dissertation improvement funding, and career
opportunities for graduates. A special program is proposed to increase
participation of underrepresented groups in this field.