* 9452023
* Development of Undergraduate Laboratories in Inorganic      Chemistry:  from Molecules to Materials
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,06/30/1997
* M. Stanley Whittingham, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 06/30/1997
* USD 93,625.00

Through the use of advanced technologies, a diverse faculty, and computer
innovation, the institution will produce an inorganic laboratory that bridges
the gap between molecular and materials sciences using techniques and
methodologies which will prepare students with the tools necessary to succeed in
industry and academia today. The central plan for this new laboratory is to have
students model, prepare, and completely characterize a series of independent
inorganic systems that range from simple molecules, such as ferrocene, to
extended molecular structures and materials, such as zeolites. In each case the
students will: 1) explore the reaction conditions and characteristics of target
substances using advanced computer software, 2) apply their computer results in
the preparation of these systems by modern synthetic methodologies, and 3)
completely characterize these systems using advanced spectroscopic and
analytical technologies. At the completion of each system, the students will
assess the success of the initial modeling efforts on the final observed product
and reaction conditions, and test any changes they may develop through
additional computer analysis. Each system/experiment will be a self standing
module that is readily transferrable to other universities. This new laboratory
will act as a model which can and will be implemented at universities and
colleges across the country both in the inorganic curriculum and, with suitable
examples, other sub-disciplines as well.