* 9452258
* Learning Chemistry in Laboratory Settings: A Mini-Course    Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* M. Rachel Wang, Spokane Community College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 08/31/1998
* USD 57,132.00

A series of mini-courses under the general title of "Chemistry in Modern
Society: Fundamental Concepts &amp; Practical Applications" is being developed.
The courses are being conducted entirely in "laboratory settings". About ten
two-hour laboratory activities are being designed for each one-credit course.
Course scheduling varies as needed: it may be concentrated in a two to three
week period, or be spread over a whole quarter. Up to five mini-courses are
being completed and test-run in an 18-month period. These include: fundamental
concepts, nuclear, environmental, art, and pharmacological applications of
chemistry. A comprehensive student manual is being written for each mini-course.
This project takes a significant step in turning away from the traditional
lecture-lab format of instruction to a student-centered, collaborative,
laboratory learning process in which the instructor is a guide and a resource
person, and the students actively engage in hands-on exercises that are designed
to trigger an appreciation and a practical understanding of fundamental concepts
of chemistry. We wish to attract, retain and educate those students who have
difficulty with introductory chemistry in conventional practice for various
reasons, by starting them with one mini-course at a time. This innovation is
being conducted in a community college with extensive vocational programs and a
high percentage of nontraditional students. As such it supports a national model
for promoting and implementing science education reform in settings not
adequately addressed currently.