* 9452586
* Development of Computational Chemistry and Computer GraphicsLaboratory Experiments and Manuals
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* George Shields, Lake Forest College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 08/31/1996
* USD 22,798.00

9452586 Shields The aim of this project is to bring high-speed computing and
graphics capabilities to the chemistry curriculum at Lake Forest College. A
Silicon Graphics IRIS INDIGO workstation has been acquired for use in Physical
Chemistry, Biochemistry and student research projects. In addition, the
workstation is being used in Natural Science 100, a new required core course for
all entering students not enrolled in a regular natural science course. In the
physical chemistry curriculum, the workstation is networked to Macintosh
computers, so that an entire class can perform quantum-mechanical calculations
on the workstation while preparing input and analyzing output on the Macintosh
platforms. In the biochemistry curriculum, the workstation is being used to
study the crystal structures available from the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank,
and for molecular dynamics simulations. Student research projects in
computational chemistry and X-ray crystallography are greatly enhanced with the
acquisition of the workstation. The graphics capabilities of the workstation are
being used in the Natural Science course to illustrate molecular interactions in
biochemical systems, with particular emphasis on the interactions of enzymes
with substrates and DNA-binding proteins with DNA. A primary goal of this
proposal is the development of two laboratory manuals. The first will contain
meaningful exercises in quantum chemistry, while the second will be a graphics
course centered on enhancing the understanding of biochemistry.