* 9452514
* Undergraduate Astronomical Image Processing and Analysis    Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Joel Weisberg, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1997
* USD 43,766.00

9452514 Blaha We propose to bring Carleton's observational astronomy program
into the 21st century through the introduction of state-of-the-art technology in
our laboratories and lectures. This ILI project will equip a new astronomical
image processing lab which will enable our students to gather their own images
here on campus, to use modern astronomical software packages to analyze their
data and to interpret their results in a collaborative research setting. Through
experimenting with two small format CCD cameras, we have found the ST-6 camera
to be the best choice in terms of high quality images and ease of operation. We
are requesting five new ST-6 CCD cameras to equip the six 8-inch Meade
reflectors used in observational labs, with camera control and data acquisition
to be provided by six Macintosh Duo systems. These Macintosh computers will also
be used in the lab to run the Voyager II planetarium display packages, telescope
observing simulators as well as numerous image analysis programs. A fully
equipped software laboratory will allow both introductory and advanced students
to explore the universe and to understand the celestial motions they observe.
Two Sun workstations will provide more powerful image processing tools, access
to data on the Internet and rapid image data storage and retrieval when
connected with the network of Macintoshes. To provide more advanced research
opportunities, we are also requesting a Photometrics Star-1 CCD and a
spectrograph to be used with our permanently mounted refractors. With these
tools, students and faculty will create new lab experiments to engage future
generations of observers and challenge them to learn the power of modern
astronomical observing techniques. ***