* 9452373
* Integration of Computational Chemistry into the             Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Paul Mueller, Hampden-Sydney College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 05/31/1996
* USD 14,342.00

9452373 Mueller Molecular orbital and molecular mechanics calculations are fast
becoming routine tools of the practicing chemist. Furthermore, these methods
when combined with high quality computer graphics, which allow students to
manipulate and rotate structures, can provide insights into many concepts of
structure and bonding. This proposal requests support for the purchase of a
network of four Silicon Graphics Indy workstations equipped with the software
package Spartan. The use of these workstations and program will be implemented
in both lecture and laboratory in the sophomore organic chemistry courses.
Building on this foundation, we will use the workstations for student projects
in Advanced Lab courses and in Physical and Medicinal chemistry courses. Because
SGI has developed a GUI that will allow students to operate the system without
knowledge of UNIX and because Spartan has graphical features that will allow
students to easily perform calculations and manipulate 3D structural and orbital
representations, we believe that this program is appropriate for sophomore
organic students. Since the relationship between structure and reactivity are
covered through the topics of frontier molecular orbital theory,
stereochemistry, conformational effects, and steric strain in organic chemistry,
this course provides an ideal entry point. Students will receive supervised and
structured training on the use of these instruments in fall term organic. Having
become familiar while sophomores with the operation of the program running on
the workstation, upperclassmen will be encouraged to use these tools for more
sophisticated applications in advanced level laboratory and lecture courses.