* 9452865
* Electronic Pathways Alliance: A Native American Think       Tank
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1994,12/31/1994
* Connie Buffalo, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Arthur W. St. George
* 12/31/1994
* USD 96,069.00

9452865 Buller This five-month project will formulate the basic plan and
establish strategies for implementing a National Center titled: Electronic
Pathways Alliance: A Native American Science, Mathematics, and Technology Think
Tank. This planning grant will result in implementing a larger five-year project
designed to reach out to American Indian urban and rural communities to provide
technical, educational, and personnel support for their development and/or
enhancement of technological applications and communications, and associated
mathematics and science knowledge and skills. The Electronic Pathways Alliance
will assist American Indian schools and communities to upgrade science,
mathematics, and reform their efforts in restructuring these content areas in
American Indian education and communities. Initially, a minimum of four national
projects will be finalized and begun as a result of this planning grant. The
five-year project will operationalize the initial four projects of Electronic
Pathways Alliance in efforts to reach 100 interested American Indian communities
(20 per year) over the five years. This planning Pathways Alliance and its
associated projects. A brief paper describing Electronic Pathways Alliance and
associated projects will be generated and distributed nationwide to American
Indian communities, schools, and other interested organizations. ***