* 9452771
* Middle-school Mathematics through Applications Project II: The Comprehensive Program
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Raymond McDermott, Institute for Research on Learning
* Continuing grant
* George W. Bright
* 09/30/1998
* USD 2,794,224.00

9452771 Goldman This project, Middle- school Mathematics through Applications
Project 11 (MMAP 11), builds on and is a continuation of the original MMAP. This
project will result in a comprehensive, three-year mathematics program for
grades 6-8. The goals of MMAP 11 include: (1) The development of materials to
create a complete mathematics program that could serve all 6th through 8th
graders regardless of prior skills or ability levels. (2) The provision of
resources, materials, and guidance to mathematics educators to help them
assemble MMAP materials into a coherent, customized, and affordable curriculum
to meet local needs. (3) The creation and compilation of guidelines and
activities to help teachers identify and systematically evaluate mathematical
competencies and mathematics embedded in students' work. and (4) The
galvanization of a community of mathematics educators, researchers, and
mathematics-using professionals to collaborate in identifying the needs and
means necessary for developing additional MMAP materials. These goals will be
achieved by using an interactive, cyclical research and development process
created and piloted in the previous project. This project creates innovative
software and investigations to simulate real world problems that rely on
mathematical concepts and skills to solve. ***