* 9452881
* PPD/EP:  Science, Engineering, Education and Disabilities   (SEED)
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* John Gardner, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 01/31/1998
* USD 1,050,940.00

9452881 Oregon State University Information transfer is often a serious problem
for students with disabilities in most academic disciplines, but it is
particularly severe in science, engineering, math (SEM) and other technical
subjects. Students with visual impairments and learning disabilities are
frequently overwhelmed by the difficulties of learning, using, and/or presenting
equations, graphs, schematic and conceptual drawings, and other non-textual
information encountered in SEM. The objectives of SEED are to develop
inexpensive easy-to-use computer-based methods and devices to reduce or
eliminate the problem with SEM information flow with the eventual result that
significantly more students with disabilities can be recruited and retained in
SEM education and careers. The initial focus is development of the Audio System
for Scientific Reading (ASTER) into a flexible tool for use by people with
visual and learning disabilities to read, write, manipulate, and understand SEM
literature. ASTER developments are considered to be critical for making SEM
materials accessible to students who are visually impaired or who have learning
disabilities. The ASTER program currently runs on a Unix workstation using a
Dectalk voice synthesizer. ASTER's internal representation of a document is a
hierarchical tree that allows the reader to easily change the style in which the
document is read aloud and also allows very fine control over where the reading
begins and ends. These two controls make audio reading of technical material
much easier to comprehend for these students. ASTER will be rewritten in a
common version of Lisp (such as CLisp) that run under DOS, OS/2, Linux, and some
versions of Unix. Subsequently, ASTER will be rewritten in C++ to make it
possible to port ASTER to other platforms. SEED also will collaborate on the
development and evaluation of tactile tablets on which raised images (comprised
of Dotsplus and figures) can be used to display complex sc ientific equations
with each term expandable in audio by ASTER. SEED will recruit talented,
motivated university students with disabilities to serve as SEED research
assistants in projects. They will be highly visible role models for other
students with disabilities; and their successes should increase the confidence
of teachers, counselors, parents, and potential employers in the ability of
students with disabilities to succeed in SEM.***