* 9452860
* MP/PPD:  Using Adaptive Computer Technology in Science,     Mathematics, and Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 01/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Steven Gilbert, American Association for Higher Education
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 03/31/1997
* USD 201,704.00

9452860 Gilbert The primary focus of this project is dissemination of the best
and most current information on making post-secondary education in the fields of
science, engineering and mathematics (SEM) more accessible to SEM faculty and to
students with disabilities. Students with disabilities may have difficulty
completing certain SEM course-work tasks independently, (e.g., reading, writing
or manipulating laboratory instruments). Modern computer-based technology can
provide the needed assistance in many of these situations. Students and faculty
need to learn about the existence and potential of this technology. The American
Association for Higher Education and Project EASI (Equal Access to Software and
Information) propose to conduct an information dissemination project to increase
the knowledge-base of these groups thereby increasing inclusion and
participation of students with disabilities in SEM studies. These students often
face obstacles to SEM studies caused by inaccessible buildings, computers,
laboratmries, information resources, and negative attitudes of administrators
and faculty regarding their abilities and potential in SEM studies. Project EASI
has spent the last six years working to help institutions of higher learning
overcome physical and attitudinal barriers that exist for students, faculty, and
staff with disabilities. Unfortunately, despite recent reports and task forces,
insufficient work has been done to distribute the growing amount of research and
information about how adaptive computer technology can help students with
disabilities who want to study and work in the fields of SEM. This project will
take the best available information about the application of adaptive technology
in SEM and distribute it to a widely decentralized education audience through
four kinds of dissemination: electronic, brief print publications, videos, and
live presentations. The goal of these efforts is to promote the rapid
dissemination of innovat ive intervention strategies that will increase the
participation of students with disabilities in SEM educational and career
tracks.***