* 9452375
* Acquisition of an Automated Atomic Absorption Spectrometer  System for Enhancement of Undergraduate Education in        Environmental Geology and Geochemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1997
* David Vanko, Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 02/28/1997
* USD 27,066.00

9452375 Rose A modern, computer automated system for atomic absorption
spectrometry has been purchased. The project is to enhance the education and
research capabilities of undergraduate students who are preparing to enter the
fields of environmental geology and geochemistry by giving sophisticated "hands-
on" assignments in water analyses. The project emphasizes an integrated approach
that includes project conception, planning of the sampling strategy, carrying
out the sampling, carrying out the water analyses, data reduction and
presentation, report writing, and ethical considerations regarding the use and
abuse of scientific data. The proposed project represents an upgrading of a
prototype project completed successfully in Spring, 1993, which involved
determinations of Pb in campus drinking fountains. A small subset of students in
Environmental Geology assessed the Pb concentrations of drinking water in light
of the EPA action level of 2O ppb Pb. The students used an old, manual, and
relatively inaccurate graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometer. The
proposed new automated instrument enables this and similar assignments to be
carried out with superior results by all of the Environmental Geology students,
resulting in a better educated and better prepared graduating class of
scientists headed for professional careers in environmental geology and
geochemistry.