* 9452027
* Innovation in the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum through Integration of FT-NMR Spectroscopy
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Cynthia Brittain, Kennesaw State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/1996
* USD 79,794.00

9452027 Brittain Modern NMR principles and practice are being integrated into
both lower- and upper-level courses in the chemistry curriculum. The innovations
in the lecture and laboratory affect not only the department's chemistry majors,
but also students enrolled in the biology and pre-professional programs. The
department is networking a 200 MHz Fourier transform NMR spectrometer with
broadband and variable temperature capabilities to personal computers located in
a novel laboratory/computer-workstation environment in a newly designed science
building to permit real-time spectral processing and discussion. The curricular
changes begin in the sophomore organic chemistry sequence: NMR spectroscopy is
being introduced early in the first course, and lecture discussions of
isomerism, nomenclature, reactions and reaction mechanisms are illustrated with
broadband-decoupled 13C spectra and 13C DEPT spectra. 1H-NMR is integrated with
13C through HETCOR spectroscopy. In the organic laboratory, the opportunity for
students to generate 13C and DEPT or HETCOR spectra of their products
complements the use of these spectra in lecture. The instrument also is used to
illustrate phenomena such as rotational isomerism and stereo- and
regioselectivity in organic reactions. In the junior year, students enrolled in
Inorganic Chemistry synthesize a ligand and create a new complex, then utilize
variable temperature NMR to slow the fast-exchange dynamics of reversible
complexation and determine a complex dissociation constant. Senior students in
the biochemistry sequence obtain and interpret COSY and NOESY spectra of
neuropeptides, determining peptide secondary structural features in various
chemical environments. In physical chemistry, these students utilize NMR to
observe the effect of solvent on molecular conformation and perform a
thermodynamic analysis of the conformational change. The instrument receives
additional usage in directed studies (undergraduate research) cou rses; research
projects in inorganic, physical, and biochemistry are available.