* 9452209
* Multimedia Teaching Laboratory for Undergraduate Computer   Science Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Nenad Marovac, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 06/30/1996
* USD 44,374.00

9452209 Marovac The objective of this project is to expand the multimedia
capabilities of our Multimedia and Software Engineering Laboratory (MM&SE).
Currently, our laboratory has one SUN IPC workstation, four IBM-PS2 Model 80 PCs
based on 80386 MPU, and an IBM AT with a color monitor for high resolution
graphics. The laboratory is used for class work and research in undergraduate
courses that cover multimedia, graphical user interface environments, computer
graphics, and software engineering and a graduate course in software
engineering. However, for graphical interface environments, computer graphics
and software engineering courses we occasionally also use departmental Sun 4/110
workstations that are shared with a number of other courses. The improvement
through this project consists of an addition of 6 computers, 3 Silicon Graphics
INDY multimedia workstations and 3 IBM multimedia 9557 DV PCs. All computers
will be equipped with 16 bit audio, hardware supported moving video and ISDN
interfaces. This project primarily impacts our multimedia course and our
undergraduate research projects in multimedia. The equipment is used in teaching
full multimedia including high quality audio and moving video. However, the
project significantly affects our undergraduate courses in user interface
environments, raster graphics and software engineering. The equipment is also
used for a number of undergraduate research projects involving development of
multimedia tools supporting other computer creative activities, e.g. a group
development environment in which the students can fully communicate with each
other through audio and real time video while working as a team on software
engineering projects.