* 9452302
* Modernization of Physics Laboratory Instrumentation         Including Community and Student Support Facilities
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Guillermina Damas, Miami-Dade Community College, North Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 07/31/1996
* USD 30,175.00

This project is intended to help the ethnically and culturally diverse community
served by Miami-Dade Community College improve scientific skills by assisting
physics students and high school physics teachers. In order to help our students
improve their understanding and applications of physics, they will be introduced
to a series of laboratory experiences using computers and video technology. It
is our expectation that in the process of doing science, students will develop
computer skills as well. In addition to formal laboratory settings, a separate
facility, fully equipped as a tutorial lab run by both instructors and peer
tutors, will be made available to physics students who need additional help.
This will enhance their understanding physics through active engagement in their
own learning in an environment that encourages them to build and communicate
their knowledge. The combination of formal laboratories and tutorial services is
expected to improve student retention and achievement in science courses and to
help students develop higher levels of scientific literacy, analytical, and
computer skills. MDCC is deeply committed to working with the community,
particularly with the public high school system. This project will provide
training for high school physics teachers in the use of MBL laboratories as well
as in the adaptation and development of new laboratory experiences.