* 9452440
* CHM 410: Computational Chemistry.  A Laboratory in MolecularModeling and Computational Chemistry at the Senior          Undergraduate Level
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Robert Zoellner, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 06/30/1996
* USD 29,362.00

9452440 Zoellner The project will introduce a course which details computational
chemistry at the senior undergraduate level, providing chemistry majors with
"hands-on" experience with the computational tools and techniques already
indispensable to the academic and industrial researcher. To meet this need, the
department will initiate a senior-level undergraduate course in computational
chemistry (CHM 410), which is designed to teach both basic principles and
methods, and, in some depth, how to use computational techniques to solve
chemical problems. Techniques to be addressed in the course include molecular
mechanics, semi-empirical, and ab initio methods, as well as how to analyze a
chemical problem so as to choose the computational method best suited to an
efficient solution given the constraints of local computational power and clock
time. To successfully initiate such a course, two computer workstations (Silicon
Graphics IRIS Indigo workstations or equivalent) and an up-grade in memory to an
existing Indigo workstation will be purchased. In addition, a site license for
the X-windows modification of the program Spartan (which includes molecular
mechanics, semi-empirical, and ab initio modules) so as to allow the efficient
use of the workstations through the existing College-funded computer laboratory,
will also be obtained.