* 9452398
* An ICP Spectrometer for Undergraduate Geochemistry          Instruction and Research
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Gerald Brem, California State University-Fullerton
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 08/31/1997
* USD 60,660.00

9452398 Brem We propose establishment of an analytical geochemistry facility in
the Department of Geological Sciences to be used in required and independent-
study courses. Current analytical equipment cannot be used because it requires
time-intensive methodologies unusable within the constraints of laboratory
courses, includes irreparable items, and cannot analyze samples for a broad
range of elements or in aqueous media. Our request consists of: (1) equipment
for rapid and contamination-free sample preparation and (2) an ICP spectrometer
capable of analyzing a broad range of major and trace elements in different
types of media. The equipment is essential for use in the required Geochemistry
(GEOL 4O6), the required Senior Thesis Research (GEOL 498) and the elective
Water Quality Investigations and Control (GEOL 437) courses. The equipment will
greatly improve the undergraduate program and will allow us to meet the
following goals: to increase students' ability to quantify geologic problems
rather than relying solely on traditional qualitative and descriptive
methodologies, to reinforce students' comprehension of basic scientific concepts
by problem solving, to increase students comprehension of uncertainty and error
present in all geochemical data and, finally, to encourage student interest in
graduate education resulting from positive, research-based experiences at the
undergraduate level.