* 9452436
* A Revision of Technical Mathematics Based on the National   Council of Teachers of Mathematics Standards
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Barbara Near, Henry Ford Community College
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 09/30/1996
* USD 20,063.00

9452436 Near Seven years ago the publication of Toward a Lean and Lively
Calculus (1986) launched a significant reform of the nation's calculus
curriculum, however, comparable reform has not been generally introduced in
technical mathematics. Technical mathematics is designed for students in
associate degree programs such as architectural construction, computer
information systems, electrical/electronics technology, energy technology,
industrial drafting, manufacturing engineering, and robotics. It is the only
college math course taken by approximately 100,000 of the nation's community
college students prior to their entry in the workplace. This project ties in
with an award to Henry Ford Community College by Fund for the Improvement of
Postsecondary Education (FIPSE) to incorporate the National Council of Teachers
of Mathematics (NCTM) Standards in the technical mathematics sequence. Henry
Ford Community College's pilot program also creates a context for cooperation
between career education faculty and mathematics faculty in the development of
applied real-life problems that are being used as activities within the
redesigned course. Representatives from companies such as Ford Motor, AC Delco,
and Kerr Manufacturing are participating in designing Activities that
incorporate industrial applications. The activities use computer-assisted
programs such as MathCad and Geometer's Sketchpad to encourage students to
collect evidence, to problem solve, and to work collaboratively.