* 9452655
* Environmental Stress in Ecosystems:  Linking Ecology and    Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2001
* Kimberly Gray, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

Environmental scientists must be able to synthesize diverse information about
the biological, chemical, and physical attributes of perturbed ecosystems. We
propose to train students broadly in the environmental sciences to produce
professionals with the breadth of knowledge needed to address serious and
complex environmental problems. A single-discipline approach is inadequate to
identify, solve, and avoid environmental degradation. Yet, graduate programs
have been slow to move beyond the traditional boundaries of colleges and
departments to develop rigorous and comprehensive degree programs that integrate
disciplines. Our proposed training program in environmental science will foster
integration of students, faculty, curricula, facilities, and knowledge from two
major disciplines: Ecology and Environmental Engineering. Our training program
will encourage the development of integrated research efforts needed to address
real-world situations of environmental perturbation and mitigations. We will
accomplish this with a combination of: (1) traditional coursework in three
primary research areas (Environmental Chemistry, Organismal Biology, and Aquatic
Ecology), (2) innovative field training modules covering six critical
subdisciplines in environmental science, (3) in-depth instructional training for
the students, and (4) active recruitment of minority students for the program.
We view a training grant from NSF as a major step in coordinating the active
graduate programs in environmental science and engineering at the University of
Notre Dame.