* 9452346
* The Use of Titration &amp; Solution Differential Scanning       Calorimetry to Improve Undergraduate Research &amp; Instruction in the Physical Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry Laborat
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Julian Snow, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 08/31/1996
* USD 45,000.00

9452346 Snow It is proposed to acquire a Microcal MSC-ITC/DSC Solution
Calorimeter System in order to enhance our capabilities to (i) teach solution
thermodynamics to the undergraduate students in our physical chemistry and
biochemistry laboratories, and (ii) perform undergraduate research projects
requiring the use of solution calorimetry. Two experiments using the solution
differential scanning calorimeter(DSC) and the isothermal titration calorimeter
(ITC) are to be developed for each laboratory. For the physical chemistry
laboratory, it is proposed that the solution DSC be used to measure the
thermodynamic properties of a drug-biological membrane interaction, while the
titration calorimeter be used to determine the partition coefficient for the
partioning of a drug in a biological membrane. For the biochemistry laboratory,
it is proposed that the solution DSC be used to study the effects of saturated
and cis unsaturated phospholipid systems on the physical properties of
biological membranes, while the titration calorimeter be used to study the
effects of binding of an enzyme to a substrate analogue. The use of these
instruments will expose our students to this important area of physical-
biochemistry, something we are unable to do effectively with our present
equipment.