* 9453604
* Teaching Excellence Advancing Math and Science (TEAMS)
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/1994,03/31/1996
* Kenneth Krane, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 03/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

Teaching Excellence Advancing Math and Science This project will develop a needs
a needs assessment for the State of Oregon for K-16 science and mathematics
education through the participation of a broad representation of stakeholders in
a collaborative effort. This effort will deal with curricular and pedagogical
changes needed in both K-12 science and mathematics education as well as
undergraduate science and math courses that serve pre-service teachers. These
issues will ultimately impact formal teacher preparation programs at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. Three workshops will be held at
geographically dispersed locations across the State of Oregon. These three sites
will allow for maximum involvement of stakeholders from through the State--
community college, college, and university faculty in science, mathematics, and
science and mathematics education; K-12 teachers and administrators; state and
local government leaders; representatives of informal science education centers
such as museums and aquariums; and leaders from business and industry.
Particular attention will be paid to involving representatives of diverse
populations that are traditionally underrepresented in science and mathematics
education, such as women and minorities. Specific efforts will made to include
representatives from rural Oregon communities tat serve large Hispanic and
American Indian populations. Each workshop will produce a document summarizing
its findings and recommendations. Following the three workshops, the three
documents will be distributed to all stakeholders, including workshop
participants and other statewide leaders in education. Through one or more
sessions on an educational television network, a opportunity will be provided
for a statewide discussion that will move toward convergence on the needs
assessment and a corresponding identification of the major problems that must be
addressed in preparing science and math teachers. This process will establish
on-going communication among stakeholders in the State of Oregon and lead to
continuing dialogs, especially between K-12 teachers and college and university
faculty, concerning the organization of programs and resources and the
commitment to solutions at all levels in the education system.