* 9453876
* ALGEBRA BY DESIGN
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1998
* Jere Confrey, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 05/31/1998
* USD 999,992.00

9453876 "Algebra by Design" is a three year project in which researchers and
teachers will create design activities for middle school students introducing
them to functions and algebraic thinking. Researchers will study students
engaged in open-ended design challenges requiring them to use their creativity
to build structures, design devices and create vidual displays form the fields
of mechanical engineering,physics, art geometry and environmental sciences.
these design challenges will present middle school students with a problem, a
purpose, constraints, materials and means of evaluation. Interactive
technological tools such as function Probe, Shape Shifter, Macmotion,
Interactive Physics and Geometer's Sketchpad will be available for students to
analyze their projects. Review panels of peers and experts will provide feedback
on the projects. projects will be selected for their appeal to success in
assisting students in learning to work effectively in algebra. Small group
interactions among groups of students and teachers will be studied first as
researchers find ways to bridge from design activities to algebraic thinking and
back. A set of selected projects will then be used in a year long teaching
experiment in a combined technology and algebra class with heterogeneous
grouping. Research will be conducted on effective policies for implementing
reform, necessary teacher development and improving student outcomes.