* 9453927
* FINDING A WAY:  Reaching Young Women of Diverse Ethnic      and Racial Backgrounds in Geography
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Susan Hardwick, National Council For Geographic Education
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 08/31/2000
* USD 598,966.00

9453927 Hardwick This three year project would develop a set of teacher
instructional materials for getting more women interested in geography. The
materials will be based on a pilot program done earlier by the National Council
for Geographic Education. In the first year, 15 experienced teachers would be
paired with 15 much less experienced teachers in the teaching of gender equity
in geography. The first workshop would be held in the east(Temple University). A
second workshop with another set of 30 teachers would be held the second year in
the west(San Diego State University). This workshop arrangement is to provide
easy access to African American and Puerto Rican women in the east at Temple,
and Hispanic and Asian women in the west in California. Each workshop will
consist of three weeks of intensive work. A one week intensive preworkshop will
be held for those less well prepared teachers. During each three week workshop
will train teachers in instructional strategies that enhance the performance in
geography of ALL students in secondary school geography and social studies
classes, paying particular attention to the needs of female students of diverse
ethnic and racial backgrounds. The first year will produce the instructional
materials that integrate geographic content on gender and ethnic minority groups
and exemplify appropriate teaching strategies. These materials will be tested,
revised and introduced to the teachers in the workshops during the summer or
years 1 and 2. The cost share of this project is 20.5% of the support from the
Foundation.