* 9453152
* Great Ideas in Science Consortium:  Partners for Integrated Science Curriculum Reform
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1995,10/31/2000
* Bonnie Lustigman, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 10/31/2000
* USD 2,839,391.00

9453152 Willis This Local Systemic Change project will target the entire
population of K-8 teachers in 44 schools in the New Jersey districts of East
Orange and Jersey City. Through a program of summer institutes, an experimental
Living Laboratory for practice teaching and peer mentoring, school year outreach
activities and teacher run in service workshops, the enhancement program will:
expand teacher knowledge of subject matter, increase understanding of inquiry-
based and process-oriented techniques, promote the integration of SMT with other
portions of the curriculum, increase teacher confidence in teaching and develop
teacher leaders to institutionalize the program beyond the grant period. The
first cohort of 120 teachers will receive 120 hours of staff development in the
first year. 30 teachers from the first year will return a second year to become
teacher leaders. The goal is to reach 540 to 570 teachers directly over the five
years (the exact number will depend on repeats) The rest of the K-8 teachers
will be reached by the Consortia staff and Outreach teams working in close
cooperation with school teams, to bring regular inservice activities into all
the schools in both districts, for at least 100 hours over the five years of the
project. The curriculum in the schools will be selected from nationally
validated instructional programs, in particular Science and Technology for
Children. The request is for $2,855,398 with cost share estimated at $1,046,585
(37%).