* 9453754
* MPWG:  The Association for Women in Science Mentoring       Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Linda Mantel, Association for Women in Science, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Larissa Rogers
* 08/31/1996
* USD 98,380.00

9453754 Tooney The Association for women in Science (AWIS) recently completed
(1993) a three-year, mentoring project with support from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation. The program which included one-on-one mentoring, small group
discussion meetings, large workshops with prominent speakers, scientific poster
sessions, laboratory experience, and exposure to scientific conferences, was
designed to encourage and retain undergraduate and graduate women in the
sciences. The project has been an outstanding success, with a deluge of requests
from institutions of higher education and professional societies on information
for implementing a mentoring program, and the publications from the program
receiving excellent reviews. AWIS proposes to use the Sloan project as a
foundation to implement community-based mentoring programs at ten sites
nationwide. The sites were selected based on geographic, ethnic and racial
considerations, as well as recognition of rural and urban environments. Based on
the research from the Sloan project, this program will focus on the top five
topics selected by undergraduate and graduate students as being the most
important: career opportunities and options; selection of academic course work;
research opportunities; professional contacts and networking; self- image and
self-confidence; and balancing work and family. In addition, the mentoring will
occur in small groups, facilitating peer mentoring as well as student to mentor
interaction. At each of the selected sites a minimum of three scientific
organizations, such as the American Chemical Society and the Society of Women
Engineers, have agreed to work with their local chapters to implement this
mentoring program. The community-based program allows for a greater opportunity
to institutionalize mentoring programs within each local chapter, as well as
facilitate further programs in each scientific society. At present eight
societies have expressed an interest in participating as well as dissemina ting
the materials, including a summary document with information on developing
mentoring programs. AWIS, through the Sloan project, has: extensive knowledge of
strategies to implement in mentoring programs; evaluation and assessment tolls
field-tested in the Sloan project; and a cadre of women scientists experienced
as mentors. ***