* 9453034
* LightPower:  An Exhibit on Light, Lasers and Optics
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Paul Deigl, Orlando Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Barry A. Van Deman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 727,105.00

9453034 Deigl LightPower is one of twelve permanent exhibits being developed for
the new Orlando Science Center (OSC) in Orlando, Florida. A 4,000 square foot
exhibit, LightPower places lasers in their broad scientific context by focusing
on light, the electromagnetic spectrum, and on lasers and their applications.
Because of the large number of laser-optics research facilities and corporations
in the Central Florida region, the exhibit also includes The Optics Workbench, a
career-themed activity center which emphasizes careers in optics and in
scientific and technical fields that utilize lasers. LightPower is being
developed by a partnership that includes the Orlando Science Center, the Orange
County Public Schools, and the Center for Research and Education in Electro-
Optics and Lasers at the University of Central Florida. The partnership will
develop, prototype, and evaluate interactive exhibit components and associated
text and labels in English and Spanish; and will develop, evaluate, and
distribute hands-on career-related activities in English and Spanish for
students and teachers. The goal of the LightPower exhibit is to contribute to
the educational infrastructure of the Central Florida region by: - Developing an
interactive exhibit that facilitates learning by a diverse public, including
African Americans and Latinos, and successfully communicating with both English
and Spanish-speaking audiences. - Supporting middle school, junior high, and
high school science curricula, and producing and distributing printed materials
that detail the relationship between exhibit components and specific curriculum
performance standards. - Developing successful hands-on career-related
activities for students and teachers in both English and Spanish.