* 9453978
* NSF Graduate Research Traineeships - A Key Component of the Minority PhD Program at the School of Marine Science,       College of William and Mary
* EHR,DGE
* 05/15/1995,06/30/2001
* John Milliman, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 06/30/2001
* USD 562,500.00

9453978 Milliman The School of Marine Science (SMS), as part of the Virginia
Institute of Marine Science (VIMS) at the College of William and Mary, proposes
using NSF Graduate Research Traineeships as a key component in a program to
attract and produce more minority Ph.D.s in coastal marine science at. Each year
two to three applicants will be awarded three-year fellowships, followed by a
one-year teaching fellowship (funded by SMS). In most cases the remaining years
will be funded through the competitive proposal process. Some students would
enter directly into the Ph.D. program; others, particularly those with course or
experience deficiencies, might first obtain an MA. Some students would begin
taking core courses at SMS immediately upon matriculation. Other students may
need remedial courses in science and math from the main campus at William and
Mary. The NSF Graduate Research Traineeships represent one part of a
comprehensive minority training effort at SMS, one that already includes an
undergraduate summer internship program. Some of the internal funds of SMS will
be spent to support sabbaticals for established minority scientists at SMS/VIMS,
particularly faculty from historically black colleges. Other institutional funds
will be used to advertise and promote VMS's minority program. The goal of this
activity is to produce at least 10 minority Ph.D. graduates who will then serve
as role models in academia for future generations of students. ***