* 9453798
* Electric Space:  Exploring our Plasma Universe
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1998
* Paul Dusenbery, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 02/28/1998
* USD 680,542.00

9453798 Dusenbery The Space Science Institute of Boulder, Colorado in
partnership with the Franklin Institute Science Museum and the Electric
Producers Research Institute will develop a 3000 sq. ft. traveling exhibit
entitled Electric Space: Exploring Our Plasma Universe. Visitors to the exhibit
will be introduced to the physics of the sun and the polar aurora. They will
learn about the effect solar variability has on technology and humans working in
space. The exhibit is divided into seven sections: Space is Not Empty;
SkyWatchers; Plasma: the Fourth State of Matter; The Dynamic Sun; Planet Earth:
a Great Magnet; Reaching Toward the Starts: the Heliosphere; and The Cosmic
Connection. Its design is guided by the desire to create a total immersion
environment that will allow visitors to explore the many realm of the plasma
university from Earth's upper atmosphere to distant galaxies. It is the
developers intention to demystify science by concentrating on process rather
than facts, to create a stimulating informal learning environment, to reach a
diverse audience, to motivate young people to pursue science as an interest and
a career, and to have the exhibit serve as an interface between the scientific
community and the general public. In addition to the exhibit, supplemental
curriculum modules using an inquiry-based approach will be developed in
cooperation with the Science Discovery Project at the University of Colorado.
These materials will provide teachers, students, and parents the opportunity to
explore the concepts presented in the exhibit. An extensive evaluation plan will
be carried. The exhibit will open at the Maryland Science Center the summer of
1995. It will then travel to nine major US cities reaching an estimated two
million adults and children who represent a great diversity of ages and
education an ethnic backgrounds.