* 9453802
* "Zillions TV"
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Joyce Newman, Consumers Union of US, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 10/31/1996
* USD 300,534.00

9453802 Newman ABSTRACT The Consumers Union of U.S., Inc. will produce four
half-hour television specials which focus on kids testing and evaluating popular
products. This "real world" approach can motivate children to learn science and
mathematics concepts and to develop problem-solving skills in the process of
tackling everyday consumer problems. The approach is particularly effective with
youth who are not print-oriented, who watch a lot of television, and who may
find "formal" science and mathematics inaccessible. Outreach materials for
viewers and for use in formal classes will extent the impact of the project. The
PI and Project Director will be Joyce Newman, Director of Consumer Reports TV.
Susan Markowitz, who produced the successful pilot program will be Producer and
Edward Groth, a biologist who serves as Consumers Union Associate Technical
Director for Public Service Projects, will be the Senior Science Advisor. Susan
Isenberg will be a major science education advisor. Ms. Isenberg is an IBM
Education Fellow and consultant to a number of New York and New Jersey school
districts. She has a B.S. in Science Education, an M.S. in Education, and has
been a teacher for 25 years. This core group will work closely with in-house
scientists and education experts as well as with an advisory committee
established for the project.