* 9453139
* MPWG:  Women and Girls in Computer Science Classes:         Improving the Transition Process
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Miriam Tausner, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 12/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9453139 Strum The goal of this project is to encourage girls from high schools
and women from colleges to enroll and remain in computer science programs. It is
a cooperative effort of women faculty at the College of Staten Island (CSI) and
Staten Island Technical High School (SI TECH). The project initiates the
expansion of an existing program operating at the college to the high school
level, and lays the foundation for broader expansion to additional colleges
within the City University of New York (CUNY) system. CSI undergraduate women
are to develop a computerized tracking system for SI Tech graduates. CSI women
undergraduates and alumnae are to give lectures at SI Tech. Stipends are to be
provided for undergraduate women to work on summer research with faculty
mentors. A women and computers "exposition" is to be hosted with high school
students and their parents invited. SI Tech is to host a seminar where CSI women
faculty and students participate in a panel discussion with SI Tech girls in the
audience. An "adopt-a-high school-student" program, where undergraduates at CSI
will mentor high school students, is to be initiated. An electronic
questionnaire to capture information from the student participants is to be
developed. A questionnaire and a tracking system are to be used for outcome
analysis. High school and college information kits are to be produced and
disseminated. ***