* 9453110
* EPWG:  Rural and Urban Images:  Voice of Girls in Science,  Mathematics, and Technology
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1999
* Carolyn Carter, Edvantia, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/1999
* USD 930,409.00

9453110 Kusimo While the culture of science and science teaching is well
recognized as a critical factor influencing participation, few programs have
been designed to increase participation by addressing cultural aspects. This
program, however, reflects the environments in which it is implemented, and is
unique in addressing three major gaps in the present knowledge base: the
effectiveness of support systems in increasing girls' persistence in science,
mathematics, and technology (SMT); the contrasts in effects of interventions in
an urban and a rural setting; and the effectiveness of materials reflecting
rural environments in teaching SMT content. This program juxtaposes two
environments--one urban, the other rural--in an intervention designed to recruit
and retain middle school girls in SMT. Together, the two sites provide fertile
ground for examining the effect of "place" on girls' lives and their
relationships with SMT. The program has three goals: (1) to have an impact on
the infrastructure of SMT curriculum design by providing examples of materials
and methods indigenous to rural environments and useful in SMT education; (2) to
create advocates for the inclusion of girls in SMT education; and (3) to add to
the knowledge base about rural and urban SMT education with respect to ethnicity
and culture. The reach the goals, there are four thrusts: (1) to develop and
test a strategy for constructing a social network made up of community members,
family, and peers who advocate for and support girls' involvement in SMT; (2) to
design materials and strategies that recruit and retain girls in SMT; (3) to
conduct an ethnographic study that examines how girls, guardians, and teachers
perceive the role of girls in SMT; and (4) to produce one or more documentaries
to demonstrate (a) the social contexts in which rural and urban girls interact
with SMT education, (b) barriers to their full participation, and (c) changes
over time when systems exist to support and validat e their worth and competency
in SMT. An examination of the intersection of girls and culture is critical to
understanding the participation of girls in SMT. To effectively communicate
these dynamics, we must give vision and voice to the girls in the project.
Although the project is being implemented in only two sites, the resulting
documentary, ethnographic study, and materials will greatly magnify its impact.
As we examine the support mechanisms that must be in place and the types of
materials and strategies that engage these communities, we will increase our
understanding of how to systematically acculturate girls in SMT. ***