* 9453181
* National Forum on Critical Issues in Environmental          Technology Programs at Two-Year Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Michael Senew, Hazardous materials Training and Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 02/29/1996
* USD 83,202.00

A two day invitational workshop is being held to examine critical issues
relating to environmental technology education. The workshop involves
postsecondary educators in the fields of mathematics, science, environmental
education, and technology as well as employers, secondary school educators, and
government representatives. Forum participants, working in one of six technical
groups, are identifying and prioritizing issues and developing recommendations
concerning Environmental Technology education at two-year colleges. Each working
group is being directed by a technical working group chair recognized as an
expert in a particular area. The working groups are addressing issues in the
professionalization of environmental technician education; curriculum and
program development and implementation; preparation, credentials, professional
advancement, and continuing education of faculty; human resources including
recruitment, retention, and placement of students; current and future employment
needs for environmental technicians; and preparation of secondary school
students for successful entry into postsecondary environmental technical
education programs. The workshop report is being distributed to academic
institutions and the private sector as well as local and federal government
staff interested in environmental technology education. Planning and
implementation of the forum is a cooperative effort involving the NSF Advanced
Technology Environmental Education Center (ATEEC), the Hazardous Materials
Training and Research Institute (HMTRI), the American Association of Community
Colleges (AACC), and the National Science Foundation (NSF).