* 9453838
* PMSA:  "STEP:  Student and Teacher Excellence Program"
* EDU,ESR
* 09/15/1994,02/28/2001
* Dianne Robinson, Newport News Public Schools
* Continuing Grant
* Ahmad Nurriddin
* 02/28/2001
* USD 2,988,656.00

PMSA-9453838 Newport News Public Schools Newport News, VA Woods, Thomasena and
Dianne Robinson "STEP: Student and Teacher Excellence Program" STEP (Student
Teacher Excellence Program) brings an urban school district and a broad-based
partnership of community organizations and federal labs to develop a model of
comprehensive Pre-K-12 science and math education to boost minority achievement
and significantly increase minority representation in the college-bound SEM
pipeline. STEP is collaborative venture of partners newport News Public Schools,
NASA-Langley Research Center, CEBAF (the Department of Energy funded Continuous
Electron Beam Accelerator Facility), Hampton University, CHROME (Cooperating
Hampton Roads Organizations for Minorities in Engineering), and the Virginia
Living Museum, working with universities, exceptional informal science
organizations and high-tech industry. STEP will produce a model that
incorporates the tremendous expertise and creativity of the unique concentration
of resources in this area and that can be replicated by communities not so
fortunate as to have such resources nearby. Newport News is a minority-majority
urban system in Southeast Virginia. About 55% of the students are minorities,
most African- American. STEP will address current inequities: African-American
students, on average, score well below white students on standardized tests of
math and science achievement and are much less likely to take advanced math and
science courses. The STEP program is closely tied to the School Board's
priorities of reducing racial disparities in achievement, channeling more
minority students into advanced classes, and ensuring that all graduates
complete Algebra. STEP also is directly linked to the City's economic growth
strategy focusing on high and applied tech industries. STEP is a system-wide
initiative and will involve all 30,800 students in the city's 29 elementary
schools, 7 middle schools, 4 high schools, and Governor's School for Science and
Technology. Consistent with PMSA goals, the emphasis will be on minority
students, but ultimately all students will benefit from the accelerated
standards, enriched education program, and upgraded teacher skills.