* 9453779
* MATHOPOLIS - Mathematics Theme Exhibitry in the New Science Center of Connecticut
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Michael Jordan, Science Center of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Barry A. Van Deman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 1,040,581.00

9453779 Jordon The Science Center of Connecticut will develop, evaluate, and
install 57 mathematical exhibit activities in its new 160,000 sq. ft. exhibit
facility. These activities will engage visitors in learning how math is an
integral part of daily life and a necessary skill in many careers. Eight math
topics will be treated: probability and statistics; relative scale; geometry;
symmetry; math puzzles; chaos and fractals; numbers, measurements, and
calculations; and estimations. The hands-on activities will range from
involvement with low-tech to high- tech, computerized activities. The target
audience is people nine and up and it will be available to the museums 500,000
annual visitors. The mathematics activities will be distributed throughout the
museum and math will serve as a integrating theme for all the museum's exhibits.
The topics are aligned with Connecticut s SSI program which focuses on applied
mathematics in context of the science disciplines. Within the state, plans are
taking shape to link with Connecticut Public Television to broadcast electronic
field trips to the museum through Knowledge Network. Nationally, museum staff
members will make presentations at both museum and mathematics education
meetings to other museum professionals. The concept of thematic integration
throughout the museum will be disseminated through the state and the nation. ***