* 9453369
* Presidential Faculty Fellows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2000
* Christopher Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2000
* USD 510,000.00

CTS-9453369 Christopher N. Bowman/University of Colorado @ Boulder ABSTRACT
Highly crosslinked polymers produced from photopolymerizations of
multifunctional monomers are suitable for applications as optical lenses,
optical fiber coatings, second harmonic generation materials, and dental
materials. These types of materials have excellent thermal and dimensional
stability, but their application has been limited by certain aspects of the
polymerization reaction. The highly crosslinked structure of the polymer
networks and the associated low mobilities lead to the formation of a
heterogeneous polymer network, autoacceleration kinetics, and reaction diffusion
controlled termination. The heterogeneous nature of these polymerizations may
cause up to a 500 fold decrease in the mechanical strength, and thus,
understanding the relationship between reaction conditions and polymer structure
is of the utmost importance in developing improved materials. This work focuses
on a fundamental characterization of these polymerizations, as well as the
development of materials for applications such as second harmonic generating
materials. Polymerization reactions of multimethacrylates, multiacrylates, and
other multivinyl compounds will be studied to determine how reaction conditions
affect the polymer structural evolution. The structural evolution will be
characterized by a variety of techniques including dielectric spectroscopy,
transmission electron microscopy, and electron spin resonance spectroscopy.
These standard techniques will be used along with two novel techniques that we
have recently applied to polymerizing systems: photochromism and second harmonic
generation. These techniques are capable of probing the microscopic structure so
that quantitative information regarding the heterogeneity and free volume
distribution can be obtained. The experimental results from these techniques
will be coupled with theoretical predictions from kinetic gelation simulations
to obtain a complete pictu re of how reaction conditions such as temperature,
initiator concentration, and monomer type affect the heterogeneity and
mechanical properties of the crosslinked polymer.