* 9453799
* "Across Space and Time" -- The Interelationship of          Technology and Basic Research
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2000
* David Gluck, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2000
* USD 370,063.00

9453799 Haynes ABSTRACT Cornell University is producing a documentary television
program about the 100-meter radio telescope in Green Bank, West Virginia. The
film, planned as a PBS special, will document the engineering and technology
behind the construction of the telescope as well as examining and explaining the
science of radio astronomy. Ancillary educational material, including a 20
minute version of the video, will be developed and distributed for use in
informal education setting through the American Astronomical Society and the
Astronomical Society of the Pacific. In addition images and information about
the Green Bank Telescope and the science of radio astronomy will be made
available through an electronic bulletin board service such as GOPHER or MOSAIC.
Teaching materials also will be developed for use in the secondary school
curriculum and an "Across Space and Time" undergraduate curriculum developed at
Cornell University will be made available to faculty at other colleges and
universities. In addition, the film and related material will serve as the
centerpiece for short courses for college teachers at Green Bank under the
National Chautauqua Short Course Program. The PI and major content developer is
Martha Haynes, Professor of Astronomy at Cornell University associated with the
National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center and the Center for Radiophysics and
Space Research. The film is being produced by PhotoSynthesis Production of
Ithaca, New York. David Gluck is co-producer, director, and cinematographer and
Deborah Hoard is co-producer and writer. A twelve person advisory committee of
astronomers, teachers, and informal science educators will guide development of
the project.