* 9453810
* Chem-Mystery:  A Hands-On Chemistry Exhibition
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Jennifer White, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 09/30/1997
* USD 704,694.00

9453810 White The Lawrence Hall of Science will develop a 3000 sq. ft. traveling
interactive chemistry exhibit in which visitors will conduct a variety of basic
chemical tests within the motivational genre of solving a mystery. Chem-Mystery
will invite visitors into an Old House facade where two non-violent mysteries
have occurred. Visitors will chose a mystery (either the case of the missing toy
boat for youngsters or the case of the missing money for older children and
adults) to solve. After learning the facts surrounding the case from videos of
the chief detective and the suspects, visitors will collect evidence from the
scene of the mystery and then proceed to the Forensics Laboratory. The Lab will
contain 15 hands-on stations where visitors explore fundamental chemistry
concepts while using chemistry as a tool to analyze clues. Complementary
educational materials will be developed. A 20 page Going Further Guide will
contain activities that can be done at home using techniques introduced in the
exhibit. Teacher workshops will be held to introduce teachers to concepts in the
exhibit and methods on how to incorporate the exhibit activities in their
curricular agenda. These materials plus other general set-up information will be
included in an Exhibit Installation Handbook. After opening to the public at the
LHS in January 1996, it will begin its tour in October, 1996 to nine US science
centers. It has the potential of reaching about 800,000 people during the
twenty-seven month tour. The exhibit design will be reviewed for universal
accessibility. It will be produced by the staff of the Lawrence Hall of Science
and circulated by ASTC. ***