* 9453106
* EPWG: Gender Equity in Science and Mathematics Education    Through Institutional Reform
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* J. Aaron Bertrand, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1999
* USD 821,088.00

9453106 Thorsen This project is a collaboration between Georgia Tech, the
Georgia Initiative in Mathematics and Science (GIMS), Clark Atlanta University,
Georgia Southern University, Georgia State University, and the University of
Georgia. It focuses upon changing the structure of educational programs which
prepare mathematics and science teachers, which should lead to significant
changes in the ways girls are taught mathematics and science. The goal is for
quality mathematics and science education to be equally accessible to both boys
and girls in the state of Georgia, i.e., that all students are encouraged to
explore and discover mathematics and science, are challenged, are successful in
their explorations, and have opportunities to develop awareness of career
opportunities in these fields. In order for access and equity to become
realities, permanent changes must be made in the structure of science,
education, engineering and mathematics departments. These changes include
incorporating the current understanding of social, learning, and teaching
factors which facilitate the interest, motivation, and achievement of girls and
women in science, engineering, and mathematics. This goal is consistent with the
vision and goals of Georgia's Statewide Systemic Initiative, the Georgia
Initiative in Mathematics and Science (GIMS). This project furthers and enhances
the work of GIMS, and is structured so that collaboration with GIMS is
intrinsic. The projects's specific objectives are: (1) to initiate and implement
the redesign of teacher-preparation programs, including instruction in science,
engineering, and mathematics courses, so that they address issues that impact
girls and women; and (2) to provide professional development opportunities for
faculty and graduate/undergraduate teaching assistants of pre-service students
emphasizing positive interventions strategies on gender issues. To achieve the
goals, project strands have been developed. These are: (1) a framew ork for
institutional self-study (colleges/universities); (2) a tool kit of materials
for teacher-preparation courses; (3) professional development of faculty and
teaching assistants; and (4) a prototype teacher-preparation program. Concurrent
project-wide evaluation will occur on an ongoing basis and will be used to
assess and refine the strands. To develop equitable learning environments in
science, engineering, education, and mathematics, and to create permanent
changes, strategies are being developed to address factors that have
traditionally discouraged girls and women from pursuing science, mathematics,
and engineering. As these strategies are tested by the participating
institutions, they are to be promulgated and incorporated throughout Georgia's
Statewide Systemic Initiative. ***