* 9453076
* EPWG:  TECH TREK
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1997
* William Booth, WGTE TV FM
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 10/31/1997
* USD 335,467.00

9453076 Richter WGTE-TV-FM, Toledo Public Broadcasting, seeks to utilize the
technical communications expertise and facilities of public broadcasting to
demonstrate innovative ways to advance gender equity in Science, Engineering,
and Math (SEM) careers. The project, TECH TREK, is an informal, out-of-school,
technology-learning opportunity directed at middle school age Cadette Girl
Scouts and adult Girl Scout leaders. In collaboration with the Maumee Valley
Girl Scout Council, COSI/Toledo, and SciMaTEC of the University of Toledo, WGTE
seeks to design, develop, test, and evaluate a model program offering week-long,
hands-on experiences using the staff, facilities and educational expertise of
public radio and public television to provide science and technology education
for middle school Girl Scouts and Girls Scout leaders. Bringing particular
expertise in the technology area of video and audio communications, WGTE is
collaborating with the Girl Scouts to develop a new approach to involving girls
in technology, which can be replicated inexpensively, nationwide, through public
broadcasting stations and local Girl Scout Councils. During the first year of
the project, 50 Girls Scouts and 15 Girls Scout leaders are to work on- site
with WGTE mentors, young professional women working in public broadcasting, who
are to: share their skills while demonstrating real life applications of their
science and math knowledge; provide the Scouts with career information; and
guide the Scouts in hands-on video and audio production activities. Girl Scout
leaders are to learn about gender equity issues in science and technology
education, and are to be trained to become advocates for encouraging young women
in further science study and careers, in addition to building basic audio and
video production skills which they can teach to others. In the second year of
the project, following evaluation of the first year TECH TREK experiences, and
fine-tuning of the curriculum, WGTE is to prod uce and distribute a video
conference and an audio bridge, as well as a "how to" manual for Girl Scout
Councils and public broadcasting stations to support the replication of TECH
TREK. Through publicity, the staff is to recruit at least 50 stations and Girls
Scout Councils to replicate the Toledo program in their home communities,
providing hands-on technology learning experiences to about 500 Girls Scout
leaders and 1,250 Cadette Girl Scouts in the first year of the national "roll-
out". Thus, the project is designed to involve a new player, public broadcasting
stations, in the national infrastructure which offers scientific and technical
learning opportunities for women and girls. It builds a new avenue for active
collaboration between Girl Scouts of USA and public broadcasting to use their
educational and technological resources to address a societal problem. ***