* 9453088
* EPWG:  Eliminating Discrimination by Gender in Education:   Project EDGE
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1999
* Laura Tubbs, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 03/31/1999
* USD 681,469.00

9453088 Rogers Project EDGE--Eliminating Discrimination by Gender in Education
-- is an experimental, multi- level mentoring project that targets young women
at key educational transition points, along with pre-college teachers,
counselors, and university faculty. The overall goal is to encourage and support
the interest in, and the retention of more young women in science, engineering,
and mathematics (SEM) by increasing the frequency, consistency, and coherence of
positive experiences and messages about participation in these fields. To
accomplish this goal, the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) proposes a
tiered approach to address several issues that have been identified by research
as key events that discourage young women in SEM fields. Project EDGE focuses on
these issues by making systemic changes in instructional styles of teachers,
connecting young women's learning about SEM fields with real-life career
experiences, and sharing resources and data with others. Project EDGE recognizes
current research which identified teachers as the "first line of attack" for
addressing the problems of classroom equity. The project seeks to sensitize the
secondary teachers, counselors and university faculty, who interact so closely
with young women, to the pedagogical practices that promote gender equity,
provide collaborative learning opportunities, and expand their interface with
the current professional SEM world. The project provides ongoing mentoring and
support to provide role-modeling and exposure to successful professional SEM
women for young women in high school and the first year of college. Mentoring
relationships are developed with: professional women working in SEM careers with
regard to career information and life style choices; teachers, who are involved
in instructional development and support groups; and, peers and other students
involved in the project. Throughout the project, students have many
opportunities to communicate informally with women in SEM careers through a
series of face-to-face activities complementing on-going communication taking
place via distance learning technologies and data networks. Thus, based upon
RIT's encouraging experience with a pilot program of this type, the proposal
expands the concept to reach more young women and develops a comprehensive,
longitudinal study to explore the pedagogical, institutional, and support issues
involved in promoting women's participation in SEM fields. The project also
seeks to share results and processes through information networking and
dissemination designed to encourage replication of the project in other
communities. ***