* 9453608
* Los Angeles Collaborative for Teacher Excellence
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/2001
* Mark Greenhalgh, California State University, Dominguez Hill Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joan T Prival
* 12/31/2001
* USD 5,520,065.00

Ten institutions which service the Los Angeles Area have come together to form
the Los Angeles Collaborative for Teacher Excellence (LACTE). The institutions
consist of five universities/colleges (California State University, Dominguez
Hills; California State University, Los Angeles; California State University,
Fullerton; Loyola Marymount University; Occidental College) paired with their
feeder community colleges (El Camino; East Los Angeles; Fullerton; Santa Monica;
Glendale Community Colleges). In Los Angeles County there are 1.5 million K-12
students (74% are members of minority groups) and 60,000 teachers (30% are
members of minority groups). The Collaborative is making a strong effort to
prepare greater numbers of qualified mathematics and science teachers and to
recruit a greater number from underrepresented groups. It is also designed to
strengthen the mathematics and science backgrounds of the future elementary
teacher. In the first year of the project a thorough recruitment campaign will
be conducted to identify 100 prospective secondary teachers and 100 pre-
elementary teachers to become part of a network which will meet on a regular
basis. Also involved in the network will be science, mathematics, engineering
and education faculty along with master teachers. Jointly the five institutions
will prepare and conduct professional development workshops for mathematics and
science faculty. These workshops will feature innovative, integrated mathematics
and science courses, based on courses currently being piloted across the nation.
The Collaborative will develop and revise ten courses for pre-service teachers
and implement the courses in the ten institutions. The goals of the
Collaborative are: 1) To increase the number of mathematics/science majors from
underrepresented groups who are planning on teaching as a career. 2) Refine the
present course of study at each institution to reflect the necessary integration
of mathematics, science and technology in the pre-service content preparation of
undergraduate students. 3) Develop an experiential component for future
elementary mathematics/science specialists and secondary science and mathematics
teachers. 4) Establish a support network for the prospective teachers.