* 9453046
* GET REAL!  Science Strand
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Owen Hoitomt, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 06/30/1996
* USD 197,852.00

94-53046 Hoitomt ABSTRACT Wisconsin Public Broadcast will incorporate a science
strand in "Get Real!," their television series for children 8-12 year olds in
Wisconsin. The series presents positive images of children involved in, and
succeeding at, a variety of areas. The Wisconsin-based stories are field-
produced; and kids are involved on-screen and off as hosts, reporters, subjects
of stories, as interns during production, and as sources of story ideas. The
series is broadcast on both public and commercial stations in Wisconsin and
receives multiple repeats. The science and technology strand: . connects science
concepts to children's known experiences and activities and tells stories about
kids involved in science-related activities; . models and reinforces positive
attitudes towards, and involvement in science and technology and affirms the
value of children's ideas, and the importance of asking why?; and . reinforces
viewers' active connection to the science content by making suggestions for
projects to get involved with, and by encouraging children to discuss and
question their knowledge of science and the world around them. The series is an
important element integrated into both informal and formal education throughout
Wisconsin. It is supported by teacher materials and science video segments that
are sent to every elementary school in Wisconsin. In season two, material also
will be created for parents and children to use at home. A "Get Real!" kids club
helps kids feel ownership of the series. Members receive a newsletter that
includes suggested at-home science activities, book lists related to the series,
features about the show, places for families to visit, and behind-the-scenes
articles about kids in the series. Every elementary school library and public
library in the state also received "Get Real!" materials including a poster and
display items. James Steinback, the creator, original producer, and executive
producer of "Newton's Apple," will be the co-PI with overall responsibility for
the project. Kathy Bissen will be executive producer of "Get Real!" and David
Wallach will be series producer. The series is produced in the three Wisconsin
Public Television studios -- in Madison, Green Bay, and Menomonie -- and,
therefore, can find and produce statewide stories.